
1. Toxicol Sci. 2016 Mar 29. pii: kfw057. [Epub ahead of print]

THE G Protein-Coupled Estrogen Receptor Agonist G-1 Inhibits Nuclear Estrogen
Receptor Activity and Stimulates Novel Phosphoproteomic Signatures.

Smith LC(1), Ralston-Hooper KJ(2), Ferguson PL(2), Sabo-Attwood T(3).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Physiological Sciences, Center for Environmental and Human
Toxicology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 Department of
Environmental and Global Health, Center for Environmental and Human Toxicology,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611. (2)Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University,
Durham, NC 27708. (3)Department of Environmental and Global Health, Center for
Environmental and Human Toxicology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 
sabo@phhp.ufl.edu.

Estrogen exerts cellular effects through both nuclear (ESR1 and ESR2) and
membrane-bound estrogen receptors (G-protein coupled estrogen receptor, GPER),
however it is unclear if they act independently or engage in crosstalk to
influence hormonal responses. To investigate each receptor's role in
proliferation, transcriptional activation, and protein phosphorylation in breast 
cancer cells (MCF-7), we employed selective agonists for ESR1 (PPT), ESR2 (DPN)
and GPER (G-1) and also determined the impact of xenoestrogens bisphenol-A (BPA) 
and genistein on these effects. As anticipated, 17ß-estradiol (E2), PPT, DPN,
BPA, and genistein each enhanced proliferation and activation of an ERE-driven
reporter gene whereas G-1 had no significant impact. However, G-1 significantly
reduced E2-, PPT-, DPN-, BPA, and genistein-induced proliferation and ERE
activation at doses greater than 500 nM indicating that G-1 mediated inhibition
is not ESR isotype specific. As membrane receptors initiate cascades of
phosphorylation events, we performed a global phosphoproteomic analysis on cells 
exposed to E2 or G-1 to identify potential targets of receptor crosstalk via
downstream protein phosphorylation targets. Of the 211 phosphorylated proteins
identified, 40 and 13 phosphoproteins were specifically modified by E2 and G-1,
respectively. Subnetwork enrichment analysis revealed several processes related
to cell cycle were specifically enriched by G-1 compared to E2. Further there
existed a number of newly identified proteins that were specifically
phosphorylated by G-1. These phosphorylation networks highlight specific proteins
that may modulate the inhibitory effects of G-1 and suggest a novel role for
interference with nuclear receptor activity driven by E2 and xenoestrogens.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 27026707  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Genet. 2016 Mar;95(1):131-40.

Contribution of polymorphisms in ESR1, ESR2, FSHR, CYP19A1, SHBG, and NRIP1 genes
to migraine susceptibility in Turkish population.

CoSkun S(1), Yucel Y, Çim A, Cengiz B, Oztuzcu S, Varol S, Özdemir HH, Uzar E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics Diyarbakir 21280, Turkey.

Migraine, a highly prevalent headache disorder, is regarded as a polygenic
multifactorial disease. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes that 
involved in sex hormone metabolism may comprise risk for migraine, but the
results of previous genetic association studies are conflicting. The aim of this 
study was to evaluate genetic variants in genes involved in oestrogen receptor
and oestrogen hormone metabolism in a Turkish population. A total of 12 SNPs in
the ESR1, ESR2, FSHR, CYP19A1, SHBG and NRIP1 genes were genotyped in 142
migraine cases and 141 nonmigraine controls, using a BioMark 96.96 dynamic array 
system. In addition, gene-gene interactions were analysed using generalized
multifactor dimensionality reduction (GMDR) methods. According to GMDR analysis, 
our results indicated that there was a significant association between migraine
and gene-gene interaction among the CYP19A1, FSHR, ESR1 and NRIP1. Single-gene
variant analysis showed that a significant association was observed between the
TT genotype of rs10046 and migraine susceptibility.When the analysis was
performed only in women, the GG genotype of rs2229741 was different between
migraineurs and controls.When the female migraine patients were divided into two 
groups, migraine related to menstruation (MRM) or migraine not related to
menstruation (MNRM), GG genotype of rs726281 was significantly associated with
MRM. These results suggested that rs10046 could play a potential role in migraine
susceptibility in Turkish population. Also, the rare GG genotype of rs726281
appears to influence migraine susceptibility in a recessive manner in MRM
subgroup of female patients. In addition, variant GG genotype of rs2229741 may
reduce the risk of migraine in Turkish women.

PMID: 27019440  [PubMed - in process]


3. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Mar 24. pii: S0006-291X(16)30421-1. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.108. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional interaction between nonreceptor tyrosine kinase c-Abl and SR-Rich
protein RBM39.

Mai S(1), Qu X(2), Li P(1), Ma Q(1), Liu X(3), Cao C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, 27 Taiping Rd, Haidian District, Beijing
100850, China. (2)General Navy Hospital of PLA, 6 Fucheng Rd, Haidian District,
Beijing 100037, China. (3)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, 27 Taiping Rd,
Haidian District, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic address: liux931932@163.com. 
(4)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, 27 Taiping Rd, Haidian District, Beijing
100850, China. Electronic address: cao_c@sohu.com.

RBM39, also known as splicing factor HCC1.4, acts as a transcriptional
coactivator for the steroid nuclear receptors JUN/AP-1, ESR1/ER-a and ESR2/ER-ß. 
RBM39 is involved in the regulation of the transcriptional responses of these
steroid nuclear receptors and promotes transcriptional initiation. In this paper,
we report that RBM39 interacts with the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase c-Abl. Both
the Src homology (SH) 2 and SH3 domains of c-Abl interact with RBM39. The major
tyrosine phosphorylation sites on RBM39 that are phosphorylated by c-Abl are Y95 
and Y99, as demonstrated by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass
spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) and mutational analysis. c-Abl was shown boost the
transcriptional coactivation activity of RBM39 for ERa and PRß in a tyrosine
kinase-dependent manner. The results suggest that mammalian c-Abl plays an
important role in steroid hormone receptor-mediated transcription by regulating
RBM39.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27018250  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 19. pii: S0303-7207(16)30072-7. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2016.03.024. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential roles of estrogen receptors, ESR1 and ESR2, in adult rat
spermatogenesis.

Dumasia K(1), Kumar A(1), Deshpande S(1), Sonawane S(2), Balasinor NH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, National Institute for Research in
Reproductive Health (Indian Council of Medical Research), Parel, Mumbai 400 012, 
India. (2)Confocal Facility, National Institute for Research in Reproductive
Health (Indian Council of Medical Research), Parel, Mumbai 400 012, India.
(3)Department of Neuroendocrinology, National Institute for Research in
Reproductive Health (Indian Council of Medical Research), Parel, Mumbai 400 012, 
India. Electronic address: balasinorn@nirrh.res.in.

Estrogens, through their receptors, play an important role in regulation of
spermatogenesis. However, the precise role of the estrogen receptors (ESR1 and
ESR2) has been difficult to determine as in vivo estradiol treatment would signal
through both the ESRs. Hence we had developed in vivo selective ESR agonist
administration models in adult male rats to decipher the individual roles of the 
ESRs. Treatment with both ESR1 and ESR2 agonists decreased sperm counts after 60 
days of treatment. The present study aimed to delineate the precise causes of
decreased sperm counts following treatment with the two ESR agonists. Treatment
with ESR1 agonist causes an arrest in differentiation of round spermatids into
elongated spermatids, mainly due to down-regulation of genes involved in
spermiogenesis. ESR2 agonist administration reduces sperm counts due to
spermiation failure and spermatocyte apoptosis. Spermiation failure observed is
due to defects in tubulobulbar complex formation because of decrease in
expression of genes involved in actin remodelling. The increase in spermatocyte
apoptosis could be due to increase in oxidative stress and decrease in
transcripts of anti-apoptotic genes. Our results suggest that the two ESRs
regulate distinct aspects of spermatogenesis. ESR1 is mainly involved with
regulation of spermiogenesis, while ESR2 regulates spermatocyte apoptosis and
spermiation. Activation of estrogen signaling through either of the receptors can
affect their respective processes during spermatogenesis and lead to low sperm
output. Since many environmental estrogens can bind to the two ESRs with
different affinities, these observations can be useful in understanding their
potential effects on spermatogenesis.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 27004961  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2016 Mar 8. pii: nsw010. [Epub ahead of print]

Social memory associated with estrogen receptor polymorphisms in women.

Karlsson S(1), Henningsson S(1), Hovey D(1), Zettergren A(2), Jonsson L(1),
Cortes DS(3), Melke J(1), Laukka P(3), Fischer H(3), Westberg L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology at the
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Department 
of Pharmacology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology at the Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, Department of Psychiatry
and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology at the Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, and. (3)Department of
Psychology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology at the Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, lars.westberg@pharm.gu.se.

The ability to recognize the identity of faces and voices is essential for social
relationships. Although the heritability of social memory is high, knowledge
about the contributing genes is sparse. Since sex differences and rodent studies 
support an influence of estrogens and androgens on social memory, polymorphisms
in the estrogen and androgen receptor genes (ESR1, ESR2, AR) are candidates for
this trait. Recognition of faces and vocal sounds, separately and combined, was
investigated in 490 subjects, genotyped for 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in ESR1, four in ESR2 and one in the AR. Four of the associations survived
correction for multiple testing: women carrying rare alleles of the three ESR2
SNPs, rs928554, rs1271572 and rs1256030, in linkage disequilibrium with each
other, displayed superior face recognition compared with non-carriers.
Furthermore, the uncommon genotype of the ESR1 SNP rs2504063 was associated with 
better recognition of identity through vocal sounds, also specifically in women. 
This study demonstrates evidence for associations in women between face
recognition and variation in ESR2, and recognition of identity through vocal
sounds and variation in ESR1. These results suggest that estrogen receptors may
regulate social memory function in humans, in line with what has previously been 
established in mice.

© The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press. For Permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26955855  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Mar 3. pii: ddw057. [Epub ahead of print]

Germline ESR2 mutation predisposes to medullary thyroid carcinoma and causes
up-regulation of RET expression.

Smith J(1), Read ML(2), Hoffman J(3), Brown R(4), Bradshaw B(5), Campbell C(6),
Cole T(3), Navas JD(7), Eatock F(8), Gundara JS(9), Lian E(10), Mcmullan D(5),
Morgan NV(1), Mulligan L(10), Morrison PJ(11), Robledo M(12), Simpson MA(13),
Smith VE(2), Stewart S(3), Trembath RC(14), Sidhu S(9), Togneri FS(5), Wake
NC(1), Wallis Y(5), Watkinson JC(4), Maher ER(15), McCabe CJ(2), Woodward ER(16).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalised Medicine. (2)School of Clinical and 
Experimental Medicine, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. (3)West 
Midlands Regional Genetics Service. (4)Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Queen Elizabeth 
Medical Centre, Birmingham B15 2TH, UK. (5)West Midlands Regional Genetics
Laboratory, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham B15 2TG, UK. (6)West Midlands
Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham B15 2TG,
UK, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre
(MAHSC), Manchester M13 9WL, UK. (7)Human Biomaterials Resource Centre, College
of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Vincent Drive,
Edgbaston B15 2TT, UK. (8)Department of Endocrine Surgery, Belfast Health and
Social Care Trust, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.
(9)Cancer Genetics, Level 9, Kolling Building and Endocrine Surgical Unit, Royal 
North Shore Hospital, University of Sydney, Pacific Highway, St Leonards, NSW
2065, Australia. (10)Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Cancer Research
Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, Canada. (11)Centre for Cancer Research
and Cell Biology, Queen's University of Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9
7AE, UK. (12)Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research 
Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain. (13)Division of Genetics and Molecular
Medicine, King's College London School of Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.
(14)Queen Mary University of London, Barts and The London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, London, UK. (15)Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalised Medicine,
Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge and NIHR Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, UK and. (16)Centre for Rare Diseases and
Personalised Medicine, West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Manchester Centre
for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre (MAHSC), Manchester M13 9WL, UK
emma.woodward@cmft.nhs.uk.

Familial medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) and its precursor, C cell hyperplasia
(CCH), is associated with germline RET mutations causing multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 2. However, some rare families with apparent MTC/CCH
predisposition do not have a detectable RET mutation. To identify novel MTC/CCH
predisposition genes we undertook exome resequencing studies in a family with
apparent predisposition to MTC/CCH and no identifiable RET mutation. We
identified a novel ESR2 frameshift mutation, c.948delT, which segregated with
histological diagnosis following thyroid surgery in family members and
demonstrated loss of ESR2-encoded ERß expression in the MTC tumour. ERa and ERß
form heterodimers binding DNA at specific oestrogen-responsive elements (EREs) to
regulate gene transcription. ERß represses ERa-mediated activation of the ERE and
the RET promoter contains three EREs. In vitro, we showed that ESR2 c.948delT
results in unopposed ERa mediated increased cellular proliferation, activation of
the ERE and increased RET expression. In vivo, immunostaining of CCH and MTC
using an anti-RET antibody demonstrated increased RET expression. Together these 
findings identify germline ESR2 mutation as a novel cause of familial MTC/CCH and
provide important insights into a novel mechanism causing increased RET
expression in tumourigenesis.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26945007  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 1;11(3):e0150070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150070.
eCollection 2016.

Computational Characterization of Osteoporosis Associated SNPs and Genes
Identified by Genome-Wide Association Studies.

Qin L(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Wu G(1), Chen J(1), Ye W(1), Yang J(2), Huang
Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 430079,
China. (2)College of Computer Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan,
430079, China.

OBJECTIVES: Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have revealed many SNPs and
genes associated with osteoporosis. However, influence of these SNPs and genes on
the predisposition to osteoporosis is not fully understood. We aimed to identify 
osteoporosis GWASs-associated SNPs potentially influencing the binding affinity
of transcription factors and miRNAs, and reveal enrichment signaling pathway and 
"hub" genes of osteoporosis GWAS-associated genes.
METHODS: We conducted multiple computational analyses to explore function and
mechanisms of osteoporosis GWAS-associated SNPs and genes, including SNP
conservation analysis and functional annotation (influence of SNPs on
transcription factors and miRNA binding), gene ontology analysis, pathway
analysis and protein-protein interaction analysis.
RESULTS: Our results suggested that a number of SNPs potentially influence the
binding affinity of transcription factors (NFATC2, MEF2C, SOX9, RUNX2, ESR2,
FOXA1 and STAT3) and miRNAs. Osteoporosis GWASs-associated genes showed
enrichment of Wnt signaling pathway, basal cell carcinoma and Hedgehog signaling 
pathway. Highly interconnected "hub" genes revealed by interaction network
analysis are RUNX2, SP7, TNFRSF11B, LRP5, DKK1, ESR1 and SOST.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provided the targets for further experimental assessment
and further insight on osteoporosis pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC4773152
PMID: 26930606  [PubMed - in process]


8. Horm Cancer. 2016 Feb 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Bisphenol A (BPA) Exposure In Utero Leads to Immunoregulatory Cytokine
Dysregulation in the Mouse Mammary Gland: A Potential Mechanism Programming
Breast Cancer Risk.

Fischer C(1), Mamillapalli R(2), Goetz LG(1), Jorgenson E(1), Ilagan Y(1), Taylor
HS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School
of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box 208063, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School
of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box 208063, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
ramana.mamillapalli@yale.edu. (3)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and
Developmental Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06520, USA.

Bisphenol-A (BPA) is a ubiquitous estrogen-like endocrine disrupting compound
(EDC). BPA exposure in utero has been linked to breast cancer and abnormal
mammary gland development in mice. The recent rise in incidence of human breast
cancer and decreased age of first detection suggests a possible environmental
etiology. We hypothesized that developmental programming of carcinogenesis may
involve an aberrant immune response. Both innate and adaptive immunity play a
role in tumor suppression through cytolytic CD8, NK, and Th1 T-cells. We
hypothesized that BPA exposure in utero would lead to dysregulation of both
innate and adaptive immunity in the mammary gland. CD1 mice were exposed to BPA
in utero during gestation (days 9-21) via osmotic minipump. At 6 weeks, the
female offspring were ovariectomized and estradiol was given at 8 weeks. RNA and 
protein were extracted from the posterior mammary glands, and the mRNA and
protein levels were measured by PCR array, qRT-PCR, and western blot. In mouse
mammary tissue, BPA exposure in utero significantly decreased the expression of
members of the chemokine CXC family (Cxcl2, Cxcl4, Cxcl14, and Ccl20),
interleukin 1 (Il1) gene family (Il1ß and Il1rn), interleukin 2 gene family (Il7 
receptor), and interferon gene family (interferon regulatory factor 9 (Irf9), as 
well as immune response gene 1 (Irg1). Additionally, BPA exposure in utero
decreased Esr1 receptor gene expression and increased Esr2 receptor gene
expression. In utero exposure of BPA resulted in significant changes to
inflammatory modulators within mammary tissue. We suggest that dysregulation of
inflammatory cytokines, both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory, leads to a
microenvironment that may promote disordered cell growth through inhibition of
the immune response that targets cancer cells.

PMID: 26911702  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 8;113(10):2780-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1514351113. Epub 2016 Feb 22.

Delay discounting, genetic sensitivity, and leukocyte telomere length.

Yim OS(1), Zhang X(2), Shalev I(3), Monakhov M(4), Zhong S(4), Hsu M(5), Chew
SH(6), Lai PS(7), Ebstein RP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117570; 
Human Genetics Lab, Department of Paediatrics, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore 119228; (2)Singapore-ETH Center for Global Environmental
Sustainability, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich, Singapore
138602; rpebstein@gmail.com zhangxingis@gmail.com chew.soohong@gmail.com
poh_san_lai@nuhs.edu.sg. (3)Department of Biobehavioral Health, Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, PA 16802; (4)Department of Economics, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117570; (5)Haas School of Business, University
of California, Berkeley, CA 94720. (6)Department of Economics, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117570; rpebstein@gmail.com
zhangxingis@gmail.com chew.soohong@gmail.com poh_san_lai@nuhs.edu.sg. (7)Human
Genetics Lab, Department of Paediatrics, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 119228; rpebstein@gmail.com zhangxingis@gmail.com
chew.soohong@gmail.com poh_san_lai@nuhs.edu.sg. (8)Department of Psychology,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117570; rpebstein@gmail.com
zhangxingis@gmail.com chew.soohong@gmail.com poh_san_lai@nuhs.edu.sg.

In a graying world, there is an increasing interest in correlates of aging,
especially those found in early life. Leukocyte telomere length (LTL) is an
emerging marker of aging at the cellular level, but little is known regarding its
link with poor decision making that often entails being overly impatient. Here we
investigate the relationship between LTL and the degree of impatience, which is
measured in the laboratory using an incentivized delay discounting task. In a
sample of 1,158 Han Chinese undergraduates, we observe that steeper delay
discounting, indexing higher degree of impatience, is negatively associated with 
LTL. The relationship is robust after controlling for health-related variables,
as well as risk attitude-another important determinant of decision making. LTL in
females is more sensitive to impatience than in males. We then asked if genes
possibly modulate the effect of impatient behavior on LTL. The oxytocin receptor 
gene (OXTR) polymorphism rs53576, which has figured prominently in investigations
of social cognition and psychological resources, and the estrogen receptor ß gene
(ESR2) polymorphism rs2978381, one of two gonadal sex hormone genes,
significantly mitigate the negative effect of impatience on cellular aging in
females. The current results contribute to understanding the relationship between
preferences in decision making, particularly impatience, and cellular aging, for 
the first time to our knowledge. Notably, oxytocin and estrogen receptor
polymorphisms temper accelerated cellular aging in young females who tend to make
impatient choices.

PMCID: PMC4790989 [Available on 2016-09-08]
PMID: 26903639  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Mol Med (Berl). 2016 Feb 22. [Epub ahead of print]

IGF-I stimulates ERß and aromatase expression via IGF1R/PI3K/AKT-mediated
transcriptional activation in endometriosis.

Zhou Y(1), Zeng C(1), Li X(1), Wu PL(1), Yin L(1), Yu XL(1), Zhou YF(1), Xue
Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University First Hospital, No.
1 Xi'anmen Street, 100034, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Peking University First Hospital, No. 1 Xi'anmen Street, 100034,
Beijing, China. 13601038626@163.com.

Estrogen receptor beta (ERß, encoded by ESR2 gene) and cytochrome P450 aromatase 
(encoded by CYP19A1 gene) play critical roles in endometriosis, and the levels of
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) in the peritoneal fluid are significantly
higher in patients with endometriosis compared with those in normal women.
However, the effects and mechanisms of IGF-I on ERß and aromatase expression
remain to be fully elucidated. In this study, human endometriotic stromal cells
(ESCs) and endometrial cells (EMs) derived from ovarian endometriomas and eutopic
endometrial tissues. ESCs were cultured with IGF-I, signal pathway inhibitors,
and siRNAs. ERß and aromatase expression were measured by real-time PCR and
Western, respectively. The binding of c-Jun and CREB to the ESR2 and CYP19A1
promoters was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Animal experiments
were performed in a xenograft mouse model. Levels of IGF-I mRNA in ESCs were
markedly higher than those in EMs. IGF-I upregulated ERß and aromatase expression
in ESCs after stimulation of the IGF1R/PI3K/AKT pathway. Following IGF-I
treatment, a marked increase in c-Jun and CREB phosphorylation occurred,
enhancing binding to the ESR2 and CYP19A1 promoters. An IGF1R inhibitor in vivo
reduced IGF-I-induced endometriosis graft growth and ERß and aromatase
expression. In conclusion, this is the first report to describe a mechanistic
analysis of ERß and aromatase expression regulated by IGF-I in ESCs. Moreover, an
IGF1R inhibitor impeded ectopic lesion growth in nude mice. These findings
suggest that an inhibitor of IGF1R might have therapeutic potential as an
antiendometriotic drug.KEY MESSAGES: Level of IGF-I mRNA in ESCs is markedly
higher than that in EMs. IGF-I up-regulates ERß and aromatase expression via
IGF1R/PI3K/AKT pathway. C-Jun and CREB are recruited to ESR2 or CYP19A1 promoter 
by IGF-I stimulation. IGF-1R inhibitors in vivo impede the growth of ectopic
lesions in nude mice.

PMID: 26899323  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 17;11(2):e0149183. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149183.
eCollection 2016.

Single Gene Prognostic Biomarkers in Ovarian Cancer: A Meta-Analysis.

Willis S(1), Villalobos VM(2), Gevaert O(3), Abramovitz M(1), Williams C(1),
Sikic BI(3), Leyland-Jones B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Avera Cancer Institute, Sioux
Falls, SD, United States of America. (2)Division of Medical Oncology, UC Denver, 
Denver, CO, United States of America. (3)Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
United States of America.

PURPOSE: To discover novel prognostic biomarkers in ovarian serous carcinomas.
METHODS: A meta-analysis of all single genes probes in the TCGA and HAS ovarian
cohorts was performed to identify possible biomarkers using Cox regression as a
continuous variable for overall survival. Genes were ranked by p-value using
Stouffer's method and selected for statistical significance with a false
discovery rate (FDR) <.05 using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.
RESULTS: Twelve genes with high mRNA expression were prognostic of poor outcome
with an FDR <.05 (AXL, APC, RAB11FIP5, C19orf2, CYBRD1, PINK1, LRRN3, AQP1, DES, 
XRCC4, BCHE, and ASAP3). Twenty genes with low mRNA expression were prognostic of
poor outcome with an FDR <.05 (LRIG1, SLC33A1, NUCB2, POLD3, ESR2, GOLPH3, XBP1, 
PAXIP1, CYB561, POLA2, CDH1, GMNN, SLC37A4, FAM174B, AGR2, SDR39U1, MAGT1, GJB1, 
SDF2L1, and C9orf82).
CONCLUSION: A meta-analysis of all single genes identified thirty-two candidate
biomarkers for their possible role in ovarian serous carcinoma. These genes can
provide insight into the drivers or regulators of ovarian cancer and should be
evaluated in future studies. Genes with high expression indicating poor outcome
are possible therapeutic targets with known antagonists or inhibitors.
Additionally, the genes could be combined into a prognostic multi-gene signature 
and tested in future ovarian cohorts.

PMCID: PMC4757072
PMID: 26886260  [PubMed - in process]


12. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2016 Feb 10. [Epub ahead of print]

Estrogen receptor beta and ovarian cancer: a key to pathogenesis and response to 
therapy.

Kyriakidis I(1), Papaioannidou P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical School, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Stilpon Kyriakidis Street 1, 546 36, Thessaloniki, Greece.
kiriakidis.yiannis@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Medical School,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Stilpon Kyriakidis Street 1, 546 36,
Thessaloniki, Greece.

INTRODUCTION: Ovarian cancer remains the leading cause of mortality due to
gynecological tumors. Estrogen receptors (ERs) seem to participate in tumor
progression even in the absence of estrogens. Twenty years after the cloning of
the second estrogen receptor, a wide spectrum of studies have shown its
implication in both physiologic and pathologic pathways. ERß, being the
predominant type of ER in normal ovary tissue, has not only been linked with
pathogenesis of ovarian cancer, but also with response to treatment. Unlike ERa, 
which is primarily linked with cell growth, ERß presence is prominent in
signaling pathways, cell cycle regulation and apoptosis.
METHODS: Literature review of relevant published material (from PubMed, Scopus,
and Cochrane databases) was conducted.
RESULTS: Polymorphisms in the respective ESR2 gene, epigenetic modifications and 
isoforms of the receptor have been extensively studied to assess potential
correlations with responsiveness to treatment and tumor behavior. Studies on the 
exact roles of ERß and its genetic variations in altering effectiveness and
toxicity of ovarian cancer treatment regimens are lacking.
CONCLUSION: Clinical utilization of ERß actions in the management of ovarian
cancer is discussed in an up-to-date review.

PMID: 26861465  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 8;113(10):2738-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1520376113. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

Genome-wide coexpression of steroid receptors in the mouse brain: Identifying
signaling pathways and functionally coordinated regions.

Mahfouz A(1), Lelieveldt BP(2), Grefhorst A(3), van Weert LT(4), Mol IM(4), Sips 
HC(4), van den Heuvel JK(4), Datson NA(5), Visser JA(3), Reinders MJ(6), Meijer
OC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The
Netherlands; Delft Bioinformatics Laboratory, Delft University of Technology,
2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands; a.mahfouz@lumc.nl. (2)Department of Radiology,
Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands; Delft
Bioinformatics Laboratory, Delft University of Technology, 2628 CD Delft, The
Netherlands; (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical
Center, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands; (4)Division of Endocrinology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC
Leiden, The Netherlands; (5)Division of Medical Pharmacology, Leiden Academic
Centre for Drug Research/Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 CC, The
Netherlands; Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden 2300 RC, The Netherlands. (6)Delft Bioinformatics Laboratory, Delft
University of Technology, 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands;

Steroid receptors are pleiotropic transcription factors that coordinate
adaptation to different physiological states. An important target organ is the
brain, but even though their effects are well studied in specific regions,
brain-wide steroid receptor targets and mediators remain largely unknown due to
the complexity of the brain. Here, we tested the idea that novel aspects of
steroid action can be identified through spatial correlation of steroid receptors
with genome-wide mRNA expression across different regions in the mouse brain.
First, we observed significant coexpression of six nuclear receptors (NRs)
[androgen receptor (Ar), estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1), estrogen receptor beta
(Esr2), glucocorticoid receptor (Gr), mineralocorticoid receptor (Mr), and
progesterone receptor (Pgr)] with sets of steroid target genes that were
identified in single brain regions. These coexpression relationships were also
present in distinct other brain regions, suggestive of as yet unidentified
coordinate regulation of brain regions by, for example, glucocorticoids and
estrogens. Second, coexpression of a set of 62 known NR coregulators and the six 
steroid receptors in 12 nonoverlapping mouse brain regions revealed selective
downstream pathways, such as Pak6 as a mediator for the effects of Ar and Gr on
dopaminergic transmission. Third, Magel2 and Irs4 were identified and validated
as strongly responsive targets to the estrogen diethylstilbestrol in the mouse
hypothalamus. The brain- and genome-wide correlations of mRNA expression levels
of six steroid receptors that we provide constitute a rich resource for further
predictions and understanding of brain modulation by steroid hormones.

PMCID: PMC4791033
PMID: 26811448  [PubMed - in process]


14. Med Hypotheses. 2016 Jan;86:67-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2015.11.030. Epub 2015 Dec
11.

Hepatocellular carcinoma and estrogen receptors: Polymorphisms and isoforms
relations and implications.

Baldissera VD(1), Alves AF(1), Almeida S(1), Porawski M(2), Giovenardi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre (UFCSPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil. (2)Programa de 
Pós-Graduação em Medicina: Hepatologia, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde
de Porto Alegre (UFCSPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil. (3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em
Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre
(UFCSPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil. Electronic address: giovenardi.marcia@gmail.com.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary tumor of liver and its 
incidence continues to increase worldwide. HCC is a disease with multifactorial
causes and genetic variability has been discussed as a risk factor for its
development. Liver is a hormone-sensitive organ and therefore is influenced by
gonadal hormones, such as estrogen. Estrogen is known to participate in various
biological functions, but its role in development of HCC, on the other hand, is
controversial and presents evidence suggesting a role as both a carcinogen and
protective effect in liver. Estrogen way of action is mediated by estrogen
receptor alpha (ERa) and estrogen receptor beta (ERß), that belong to a family of
nuclear receptors that may regulate the expression of many genes. The ER subtypes
exert a variety of roles in many stages of liver disease and may play a part in
the process of signal transduction, according to some studies. However, the many 
functions of ER subtypes in hepatic diseases, in special of the ERß, are yet to
be clarified. The genetic modifications related to HCC are not yet fully
clarified and accumulation of multiple genetic alterations appears to have an
important role in carcinogenesis of HCC. The presence of some certain single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) may have a functional repercussion related to final
product of a gene, which can be measured and may participate in some alterations 
related to a pathological condition. Our hypothesis is based on the fact that
liver tissue express ER and its different variants exert multiple functions in
various stages of liver disease and participate in an extremely complicated
signal transduction process, therefore we believe that the presence of one or
more SNPs of ESR1 and ESR2 genes may be related with the increase of risk in
developing and the severity of HCC, as well as in the response to different
treatments. The confirmation of our hypothesis by scientific studies may provide 
knowledge of markers that act as prognostic factors of this disease, as well as
enabling alternatives to development of anti tumoral therapies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26804600  [PubMed - in process]


15. Anim Reprod Sci. 2016 Mar;166:28-35. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2016.01.001. Epub
2016 Jan 6.

Luteal P4 synthesis in early pregnant gilts after induction of estrus with
PMSG/hCG.

Blitek A(1), Szymanska M(2), Pieczywek M(2), Morawska-Pucinska E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of the Polish Academy of
Sciences, Tuwima 10, 10-748 Olsztyn, Poland. Electronic address:
a.blitek@pan.olsztyn.pl. (2)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of
the Polish Academy of Sciences, Tuwima 10, 10-748 Olsztyn, Poland.

The present study was designed to examine whether an estrus induction with
gonadotropins could affect luteal P4 synthesis in early pregnant gilts. Sixteen
prepubertal gilts received 750IU of PMSG and 500IU of hCG 72h later. Prepubertal 
gilts in the control group (n=17) were observed daily for estrus behavior. All
gilts were inseminated in their first estrus. Corpora lutea (CLs) were collected 
on days 10, 12 and 15 of pregnancy and analyzed for (1) the mRNA and protein
expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), cytochrome P450
family 11 subfamily A polypeptide 1 (CYP11A1), and 3ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (3ßHSD); (2) the tissue concentration of P4; and (3) the mRNA
expression of luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR) and estrogen receptors (ESR1 and
ESR2). Additionally, P4 concentration was analyzed in blood serum of all animals.
PMSG/hCG injections to induce estrus decreased mRNA expression of StAR, CYP11A1
and 3ßHSD on day 10 and CYP11A1 on day 12 of pregnancy compared with the control 
group, while CYP11A1 and 3ßHSD proteins were down-regulated on day 10 in the
hormonally-treated gilts. Concentrations of P4 in luteal tissue and blood serum
were also lower in animals after gonadotropin-induced estrus. In contrast, LHR
and ESR1 mRNA expression was greater in PMSG/hCG-treated than control gilts on
day 15 of gestation. In conclusion, induction of estrus with a PMSG/hCG protocol 
in prepubertal gilts impaired expression of the luteal P4 synthesis system. Low
P4 content may, in turn, induce local mechanisms involving LHR and ESR1
expression to support CL function.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26781360  [PubMed - in process]


16. Cancer Lett. 2016 Mar 1;372(1):48-56. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.12.009. Epub
2015 Dec 18.

Estrogen receptor beta as target for colorectal cancer prevention.

Williams C(1), DiLeo A(2), Niv Y(3), Gustafsson JÅ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, Department of Biology and
Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5056, USA; SciLifeLab, 
School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 171 21 Solna, Sweden;
Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Novum, Karolinska Institutet, 141 83
Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: Cecilia.Williams@scilifelab.se.
(2)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, Bari,
Italy. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Rabin Medical Center, Tel Aviv
University, Petach Tikva 49100, Israel. (4)Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell 
Signaling, Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston,
Houston, Texas 77204-5056, USA; Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Novum,
Karolinska Institutet, 141 83 Stockholm, Sweden.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of death in the United States. Despite
its slow development and the capacity for early diagnosis, current preventive
approaches are not sufficient. However, a role for estrogen has been demonstrated
in multiple epidemiologic studies, which may benefit CRC prevention. A large body
of evidence from preclinical studies indicates that expression of the estrogen
receptor beta (ERß/ESR2) demonstrates an inverse relationship with the presence
of colorectal polyps and stage of tumors, and can mediate a protective response. 
Natural compounds, including phytoestrogens, or synthetic ERß selective agonists,
can activate or upregulate ERß in the colon and promote apoptosis in preclinical 
models and in clinical experience. Importantly, this activity has been associated
with a reduction in polyp formation and, in rodent models of CRC, has been shown 
to lower incidence of colon adenocarcinoma. Collectively, these findings indicate
that targeted activation of ERß may represent a novel clinical approach for
management of colorectal adenomatous polyps and prevention of colorectal
carcinoma in patients at risk for this condition. In this review, we discuss the 
potential of new chemopreventive or dietary approaches based on estrogen
signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4744541 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26708506  [PubMed - in process]


17. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Apr;158:189-97. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.12.009. Epub 2015 Dec 18.

Evolution of estrogen receptors in ray-finned fish and their comparative
responses to estrogenic substances.

Tohyama S(1), Miyagawa S(2), Lange A(3), Ogino Y(4), Mizutani T(4), Ihara M(5),
Tanaka H(5), Tatarazako N(6), Kobayashi T(7), Tyler CR(3), Iguchi T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences,
University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan; Okazaki Institute for
Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes
of Natural Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies),
Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan. (2)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, 
National Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences,
SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787,
Japan. Electronic address: miyagawa@nibb.ac.jp. (3)University of Exeter,
Biosciences, College of Life & Environmental Sciences, Exeter EX4 4QD, United
Kingdom. (4)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for 
Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan. (5)Research
Center for Environmental Quality Management, Kyoto University, Otsu, Shiga
520-0811, Japan. (6)Center for Environmental Risk Research, National Institute
for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8506, Japan. (7)Graduate School
of Integrated Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka,
Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan. (8)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience,
National Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences,
SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787,
Japan. Electronic address: taisen@nibb.ac.jp.

In vertebrates, estrogens play fundamental roles in regulating reproductive
activities through estrogen receptors (ESRs), and disruption of estrogen
signaling is now of global concern for both wildlife and human health. To date,
ESRs of only a limited number of species have been characterized. We investigated
the functional diversity and molecular basis or ligand sensitivity of ESRs among 
ray-finned fish species (Actinopterygii), the most variable group within
vertebrates. We cloned and characterized ESRs from several key species in the
evolution of ray-finned fish including bichir (Polypteriformes, ESR1 and ESR2) at
the basal lineage of ray-finned fish, and arowana (Osteoglossiformes, ESR1 and
ESR2b) and eel (Anguilliformes, ESR1, ESR2a and ESR2b) both belonging to ancient 
early-branching lineages of teleosts, and suggest that ESR2a and ESR2b emerged
through teleost-specific whole genome duplication, but an ESR1 paralogue has been
lost in the early lineage of euteleost fish species. All cloned ESR isoforms
showed similar responses to endogenous and synthetic steroidal estrogens, but
they responded differently to non-steroidal estrogenic endocrine disrupting
chemicals (EDCs) (e.g., ESR2a exhibits a weaker reporter activity compared with
ESR2b). We show that variation in ligand sensitivity of ESRs can be attributed to
phylogeny among species of different taxonomic groups in ray-finned fish. The
molecular information provided contributes both to understanding of the
comparative role of ESRs in the reproductive biology of fish and their
comparative responses to EDCs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26707410  [PubMed - in process]


18. Reproduction. 2016 Mar;151(3):253-9. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0522. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Estrogen receptor ß controls MMP-19 expression in mouse ovaries during ovulation.

Nalvarte I(1), Töhönen V(1), Lindeberg M(1), Varshney M(1), Gustafsson JÅ(2),
Inzunza J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and NutritionKarolinska Institutet, SE-14183
Huddinge, SwedenCenter for Nuclear Receptors and SignalingUniversity of Houston, 
Houston, Texas 77204-5056, USA. (2)Department of Biosciences and
NutritionKarolinska Institutet, SE-14183 Huddinge, SwedenCenter for Nuclear
Receptors and SignalingUniversity of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5056, USA
Department of Biosciences and NutritionKarolinska Institutet, SE-14183 Huddinge, 
SwedenCenter for Nuclear Receptors and SignalingUniversity of Houston, Houston,
Texas 77204-5056, USA. (3)Department of Biosciences and NutritionKarolinska
Institutet, SE-14183 Huddinge, SwedenCenter for Nuclear Receptors and
SignalingUniversity of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5056, USA
jose.inzunza@ki.se.

Estrogen receptor beta (ERß/ESR2) has a central role in mouse ovaries, as ERß
knockout (BERKO) mice are subfertile due to an increase in fibrosis around the
maturing follicle and a decrease in blood supply. This has a consequence that
these follicles rarely rupture to release the mature oocyte. Matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) are modulators of the extracellular matrix, and the
expression of one specific MMP, MMP-19, is normally increased in granulosa cells 
during their maturation until ovulation. In this study, we demonstrate that
MMP-19 levels are downregulated in BERKO mouse ovaries. Using human MCF-7 cells
that overexpress ERß, we could identify MMP-19 to be a transcriptional target of 
ligand-bound activated ERß acting on a specificity protein-1 binding site. These 
data provide a molecular explanation for the observed follicle rupture defect
that contributes to the subfertility of female BERKO mice.

© 2016 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 26700939  [PubMed - in process]


19. Biomed Environ Sci. 2015 Nov;28(11):820-2. doi: 10.3967/bes2015.113.

The Expression of Estrogen Receptor Subtypes in Prolactinomas and Their
Relationship to Tumor Biological Behavior.

Li CZ(1), Gui SB(2), Zong XY(2), Zhang YZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, Beijing 100050, China; Neurosurgical
Department of Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Beijing 100050, China; Beijing Institute 
for Brain Disorders Brain Tumor Center, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Neurosurgical
Department of Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Beijing 100050, China. (3)Beijing
Neurosurgical Institute, Beijing 100050, China; Beijing Institute for Brain
Disorders Brain Tumor Center, Beijing 100050, China; Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100050, China.

Dopamine agonists (DA) are a first-line therapy for prolactinomas (PA). However, 
nearly 10% of prolactinomas do not respond to DA therapy. A considerable number
of studies have shown that estrogen plays an important role in the development of
prolactinomas. However, the expression of estrogen receptors (ER) in
prolactinomas has not been fully explored. Accordingly, we examined the levels of
ESR1 and its subtypes <U+0394>5-Del-ESR1 and ESR2 mRNA in prolactinomas. In the present 
study, we found that ESR1 mRNA levels were significantly lower in women of
childbearing age group compared to men (P<0.01) and post-menopausal women
(P<0.05). In addition, ESR1 mRNA levels showed a significant positive correlation
with the levels of prolactin (PRL). Moreover, ESR1 mRNA levels were significantly
lower in noninvasive prolactinomas compared to invasive prolactinomas.

Copyright © 2015 The Editorial Board of Biomedical and Environmental Sciences.
Published by China CDC. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26695360  [PubMed - in process]


20. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2016 Mar 1;310(5):L415-25. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00398.2015. Epub 2015 Dec 18.

Estrogenic compounds reduce influenza A virus replication in primary human nasal 
epithelial cells derived from female, but not male, donors.

Peretz J(1), Pekosz A(2), Lane AP(3), Klein SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; (2)W. Harry
Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of
Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland; (3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (4)W. Harry Feinstone
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
Maryland; and sklein2@jhu.edu.

Influenza causes an acute infection characterized by virus replication in
respiratory epithelial cells. The severity of influenza and other respiratory
diseases changes over the life course and during pregnancy in women, suggesting
that sex steroid hormones, such as estrogens, may be involved. Using primary,
differentiated human nasal epithelial cell (hNEC) cultures from adult male and
female donors, we exposed cultures to the endogenous 17ß-estradiol (E2) or select
estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) and then infected cultures with a seasonal
influenza A virus (IAV) to determine whether estrogenic signaling could affect
the outcome of IAV infection and whether these effects were sex dependent.
Estradiol, raloxifene, and bisphenol A decreased IAV titers in hNECs from female,
but not male, donors. The estrogenic decrease in viral titer was dependent on the
genomic estrogen receptor-2 (ESR2) as neither genomic ESR1 nor nongenomic GPR30
was expressed in hNEC cultures and addition of the genomic ER antagonist ICI
182,780 reversed the antiviral effects of E2. Treatment of hNECs with E2 had no
effect on interferon or chemokine secretion but significantly downregulated cell 
metabolic processes, including genes that encode for zinc finger proteins, many
of which contain estrogen response elements in their promoters. These data
provide novel insights into the cellular and molecular mechanisms of how natural 
and synthetic estrogens impact IAV infection in respiratory epithelial cells
derived from humans.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4773846 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26684252  [PubMed - in process]


21. Vojnosanit Pregl. 2015 Oct;72(10):906-13.

The expression and localization of estrogen receptor beta in hyperplastic and
neoplastic prostate lesions.

Levakov AF, Kacanski MM, Vuckovic N, Zivojinov M, Amidzic J, Sabo JI.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Benign acini in benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) are lined with
pseudostratified cylindrical epithelium with a continuous basal cell layer.
Adenocarcinoma of the prostate is the most common cancer in men. High
gradus-prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) lesions precede invasive
cancer. Prostate adenocarcinoma (PCa) implies a complete absence of basal cells
and stromal invasion by malignant acini. Estrogen receptor (ER) is located in
nuclei of acinar basal and secretory cells and partially in stromal cells. The
aim of this research was to demonstrate and localize ER in BPH and in PCa of
different Gleason scores. Considering literature data for ER-beta. expression in 
different morphologic prostate lesions, it is assumed that there is expression of
ER-beta in most moderately differentiated PCa, and that the observed receptor
expression is lost with increasing of the Gleason score.
METHODS: Four groups of patients were formed: the control with BPH and three
experimental groups with PCa of different grades and scores, according to the
Gleason grading system. The patients were male of various ages suspected of PCa, 
based on clinical and laboratory parameters. The study was conducted in a period 
2010-2012. None of the patients received prior hormonal therapy. Sextant byopsies
with BPH and PCa were treated for ER-beta (Novacastra). Localization and
intensity of ER-beta expression is reported through the score: 0 = zero; 1 = <
1%; 2 = 1-10%; 3=11-33%; 4= 34-66%; 5- > 66%. Positive fibroblasts and
endothelial cells are used for comparison.
RESULTS: ER-beta expression in acinar epithelial cells was the weakest in
well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. A decline of ER-beta expression was noticed
in malignant lesions of the prostate vs. benign ones. Less differentiated
adenocarcinomas showed a decrease of ER-beta expression in basal and in the
secretory cells. ER-beta expression in basal cells was stronger than in secretory
ones in BPH and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma.
CONCLUSION: ER-beta expression was most pronounced in BHP samples and declined in
malignant prostate lesions. This finding supports statement on
anticiproliferative role of ER-beta in prostatic tissue.

PMID: 26665557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Genesis. 2016 Jan;54(1):38-52. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22911. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Generation of an estrogen receptor beta-iCre knock-in mouse.

Cacioppo JA(1), Koo Y(1,)(2), Lin PC(1), Osmulski SA(1), Ko CD(1), Ko C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, 61802. (2)School of Biological Sciences,
Inje University, Gimhae, South Korea.

A novel knock-in mouse that expresses codon-improved Cre recombinase (iCre) under
regulation of the estrogen receptor beta (Esr2) promoter was developed for
conditional deletion of genes and for the spatial and/or temporal localization of
Esr2 expression. ESR2 is one of two classical nuclear estrogen receptors and
displays a spatiotemporal expression pattern and functions that are different
from the other estrogen receptor, ESR1. A cassette was constructed that contained
iCre, a polyadenylation sequence, and a neomycin selection marker. This construct
was used to insert iCre in front of the endogenous start codon of the Esr2 gene
of a C57BL/6J embryonic stem cell line via homologous recombination. Resulting
Esr2-iCre mice were bred with ROSA26-lacZ and Ai9-RFP reporter mice to visualize 
cells of functional iCre expression. Strong expression was observed in the ovary,
the pituitary, the interstitium of the testes, the head and tail but not body of 
the epididymis, skeletal muscle, the coagulation gland (anterior prostate), the
lung, and the preputial gland. Additional diffuse or patchy expression was
observed in the cerebrum, the hypothalamus, the heart, the adrenal gland, the
colon, the bladder, and the pads of the paws. Overall, Esr2-iCre mice will serve 
as a novel line for conditionally ablating genes in Esr2-expressing tissues,
identifying novel Esr2-expressing cells, and differentiating the functions of
ESR2 and ESR1. genesis 54:38-52, 2016. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4756916 [Available on 2017-01-08]
PMID: 26663382  [PubMed - in process]


23. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2015 Nov 30. pii: S0016-6480(15)30034-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ygcen.2015.11.021. [Epub ahead of print]

Three nuclear and two membrane estrogen receptors in basal teleosts, Anguilla
sp.: Identification, evolutionary history and differential expression regulation.

Lafont AG(1), Rousseau K(2), Tomkiewicz J(3), Dufour S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Sorbonne Universités, Research Unit
BOREA, Biology of Aquatic Organisms and Ecosystems, CNRS 7208, IRD207, UPMC, UCN,
Paris, France. Electronic address: lafont@mnhn.fr. (2)Muséum National d'Histoire 
Naturelle, Sorbonne Universités, Research Unit BOREA, Biology of Aquatic
Organisms and Ecosystems, CNRS 7208, IRD207, UPMC, UCN, Paris, France.
(3)Technical University of Denmark, National Institute of Aquatic Resources,
Charlottenlund, Denmark. (4)Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Sorbonne
Universités, Research Unit BOREA, Biology of Aquatic Organisms and Ecosystems,
CNRS 7208, IRD207, UPMC, UCN, Paris, France. Electronic address:
Sylvie.dufour@mnhn.fr.

Estrogens interact with classical intracellular nuclear receptors (ESR), and with
G-coupled membrane receptors (GPER). In the eel, we identified three nuclear
(ESR1, ESR2a, ESR2b) and two membrane (GPERa, GPERb) estrogen receptors.
Duplicated ESR2 and GPER were also retrieved in most extant teleosts. Phylogeny
and synteny analyses suggest that they result from teleost whole genome
duplication (3R). In contrast to conserved 3R-duplicated ESR2 and GPER, one of
3R-duplicated ESR1 has been lost shortly after teleost emergence. Quantitative
PCRs revealed that the five receptors are all widely expressed in the eel, but
with differential patterns of tissue expression and regulation. ESR1 only is
consistently up-regulated in vivo in female eel BPG-liver axis during induced
sexual maturation, and also up-regulated in vitro by estradiol in eel hepatocyte 
primary cultures. This first comparative study of the five teleost estradiol
receptors provides bases for future investigations on differential roles that may
have contributed to the conservation of multiple estrogen receptors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26654744  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Zhongguo Gu Shang. 2015 Sep;28(9):854-60.

[Advance on genetic mechanism of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis and genetic
relationship map].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang W, Ma J, Li SY, Wu X, Hu B, Wang XF, Zhou XH.

Identification of genetic risk factors is the hotspot of adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis (AIS). Through candidate gene approach and genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), some genes were preliminary identified. To review AIS related
genes,and construct the gene network map of AIS gene. We searched on NCBI PubMed 
and Web of Science database using search terms "adolescent idiopathic scoliosis" 
and "gene", to classify induction genes. We then constructed gene diagram using
string-db. We found 35 AIS genes relating to connective tissue, nervous system
active substances, melatonin synthesis and metabolism, puberty and growth, and
genes whose function is unknown. Gene diagram shows that a network relationship
between gene and other genes,in which IL6, ESR1, ESR2, VDR, TGFB1, IGF1 gene may 
as the key gene about AIS' genetic mechanism. Two sites of 3 GWAS results outside
the network, it is suggesting new pathway that need to be explored. The study
about AIS susceptibility gene is still preliminary, requiring in-depth research
to identify the new networks.

PMID: 26647570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Nov;10(5):1990-1994. Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Association between polymorphisms of estrogen receptor 2 and benign prostatic
hyperplasia.

Kim SK(1), Chung JH(1), Park HC(1), Kim JH(1), Ann JH(2), Park HK(2), Lee SH(3), 
Yoo KH(3), Lee BC(4), Kim YO(5).

Author information: 
(1)Kohwang Medical Research Institute, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biomedical Engineering and
Healthcare Industry Research Institute, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Urology, School of Medicine,
Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Internal
Medicine, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701,
Republic of Korea. (5)Herbal Crop Utilization Research Team, Department of
Medicinal Crop Research, Rural Administration, Soi-myeon, Eumseong-gun 369-873,
Republic of Korea.

Estrogens and estrogen receptors (ESRs) have been implicated in the stimulation
of aberrant prostate growth and the development of prostate diseases. The aim of 
the present study was to investigate four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
of the ESR2 gene in order to examine whether ESR2 is a susceptibility gene for
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). In order to evaluate whether an association
exists between ESR2 and BPH risk, four polymorphisms [rs4986938 (intron),
rs17766755 (intron), rs12435857 (intron) and rs1256049 (Val328Val)] of the ESR2
gene were genotyped by direct sequencing. A total of 94 patients with BPH and 79 
control subjects were examined. SNPStats and Haploview version 4.2 we used for
the genetic analysis. Multiple logistic regression models (codominant1,
codominant2, dominant, recessive and log-additive) were produced in order to
obtain the odds ratio, 95% confidence interval and P-value. Three SNPs
(rs4986938, rs17766755 and rs12435857) showed significant associations with BPH
(rs4986938, P=0.015 in log-additive model; rs17766755, P=0.033 in codominant1
model, P=0.019 in dominant model and P=0.020 in log-additive model; rs12435857,
P=0.023 in dominant model and P=0.011 in log-additive model). The minor alleles
of these SNPs increased the risk of BPH, and the AAC haplotype showed significant
association with BPH (<U+03C7>(2)=6.34, P=0.0118). These data suggest that the ESR2 gene
may be associated with susceptibility to BPH.

PMCID: PMC4665750
PMID: 26640585  [PubMed]


26. Springerplus. 2015 Nov 19;4:710. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1512-7. eCollection
2015.

High incidence of triple negative breast cancers following pregnancy and an
associated gene expression signature.

Asztalos S(1), Pham TN(1), Gann PH(2), Hayes MK(1), Deaton R(2), Wiley EL(2),
Emmadi R(2), Kajdacsy-Balla A(2), Banerji N(3), McDonald W(3), Khan SA(4),
Tonetti DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL USA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL USA. (3)Allina Health, Minneapolis, MN USA. (4)Department of Surgery,
Northwestern Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL USA.

Breast cancer risk increases transiently in the period following pregnancy;
pregnancy-associated breast cancers (PABC) are more aggressive than cases
diagnosed in nulliparous women. We have previously reported that in the normal
human breast pregnancy results in the upregulation of a number of inflammation
related genes, suggesting a pro-tumorigenic environment as well as downregulation
of ESR1 (ERa) and ERBB2 (HER2) and upregulation of ESR2 (ERß), suggesting a
protective effect. In this study, we aimed to investigate the possibility of
differential regulation of the same gene set modulated in the normal breast, in
human breast tumors following pregnancy. Gene expression was measured by
real-time PCR on tumor regions isolated by laser capture microdissection from
paraffin sections. Immunohistochemistry was performed on tissue microarrays (TMA)
for protein expression. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the average
linkage method to determine coordinate expression of sets of genes. We find that 
breast cancers detected within 10 years following pregnancy display a different
gene expression pattern than those detected in nulliparous breast cancer
patients. The gene expression difference is mainly attributable to a triple
negative (TNBC) subgroup found to be more frequent in PABCs up to 10 years
following a pregnancy. We also show that protein and mRNA expression levels
correlate in half of the proteins tested by TMA. Despite the fact that this is a 
small study of 53 patients, we identified a gene expression signature that is
differentially expressed in pregnancy-associated TNBC.

PMCID: PMC4653130
PMID: 26618099  [PubMed]


27. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Nov 20;128(22):3008-14. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.168964.

Association of Estrogen Receptor Gene Polymorphisms and Primary Biliary Cirrhosis
in a Chinese Population: A Case-Control Study.

Yang L, Zhang H, Jiang YF, Jin QL, Zhang P, Li X, Gao PJ, Niu JQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, First Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin
130021, China.

BACKGROUND: Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a chronic and slowly progressive
cholestatic liver disease characterized by destruction of the interlobular bile
ducts and a striking female predominance. The aim of this study was to identify
associations between estrogen receptor (ESR) gene polymorphisms with the risk of 
developing PBC and abnormal serum liver tests in a Chinese population.
METHODS: Thirty-six patients with PBC (case group) and 35 healthy individuals
(control group) from the First Hospital of Jilin University were studied. Whole
genomic DNA was extracted from all the participants. Three single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (rs2234693, rs2228480, and rs3798577) from ESR1 and two (rs1256030 
and rs1048315) from ESR2 were analyzed by a pyrosequencing method. Demographic
data and liver biochemical data were collected.
RESULTS: Subjects with the T allele at ESR2 rs1256030 had 1.5 times higher risk
of developing PBC than those with the C allele (odds ratio [OR] = 2.1277, 95%
confidence interval [CI] = 1.1872-4.5517). Haplotypes TGC of ESR1 rs2234693,
rs2228480, and rs3798577 were risk factors for having PBC. The C allele at ESR1
rs2234693 was associated with abnormal alkaline phosphatase (OR = 5.2469, 95% CI 
= 1.3704-20.0895) and gamma-glutamyl transferase (OR = 3.4286, 95% CI =
1.0083-13.6578) levels in PBC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR2 rs1256030 T allele may be a significant risk factor for the
development of PBC. Screening for patients with gene polymorphisms may help to
make early diagnoses in patients with PBC.

PMID: 26608979  [PubMed - in process]


28. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Dec;154(3):543-55. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3634-6. 
Epub 2015 Nov 21.

ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms in the BIG 1-98 trial comparing adjuvant letrozole
versus tamoxifen or their sequence for early breast cancer.

Leyland-Jones B(1), Gray KP(2), Abramovitz M(3), Bouzyk M(4), Young B(5), Long
B(6), Kammler R(7), Dell'Orto P(8), Biasi MO(9), Thürlimann B(10,)(11,)(12),
Harvey V(13,)(14,)(15), Neven P(16), Arnould L(17), Maibach R(18), Price KN(19), 
Coates AS(20,)(21), Goldhirsch A(22,)(23), Gelber RD(24), Pagani O(25,)(26),
Viale G(27), Rae JM(28), Regan MM(29); BIG 1-98 Collaborative Group.

Author information: 
(1)Avera Cancer Institute, 1000 E 23rd Street, Sioux Falls, SD, 57105, USA.
bleylandj@aol.com. (2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology,
International Breast Cancer Study Group Statistical Center, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, 450 Brookline Ave, Boston,
MA, 02215, USA. pkruan@jimmy.harvard.edu. (3)VM Institute of Research, 6100 Av
Royalmount, Montréal, QC, H4P 2R2, Canada. mark.abramovitz@gmail.com.
(4)AKESOgen, Inc., 3155 Northwoods Pl NW, Norcross, GA, 30071, USA.
mbouzyk@akesogen.com. (5)Avera Cancer Institute, 1000 E 23rd Street, Sioux Falls,
SD, 57105, USA. brandon.young@avera.org. (6)Genomic and Molecular Pathology,
University of Chicago, 900 E 57th St. Room 1260D, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
bradley.long@uchospitals.edu. (7)International Breast Cancer Study Group
Coordinating Center and Central Pathology Office, Effingerstrasse 40, 3008, Bern,
Switzerland. rosita.kammler@ibcsg.org. (8)Division of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, International Breast Cancer Study Group Central Pathology Office,
European Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20146, Milan, Italy.
patrizia.dellorto@ieo.it. (9)Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
European Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20146, Milan, Italy.
olivia.biasi@ieo.it. (10)Breast Center, Kantonsspital St. Gallen, Rorschacher
Strasse 95, 9007, St. Gallen, Switzerland. (11)Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer
Research (SAKK), Bern, Switzerland. (12)International Breast Cancer Study Group, 
Bern, Switzerland. (13)International Breast Cancer Study Group, Bern,
Switzerland. vernonh@adhb.govt.nz. (14)Auckland City Hospital, PO Box 26498,
Epsom, Auckland, 1344, New Zealand. vernonh@adhb.govt.nz. (15)Australia and New
Zealand Breast Cancer Trials Group, Newcastle, Australia. vernonh@adhb.govt.nz.
(16)Department of Oncology, Multidisciplinary Breast Center, KULeuven (University
of Leuven), University Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
patrick.neven@uzleuven.be. (17)Institute Georges François Leclerc, 1 Rue
Professeur Marion, BP 77 980, 21079, Dijon Cedex, France.
larnould@dijon.fnclcc.fr. (18)International Breast Cancer Study Group
Coordinating Center, Effingerstrasse 40, 3008, Bern, Switzerland.
rudolf.maibach@ibcsg.org. (19)International Breast Cancer Study Group Statistical
Center, Frontier Science and Technology Research Foundation, 450 Brookline Ave,
Boston, MA, 02215, USA. price@jimmy.harvard.edu. (20)International Breast Cancer 
Study Group, Bern, Switzerland. alan.coates@ibcsg.org. (21)University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia. alan.coates@ibcsg.org. (22)International Breast Cancer Study
Group, Bern, Switzerland. aron.goldhirsch@ibcsg.org. (23)Program for Breast
Health (Senology), European Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20146,
Milan, Italy. aron.goldhirsch@ibcsg.org. (24)International Breast Cancer Study
Group Statistical Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Frontier Science and Technology
Research Foundation, 450 Brookline Ave, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.
gelber@jimmy.harvard.edu. (25)International Breast Cancer Study Group, Bern,
Switzerland. olivia.pagani@ibcsg.org. (26)Institute of Oncology of Southern
Switzerland (IOSI), Ospedale Italiano, Via Capelli, 6962, Viganello, Switzerland.
olivia.pagani@ibcsg.org. (27)International Breast Cancer Study Group Central
Pathology Office, Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, European
Institute of Oncology, University of Milan, Via Ripamonti 435, 20146, Milan,
Italy. giuseppe.viale@ieo.it. (28)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of 
Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, 1500 E Medical Cntr Drive/SPC 5946, Ann
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. jimmyrae@med.umich.edu. (29)Department of Biostatistics
and Computational Biology, International Breast Cancer Study Group Statistical
Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 450 Brookline Ave, 
Boston, MA, 02215, USA. mregan@jimmy.harvard.edu.

Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and ESR2 gene polymorphisms have been associated with 
endocrine-mediated physiological mechanisms, and inconsistently with breast
cancer risk and outcomes, bone mineral density changes, and hot flushes/night
sweats. DNA was isolated and genotyped for six ESR1 and two ESR2
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from tumor specimens from 3691
postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer enrolled in the
BIG 1-98 trial to receive tamoxifen and/or letrozole for 5 years. Associations
with recurrence and adverse events (AEs) were assessed using Cox proportional
hazards models. 3401 samples were successfully genotyped for five SNPs. ESR1
rs9340799(XbaI) (T>C) variants CC or TC were associated with reduced breast
cancer risk (HR = 0.82,95% CI = 0.67-1.0), and ESR1 rs2077647 (T>C) variants CC
or TC was associated with reduced distant recurrence risk (HR = 0.69, 95% CI =
0.53-0.90), both regardless of the treatments. No differential treatment effects 
(letrozole vs. tamoxifen) were observed for the association of outcome with any
of the SNPs. Letrozole-treated patients with rs2077647 (T>C) variants CC and TC
had a reduced risk of bone AE (HR = 0.75, 95% CI = 0.58-0.98, P interaction =
0.08), whereas patients with rs4986938 (G>A) genotype variants AA and AG had an
increased risk of bone AE (HR = 1.37, 95% CI = 1.01-1.84, P interaction = 0.07). 
We observed that (1) rare ESR1 homozygous polymorphisms were associated with
lower recurrence, and (2) ESR1 and ESR2 SNPs were associated with bone AEs in
letrozole-treated patients. Genes that are involved in estrogen signaling and
synthesis have the potential to affect both breast cancer recurrence and side
effects, suggesting that individual treatment strategies can incorporate not only
oncogenic drivers but also SNPs related to estrogen activity.

PMCID: PMC4730949 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26590813  [PubMed - in process]


29. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Feb 15;422:182-91. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.11.013. Epub
2015 Nov 14.

Osteoblasts promote castration-resistant prostate cancer by altering intratumoral
steroidogenesis.

Hagberg Thulin M(1), Nilsson ME(2), Thulin P(3), Céraline J(4), Ohlsson C(2),
Damber JE(3), Welén K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Department of Urology, Institute of Clinical
Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Electronic address: malin.hagberg@urology.gu.se. (2)Center for Bone and Arthritis
Research, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Institute of
Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Department of Urology, Institute of Clinical
Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)INSERM UMR_S 1113, FMTS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

The skeleton is the preferred site for prostate cancer (PC) metastasis leading to
incurable castration-resistant disease. The increased expression of genes
encoding steroidogenic enzymes found in bone metastatic tissue from patients
suggests that up-regulated steroidogenesis might contribute to tumor growth at
the metastatic site. Because of the overall sclerotic phenotype, we hypothesize
that osteoblasts regulate the intratumoral steroidogenesis of castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) in bone. We here show that osteoblasts alter the
steroidogenic transcription program in CRPC cells, closely mimicking the gene
expression pattern described in CRPC. Osteoblast-stimulated LNCaP-19 cells
displayed an increased expression of genes encoding for steroidogenic enzymes
(CYP11A1, HSD3B1, and AKR1C3), estrogen signaling-related genes (CYP19A1, and
ESR2), and genes for DHT-inactivating enzymes (UGT2B7, UGT2B15, and UGT2B17). The
observed osteoblast-induced effect was exclusive to osteogenic CRPC cells
(LNCaP-19) in contrast to osteolytic PC-3 and androgen-dependent LNCaP cells. The
altered steroid enzymatic pattern was specific for the intratibial tumors and
verified by immunohistochemistry in tissue specimens from LNCaP-19 xenograft
tumors. Additionally, the overall steroidogenic effect was reflected by
corresponding levels of progesterone and testosterone in serum from castrated
mice with intratibial xenografts. A bi-directional interplay was demonstrated
since both proliferation and Esr2 expression of osteoblasts were induced by CRPC 
cells in steroid-depleted conditions. Together, our results demonstrate that
osteoblasts are important mediators of the intratumoral steroidogenesis of CRPC
and for castration-resistant growth in bone. Targeting osteoblasts may therefore 
be important in the development of new therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26586211  [PubMed - in process]


30. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1366:29-39. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3127-9_4.

Bioinformatics Analysis of Estrogen-Responsive Genes.

Handel AE(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QX, UK. adam.handel@gmail.com. (2)Weatherall Institute
of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Headley Way, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.
adam.handel@gmail.com.

Estrogen is a steroid hormone that plays critical roles in a myriad of
intracellular pathways. The expression of many genes is regulated through the
steroid hormone receptors ESR1 and ESR2. These bind to DNA and modulate the
expression of target genes. Identification of estrogen target genes is greatly
facilitated by the use of transcriptomic methods, such as RNA-seq and expression 
microarrays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation with massively parallel sequencing
(ChIP-seq). Combining transcriptomic and ChIP-seq data enables a distinction to
be drawn between direct and indirect estrogen target genes. This chapter
discusses some methods of identifying estrogen target genes that do not require
any expertise in programming languages or complex bioinformatics.

PMID: 26585125  [PubMed - in process]


31. Reproduction. 2016 Feb;151(2):135-47. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0332. Epub 2015 Nov 17.

Steroid hormones, prostanoids, and angiogenic systems during rescue of the corpus
luteum in pigs.

Przygrodzka E(1), Kaczmarek MM(2), Kaczynski P(1), Ziecik AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hormonal Action Mechanisms and Molecular Biology
LaboratoryInstitute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of the Polish
Academy of Sciences (IARFR PAS), Tuwima 10, 10-748 Olsztyn, Poland. (2)Department
of Hormonal Action Mechanisms and Molecular Biology LaboratoryInstitute of Animal
Reproduction and Food Research of the Polish Academy of Sciences (IARFR PAS),
Tuwima 10, 10-748 Olsztyn, Poland a.ziecik@pan.olsztyn.pl
m.kaczmarek@pan.olsztyn.pl.

In order to characterize the transition of the corpora lutea (CL) from
acquisition of luteolytic sensitivity to rescue of luteal function: i) the
expression of 38 factors associated with steroids, prostanoids, and angiogenic
systems and ii) concentrations of the main hormones responsible for maintenance
of CL function in cyclic and pregnant pigs were examined. Additionally, the
effect of prostaglandin (PG) E2 and F2 a on luteal function during the estrous
cycle and pregnancy was evaluated in vitro. Significantly up-regulated gene
expression was revealed in CL collected on day 14 of the estrous cycle (CYP19A1, 
ESR2, PTGS2, HIF1A, and EDN1) and on days 12-14 of pregnancy (SCARB1, PGRMC1,
STAR, HSD3B1, NR5A1, PTGFR, PTGER4, and VEGFA). Elevated concentrations of
estradiol-17ß and PGE2 occurred in CL on days 12 and 14 of pregnancy
respectively, while an increased intraluteal PGF2 a content was noted on day 14
of the estrous cycle. Both PGs increased the synthesis of progesterone by
cultured luteal slices obtained on day 14 of pregnancy, in contrast to the action
of PGF2 a on the corresponding day of the estrous cycle. PGE2 stimulated cAMP
production via PTGER2 and PTGER4, while PGF2 a elevated the content of CREB in
cultured luteal slices from CL of pregnant pigs. In silico analysis showed that
infiltration of lymphocytes and apoptosis of microvascular endothelium were
activated in CL on day 12 of the estrous cycle vs pregnancy. Summarizing, an
abundance of E2 and PGE2 during pregnancy regulates specific pathways responsible
for steroidogenesis, the prostanoid signaling system and angiogenesis during
rescue from luteolysis in porcine CL.

© 2016 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 26577025  [PubMed - in process]


32. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Nov;154(2):263-73. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3608-8. 
Epub 2015 Nov 4.

Associations between genetic variants and the effect of letrozole and exemestane 
on bone mass and bone turnover.

Oesterreich S(1), Henry NL(2), Kidwell KM(3), Van Poznak CH(2), Skaar TC(4),
Dantzer J(4), Li L(4), Hangartner TN(5), Peacock M(6), Nguyen AT(4), Rae JM(2),
Desta Z(4), Philips S(4), Storniolo AM(7), Stearns V(8), Hayes DF(2), Flockhart
DA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Women's Cancer Research
Center, Magee Womens Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute (UPCI), 204 Craft Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15261, USA.
oesterreichs@upmc.edu. (2)Breast Oncology Program, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI,
48109, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan School of
Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (4)Division of Clinical Pharmacology,
Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 
46202, USA. (5)BioMedical Imaging Laboratory, Wright State University, Dayton,
OH, 45435, USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA. (7)Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer 
Center, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA. (8)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA.

Adjuvant therapy for hormone receptor (HR) positive postmenopausal breast cancer 
patients includes aromatase inhibitors (AI). While both the non-steroidal AI
letrozole and the steroidal AI exemestane decrease serum estrogen concentrations,
there is evidence that exemestane may be less detrimental to bone. We
hypothesized that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) predict effects of AIs on
bone turnover. Early stage HR-positive breast cancer patients were enrolled in a 
randomized trial of exemestane versus letrozole. Effects of AI on bone mineral
density (BMD) and bone turnover markers (BTM), and associations between SNPs in
24 candidate genes and changes in BMD or BTM were determined. Of the 503 enrolled
patients, paired BMD data were available for 123 and 101 patients treated with
letrozole and exemestane, respectively, and paired BTM data were available for
175 and 173 patients, respectively. The mean change in lumbar spine BMD was
significantly greater for letrozole-treated (-3.2 %) compared to
exemestane-treated patients (-1.0 %) (p = 0.0016). Urine N-telopeptide was
significantly increased in patients treated with exemestane (p = 0.001) but not
letrozole. Two SNPs (rs4870061 and rs9322335) in ESR1 and one SNP (rs10140457) in
ESR2 were associated with decreased BMD in letrozole-treated patients. In the
exemestane-treated patients, SNPs in ESR1 (Rs2813543) and CYP19A1 (Rs6493497)
were associated with decreased bone density. Exemestane had a less negative
impact on bone density compared to letrozole, and the effects of AI therapy on
bone may be impacted by genetic variants in the ER pathway.

PMCID: PMC4807610 [Available on 2016-11-04]
PMID: 26536870  [PubMed - in process]


33. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Oct 23;16(10):25285-322. doi: 10.3390/ijms161025285.

Integrated Bioinformatics, Environmental Epidemiologic and Genomic Approaches to 
Identify Environmental and Molecular Links between Endometriosis and Breast
Cancer.

Roy D(1), Morgan M(2), Yoo C(3), Deoraj A(4), Roy S(5), Yadav VK(6), Garoub M(7),
Assaggaf H(8), Doke M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental & Occupational Health, Florida International
University, Miami, FL 33199, USA. droy@fiu.edu. (2)Department of Environmental & 
Occupational Health, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA.
mmorg003@fiu.edu. (3)Department of Biostatistics, Robert Stempel College of
Public Health and Social Work, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199,
USA. cyoo@fiu.edu. (4)Department of Environmental & Occupational Health, Florida 
International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA. adeoraj@fiu.edu. (5)BMSNF Inc.,
Aventura, FL 33180, USA. roy.sandhya09@gmail.com. (6)Department of Physics, GKPD 
College, Karpoorigram, Samastipur 848129, India. sundrian9@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Environmental & Occupational Health, Florida International
University, Miami, FL 33199, USA. mgaro005@fiu.edu. (8)Department of
Environmental & Occupational Health, Florida International University, Miami, FL 
33199, USA. hassagga@fiu.edu. (9)Department of Environmental & Occupational
Health, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA. mdoke001@fiu.edu.

We present a combined environmental epidemiologic, genomic, and bioinformatics
approach to identify: exposure of environmental chemicals with estrogenic
activity; epidemiologic association between endocrine disrupting chemical (EDC)
and health effects, such as, breast cancer or endometriosis; and gene-EDC
interactions and disease associations. Human exposure measurement and modeling
confirmed estrogenic activity of three selected class of environmental chemicals,
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), bisphenols (BPs), and phthalates. Meta-analysis
showed that PCBs exposure, not Bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates, increased the
summary odds ratio for breast cancer and endometriosis. Bioinformatics analysis
of gene-EDC interactions and disease associations identified several hundred
genes that were altered by exposure to PCBs, phthalate or BPA. EDCs-modified
genes in breast neoplasms and endometriosis are part of steroid hormone signaling
and inflammation pathways. All three EDCs-PCB 153, phthalates, and BPA influenced
five common genes-CYP19A1, EGFR, ESR2, FOS, and IGF1-in breast cancer as well as 
in endometriosis. These genes are environmentally and estrogen responsive,
altered in human breast and uterine tumors and endometriosis lesions, and part of
Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways in cancer. Our
findings suggest that breast cancer and endometriosis share some common
environmental and molecular risk factors.

PMCID: PMC4632802
PMID: 26512648  [PubMed - in process]


34. Pharmacogenomics J. 2015 Oct 27. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2015.77. [Epub ahead of print]

Estrogen receptor-beta genetic variations and overall survival in patients with
locally advanced gastric cancer.

Sunakawa Y(1,)(2), Cao S(3), Berger MD(1), Matsusaka S(1), Yang D(3), Zhang W(1),
Ning Y(1), Parekh A(1), Stremitzer S(1), Mendez A(1), Okazaki S(1), Wakatsuki
T(1), Azuma M(4), Shimada K(5), Watanabe M(6), Koizumi W(4), Wu AH(3), Lenz
HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Division
of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Showa University Northern Yokohama
Hospital, Yokohama, Japan. (3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (4)Department of Gastroenterology, Kitasato
University School of Medicine, Sagamihara, Japan. (5)Division of Medical
Oncology, Department of Medicine, Showa University Koto Toyosu Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan. (6)Department of Surgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara, Japan.

Estrogen has been shown not only to reduce the incidence of colorectal cancer but
also gastric cancer (GC). Polymorphisms in estrogen receptor ß gene, ESR2,
correlate with colorectal cancer survival. To better understand the role of ESR2 
in GC, genomic DNA extracted from 169 Japanese patients and 172 patients from Los
Angeles County (LAC) was analyzed for association of overall survival (OS) with
three ESR2 polymorphisms, which are of biological significance using
multivariable Cox proportional hazard regression. ESR2 rs1271572 (C>A) and
rs3020443 (T>G) had univariate and multivariable associations with OS in the
Japanese cohort, whereas the C allele of ESR2 rs2978381 (T>C) predicted favorable
OS in the Japanese cohort but worse OS in the LAC cohort. The interaction term of
the ESR2 rs2978381 and cohort group reached statistical significance. Our study
provides evidence that genetic variations in ESR2 gene are significantly
associated with survival in patients with locally advanced GC.The
Pharmacogenomics Journal advance online publication, 27 October 2015;
doi:10.1038/tpj.2015.77.

PMID: 26503819  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


35. Biol Open. 2015 Oct 12;4(11):1436-47. doi: 10.1242/bio.014308.

Genome-wide ChIP-seq analysis of human TOP2B occupancy in MCF7 breast cancer
epithelial cells.

Manville CM(1), Smith K(1), Sondka Z(1), Rance H(1), Cockell S(2), Cowell IG(1), 
Lee KC(1), Morris NJ(3), Padget K(4), Jackson GH(5), Austin CA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (2)The Bioinformatics Support Unit, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2
4HH, UK. (4)Department of Applied Biology, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE1 8ST, UK. (5)Institute for Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (6)Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK
caroline.austin@ncl.ac.uk.

We report the whole genome ChIP seq for human TOP2B from MCF7 cells. Using three 
different peak calling methods, regions of binding were identified in the
presence or absence of the nuclear hormone estradiol, as TOP2B has been reported 
to play a role in ligand-induced transcription. TOP2B peaks were found across the
whole genome, 50% of the peaks fell either within a gene or within 5 kb of a
transcription start site. TOP2B peaks coincident with gene promoters were less
frequently associated with epigenetic features marking active promoters in
estradiol treated than in untreated cells. Significantly enriched transcription
factor motifs within the DNA sequences underlying the peaks were identified.
These included SP1, KLF4, TFAP2A, MYF, REST, CTCF, ESR1 and ESR2. Gene ontology
analysis of genes associated with TOP2B peaks found neuronal development terms
including axonogenesis and axon guidance were significantly enriched. In the
absence of functional TOP2B there are errors in axon guidance in the zebrafish
eye. Specific heparin sulphate structures are involved in retinal axon targeting.
The glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis-heparin sulphate/heparin pathway is
significantly enriched in the TOP2B gene ontology analysis, suggesting changes in
this pathway in the absence of TOP2B may cause the axon guidance faults.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728365
PMID: 26459242  [PubMed]


36. Steroids. 2015 Dec;104:129-36. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2015.09.005. Epub 2015 Oct
9.

Prognostic value of estrogen receptors mRNA expression in non-small cell lung
cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Li W(1), Tse LA(2), Wang F(3).

Author information: 
(1)JC School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. Electronic address:
waveofocean99@gmail.com. (2)JC School of Public Health and Primary Care, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
Electronic address: shelly@cuhk.edu.hk. (3)JC School of Public Health and Primary
Care, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region.

The prognostic value of estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2) mRNA expression in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains controversial.
Therefore, a systematic review with meta-analysis was conducted. A systematic
literature search was conducted in both Pubmed and Embase. Studies that reported 
association of ESR and survival in NSCLC patients in the form of hazard ratio
(HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) were included. Pooled HR was taken as the
effect size to reflect the association. Five eligible articles provided six
separate studies for ESR1 and four for ESR2. For ESR1, the pooled HR of overall
survival was 0.72 (95% CI 0.41-1.27) by univariate analysis and was 0.33 (95% CI:
0.20-0.53) by multivariate analysis. For ESR2, the pooled HR was 0.95 (95% CI
0.73-1.23) by univariate analysis. Sub-group analysis suggested that the disease 
stages and cut-off point may explain heterogeneity among studies of ESR1. Results
of the meta-analysis revealed a potential benefit of positive ESR1 mRNA
expression in survival in patients with NSCLC, especially in those of advanced
stage. No statistically significant association was found between ESR2 mRNA
expression and NSCLC patients' prognosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26456481  [PubMed - in process]


37. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Jan 5;419:102-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.10.004. Epub 
2015 Oct 8.

Testing the critical window of estradiol replacement on gene expression of
vasopressin, oxytocin, and their receptors, in the hypothalamus of aging female
rats.

Garcia AN(1), Depena CK(2), Yin W(2), Gore AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712,
USA. (2)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. (3)Department of Psychology, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA; Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. Electronic address:
andrea.gore@austin.utexas.edu.

The current study tested the "critical window" hypothesis of menopause that
postulates that the timing and duration of hormone treatment determine their
potential outcomes. Our focus was genes in the rat hypothalamus involved in
social and affiliative behaviors that change with aging and/or estradiol (E2):
Avp, Avpr1a, Oxt, Oxtr, and Esr2 in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and
supraoptic nucleus (SON). Rats were reproductively mature or aging adults,
ovariectomized, given E2 or vehicle treatment of different durations, with or
without a post-ovariectomy delay. Our hypothesis was that age-related changes in 
gene expression are mitigated by E2 treatments. Contrary to this, PVN Oxtr
increased with E2, and Avpr1a increased with age. In the SON, Avpr1a increased
with age, Oxtr with age and timing, and Avp was altered by duration. Thus,
chronological age and E2 have independent actions on gene expression, with the
"critical window" hypothesis supported by the observed timing and duration
effects.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4684429 [Available on 2017-01-05]
PMID: 26454088  [PubMed - in process]


38. Nat Commun. 2015 Oct 7;6:8469. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9469.

Large-scale association analysis in Asians identifies new susceptibility loci for
prostate cancer.

Wang M(1,)(2,)(3), Takahashi A(4), Liu F(5), Ye D(6), Ding Q(5), Qin C(7), Yin
C(7), Zhang Z(2), Matsuda K(8), Kubo M(9), Na R(5), Lin X(5), Jiang H(5), Ren
S(10), Sun J(3), Zheng SL(3,)(11), Le Marchand L(12), Isaacs WB(13), Mo Z(14),
Haiman CA(15), Sun Y(10), Nakagawa H(16), Xu J(5,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing 210029, China. (2)Department of Molecular and Genetic Toxicology, Key
Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. (3)Center for Cancer
Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North
Carolina 27157, USA. (4)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (5)Fudan Institute of
Urology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China.
(6)Department of Urology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. (7)Department of
Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China. (8)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center,
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
(9)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (10)Department of Urology, Shanghai Changhai 
Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China. (11)Program
for Personalized Cancer Care, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston,
Illinois 60201, USA. (12)Department of Epidemiology Program, University of Hawaii
Cancer Center, Honolulu, Hawai 96813, USA. (13)Department of Urology, James
Buchanan Brady Urologic Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA. (14)Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China. (15)Department of
Preventive Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA.
(16)Laboratory for Genome Sequencing Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified ~100 genetic loci
associated with prostate cancer risk. Less than a dozen of these loci were
initially identified from GWAS in two Asian populations, likely because of
smaller sample sizes of these individual GWAS in Asians. Here, we conduct a
large-scale meta-analysis of two GWAS from the Japanese population (1,583 cases
and 3,386 controls) and the Chinese population (1,417 cases and 1,008 controls), 
followed by replication in three independent sample sets. We identify two
independent susceptibility loci for prostate cancer at 11p15.4 (rs12791447,
P=3.59 × 10(-8); PPFIBP2) and 14q23.2 (rs58262369, P=6.05 × 10(-10); ESR2). The
mRNA levels of PPFIBP2 and ESR2 are differentially expressed in prostate tumours 
and paired normal tissues. Our study adds two new loci to the limited number of
prostate cancer risk-associated variants in Asians and provides important insight
into potential biological mechanisms of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4633711
PMID: 26443449  [PubMed - in process]


39. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 25;10(9):e0138738. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138738.
eCollection 2015.

Polymorphisms in Genes of Relevance for Oestrogen and Oxytocin Pathways and Risk 
of Barrett's Oesophagus and Oesophageal Adenocarcinoma: A Pooled Analysis from
the BEACON Consortium.

Lagergren K(1), Ek WE(2), Levine D(3), Chow WH(4), Bernstein L(5), Casson AG(6), 
Risch HA(7), Shaheen NJ(8), Bird NC(9), Reid BJ(10), Corley DA(11), Hardie
LJ(12), Wu AH(13), Fitzgerald RC(14), Pharoah P(15), Caldas C(16), Romero Y(17), 
Vaughan TL(18), MacGregor S(19), Whiteman D(20), Westberg L(21), Nyren O(22),
Lagergren J(23).

Author information: 
(1)Upper Gastrointestinal Surgery, Department of Molecular medicine and Surgery, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Statistical Genetics, QIMR Berghofer
Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland, Australia; Department of
Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America. (4)Department of Epidemiology, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (5)Department of Population
Sciences, Beckman Research Institute and City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Duarte, California, United States of America. (6)Department of Surgery,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada. (7)Yale School of Public
Health, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America. (8)Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, UNC School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (9)Department of
Oncology, The Medical School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(10)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America. (11)Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 
Division of Research, Oakland, California, United States of America. (12)Division
of Epidemiology, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. (13)Department of
Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (14)Medical
Research Council (MRC) Cancer Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (15)Department of Public Health, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (16)Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (17)Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States
of America. (18)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America. (19)Statistical
Genetics, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland,
Australia. (20)Cancer Control Group, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Herston, Queensland, Australia. (21)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of
Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden. (22)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (23)Upper Gastrointestinal Surgery,
Department of Molecular medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden; Division of Cancer Studies, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The strong male predominance in oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC) and 
Barrett's oesophagus (BO) continues to puzzle. Hormonal influence, e.g. oestrogen
or oxytocin, might contribute.
METHODS: This genetic-epidemiological study pooled 14 studies from three
continents, Australia, Europe, and North America. Polymorphisms in 3 key genes
coding for the oestrogen pathway (receptor alpha (ESR1), receptor beta (ESR2),
and aromatase (CYP19A1)), and 3 key genes of the oxytocin pathway (the oxytocin
receptor (OXTR), oxytocin protein (OXT), and cyclic ADP ribose hydrolase
glycoprotein (CD38)), were analysed using a gene-based approach, versatile
gene-based test association study (VEGAS).
RESULTS: Among 1508 OAC patients, 2383 BO patients, and 2170 controls, genetic
variants within ESR1 were associated with BO in males (p = 0.0058) and an
increased risk of OAC and BO combined in males (p = 0.0023). Genetic variants
within OXTR were associated with an increased risk of BO in both sexes combined
(p = 0.0035) and in males (p = 0.0012). We followed up these suggestive findings 
in a further smaller data set, but found no replication. There were no
significant associations between the other 4 genes studied and risk of OAC, BO,
separately on in combination, in males and females combined or in males only.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variants in the oestrogen receptor alpha and the oxytocin
receptor may be associated with an increased risk of BO or OAC, but replication
in other large samples are needed.

PMCID: PMC4583498
PMID: 26406593  [PubMed - in process]


40. Equine Vet J. 2015 Sep 25. doi: 10.1111/evj.12514. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular changes in the equine follicle in relation to variations in antral
follicle count and anti-Müllerian hormone concentrations.

Claes A(1), Ball BA(1), Troedsson MH(1), Curry TE Jr(2), Squires EL(2), Scoggin
KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gluck Equine Research Center, Department of Veterinary Science, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, USA. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University 
of Kentucky, Lexington, USA.

REASONS FOR PERFORMING STUDY: The wide variation in circulating anti-Müllerian
hormone (AMH) concentrations between mares is attributed to differences in antral
follicle count (AFC) which may reflect follicular function. There are few data
regarding variations in AFC and associated regulatory factors for AMH in the
equine follicle during follicular development.
OBJECTIVES: To examine molecular and hormonal differences in the equine follicle 
in relation to variations in AFC and circulating AMH concentrations during
follicular development and to identify genes co-expressed with AMH in the equine 
follicle.
STUDY DESIGN: Observational study.
METHODS: Plasma AMH concentrations and AFC were determined in 30 cyclic mares.
Granulosa cells, theca cells and follicular fluid were recovered from growing (n 
= 17) or dominant follicles (n = 13). The expression of several genes, known to
be involved in folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis, was examined using real-time
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
Intrafollicular oestradiol and AMH concentrations were determined by immunoassay.
RESULTS: Within growing follicles, the expression of AMH, AMHR2, ESR2 and INHA in
granulosa cells was positively correlated with AFC and plasma AMH concentrations.
In addition, the expression of ESR1 and FSHR was positively associated with
plasma AMH concentrations. No significant associations were detected in dominant 
follicles. Furthermore, there was no association between AMH or oestradiol
concentrations in follicular fluid and variations in AFC. Finally, the expression
of AMH and genes co-expressed with AMH (AMHR2, ESR2 and FSHR) in granulosa cells 
as well as intrafollicular AMH concentrations decreased during follicular
development while intrafollicular oestradiol concentrations increased and were
inversely related to intrafollicular AMH concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that variations in AFC and circulating AMH
concentrations are associated with molecular changes in the growing equine
follicle.

© 2015 EVJ Ltd.

PMID: 26403213  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


41. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Nov;100(11):E1404-14. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-2031.
Epub 2015 Sep 22.

C-Jun NH2-Terminal Kinase and p38 Inhibition Suppresses Prostaglandin
E2-Stimulated Aromatase and Estrogen Receptor Levels in Human Endometriosis.

Zeng C(1), Xu JN(1), Zhou Y(1), Yang HX(1), Zhou YF(1), Xue Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (C.Z., J.-n.X., Y.Z., H.-x.Y.,
Y.-f.Z., Q.X.), Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034, P. R. China.

CONTEXT: Endometriosis is an estrogen-dependent disease. P38 and C-jun
NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitors may have a therapeutic effect on
endometriosis through regulation of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)-induced estrogen
metabolism.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine whether the activated
MAPKs signaling pathway observed in human ectopic endometrial stromal cells
(ESCs) from ovarian endometriomas influences levels of aromatase and estrogen
receptor ß (ERß) protein regulated by PGE2. In turn, the effects of inhibiting
MAPKs in the presence of PGE2 on estrogen production were investigated in vitro
and in vivo.
RESULTS: Expression of aromatase and ERß regulated by PGE2 were much higher in
ESCs than eutopic ESCs from the same person. Activation of p38, JNK, ERK 1/2 and 
ERK 5 MAPKs by PGE2 were observed in ESCs, where PGE2-stimulated aromatase and
ERß expression mainly through p38 and JNK pathway. P38 and JNK inhibition or
small interfering RNA knockdown blocked PGE2-induced aromatase and ERß
expression. PGE2 enhanced binding of downstream p38 and JNK transcription factors
activating transcription factor-2 and c-Jun to aromatase and ERB promoter regions
in ESCs. Moreover, treatment of endometriosis xenografts with inhibitors of p38
and JNK abrogated PGE2-amplified estradiol synthesis and xenograft growth.
CONCLUSIONS: PGE2 activates p38 and JNK signaling pathways, further stimulating
c-Jun and activating transcription factor-2 binding to aromatase and ERB promoter
regions with elevated estradiol production. Inhibition of JNK and P38 may be a
potential method of treating human endometriosis.

PMID: 26394174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Endocrinology. 2015 Dec;156(12):4448-57. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1448. Epub 2015 Sep
15.

Identification of California Condor Estrogen Receptors 1 and 2 and Their
Activation by Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals.

Felton RG(1), Steiner CC(1), Durrant BS(1), Keisler DH(1), Milnes MR(1), Tubbs
CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research (R.G.F., C.C.S., B.S.D.,
C.W.T.), Escondido, California 92027; Division of Animal Sciences (D.H.K.),
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211; and Department of Natural
Sciences (M.R.M.), Mars Hill University, Mars Hill, North Carolina 28754.

Recently, California condors (Gymnogyps californianus) have been reintroduced to 
coastal regions of California where they feed on marine mammal carcasses. There
is evidence that coastal-dwelling condors experience reproductive issues, such as
eggshell thinning, likely resulting from exposure to endocrine-disrupting
chemicals (EDCs). To address this problem, we have identified and cloned condor
estrogen receptors (ESRs) 1 and 2 and characterized their activation by EDCs
present in the coastal habitats where condors reside.
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and its metabolites all activated ESR1 and 
ESR2, although their relative potency differed between the receptors. Bisphenol
A, dieldrin, trans-nonachlor, and polychlorinated biphenyl 52 (PCB52) moderately 
activated both ESRs, whereas PCB138 and PCB153 stimulated little to no
activation. Overall, EDC activation of condor ESR2, which is the first ESR2
cloned from a raptor species, was greater than that of ESR1. Significant
activation of both condor ESRs by EDCs occurred at high concentrations (=1µM),
which are within the range of plasma levels of certain EDCs (eg,
dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene [p'p-DDE]) in coastal-dwelling condors. Finally,
phylogenetic analyses of ESRs of 41 avian species identified a single amino acid 
position in ESR2 under positive selection. Mutation of this amino acid affected
receptor activation by EDCs, suggesting the identity of this amino acid may
influence EDC sensitivity of avian species. Together, these findings broaden our 
understanding of EDC interactions with ESRs in avian species. For condors
specifically, these data could be used to evaluate EDC exposure risk at future
release sites to identify those least likely to compromise the continued recovery
of this species.

PMID: 26372180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. BMC Vet Res. 2015 Sep 15;11:235. doi: 10.1186/s12917-015-0546-y.

Endocrine control of canine mammary neoplasms: serum reproductive hormone levels 
and tissue expression of steroid hormone, prolactin and growth hormone receptors.

Spoerri M(1,)(2), Guscetti F(3), Hartnack S(4), Boos A(5), Oei C(6), Balogh O(7),
Nowaczyk RM(8), Michel E(9), Reichler IM(10), Kowalewski MP(11).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Reproductive Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. mspoerri@vetclinics.uzh.ch.
(2)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. mspoerri@vetclinics.uzh.ch.
(3)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 268/272, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland.
franco.guscetti@vetpath.uzh.ch. (4)Section of Epidemiology, Vetsuisse Faculty,
Winterthurerstrasse 270, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. sonja.hartnack@access.uzh.ch.
(5)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. boosa@vetanat.uzh.ch.
(6)Department of Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, P.O Box 80125, Utrecht, 3508 TC, The Netherlands. C.H.Y.Oei@uu.nl.
(7)Clinic of Reproductive Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. obalogh@vetclinics.uzh.ch.
(8)Division of Animal Anatomy, Department of Animal Physiology and Biostructure, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life
Sciences, Wroclaw, Poland. renatanowaczyk@o2.pl. (9)Clinic of Reproductive
Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 260,
Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. erikamichel@bluewin.ch. (10)Clinic of Reproductive
Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 260,
Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. ireichler@vetclinics.uzh.ch. (11)Institute of
Veterinary Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse
260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. kowalewski@vetanat.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND: Neoplasms of the mammary gland are among the most common diseases in 
female domestic dogs (Canis familiaris). It is assumed that reproductive hormones
influence tumorigenesis in this species, although the precise role of the
endocrine milieu and reproductive state is subject to continuing discussion. In
line with this, a recent systematic review of available data on the development
of mammary neoplasms revealed weak evidence for risk reduction after neutering
and an effect of age at neutering. Investigation of several hormone receptors has
revealed decreased expression of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERa, ESR1),
progesterone (P4) receptor (PGR), prolactin (PRL) receptor (PRLR) and growth
hormone receptor (GHR) associated with neoplastic differentiation of mammary
tissues. In other studies, increased levels of estrogens, progesterone and
prolactin were found in serum and/or tissue homogenates of dogs with malignant
neoplasms. However, the association between these entities within one animal
population was never previously examined. Therefore, this study investigated the 
association between circulating serum concentrations of estradiol-17ß,
progesterone and prolactin, and gene expression of ERa (ESR1), ERß (ESR2), PGR,
PRLR, PRL and GHR, with respect to reproductive state (spayed vs. intact) and
cycle stage (anestrus vs. diestrus). Additionally, the expression of E-cadherin
(CDH-1) was evaluated as a possible indicator of metastatic potential.
RESULTS: For all receptors, the lowest gene expression was found in malignant
tumors compared to normal tissues of affected dogs. Steroid levels were not
influenced by their corresponding receptor expression in mammary neoplasms, but
increased PRL levels were negatively associated with low PRLR gene expression in 
malignant tumors. The expression of CDH-1 was influenced by tumor malignancy and 
cycle stage, i.e., the highest gene expression was found in benign mammary tumors
in diestrous dogs compared to normal and malignant mammary tissues of anestrous
and spayed dogs.
CONCLUSIONS: Herein, it has been confirmed that transformation towards malignant 
neoplasms is associated with significant reduction of gene expression of
particular hormone receptors. Only PRLR in malignant tumors seems to be
influenced by circulating PRL levels. In dogs, CDH-1 can be used as a prognostic 
factor; its expression, however, in benign tumors is influenced by cycle stage.

PMCID: PMC4570623
PMID: 26370564  [PubMed - in process]


44. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 10;10(9):e0135988. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135988.
eCollection 2015.

G Protein-Coupled Estrogen Receptor 1 Mediates Acute Estrogen-Induced
Cardioprotection via MEK/ERK/GSK-3ß Pathway after Ischemia/Reperfusion.

Kabir ME(1), Singh H(2), Lu R(3), Olde B(4), Leeb-Lundberg LM(4), Bopassa JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, TX 78229, United States of America. (2)Department 
of Pharmacology and Physiology, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19102, United States of America. (3)Department of
Anesthesiology, Division of Molecular Medicine, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1778, United States of America. (4)Department of
Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, 22184 Lund, Sweden.

Three types of estrogen receptors (ER) exist in the heart, Esr1, Esr2 and the G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1, Gper1. However, their relative importance in
mediating estrogen protective action is unknown. We found that, in the male mouse
ventricle, Gper1 transcripts are three- and seventeen-fold more abundant than
Esr1 and Esr2 mRNAs, respectively. Analysis of the three ER knockouts (Esr1-/-,
Esr2-/- and Gper1-/-) showed that only the Gper1-/- hearts lost their ability to 
be protected by 40 nM estrogen as measured by heart function, infarct size and
mitochondrial Ca2+ overload, an index of mitochondrial permeability transition
pore (mPTP) activity. Analysis of Akt, ERK1/2 and GSK-3ß salvage kinases
uncovered Akt and ERK1/2 transient activation by estrogen whose phosphorylation
increased during the first 5 min of non-ischemic perfusion. All these increase in
phosphorylation effects were abrogated in Gper1-/-. Inhibition of MEK1/2/ERK1/2
(1 µM U0126) and PI-3K/Akt (10 µM LY294002) signaling showed that the
MEK1/2/ERK1/2 pathway via GSK-3ß exclusively was responsible for cardioprotection
as an addition of U0126 prevented estrogen-induced GSK-3ß increased
phosphorylation, resistance to mitochondrial Ca2+-overload, functional recovery
and protection against infarction. Further, inhibiting PKC translocation (1 µM
chelerythrin-chloride) abolished estrogen-induced cardioprotection. These data
indicate that estrogen-Gper1 acute coupling plays a key role in cardioprotection 
against ischemia/reperfusion injury in male mouse via a cascade involving PKC
translocation, ERK1/2/GSK-3ß phosphorylation leading to the inhibition of the
mPTP opening.

PMCID: PMC4565659
PMID: 26356837  [PubMed - in process]


45. Reprod Domest Anim. 2015 Oct;50(5):719-29. doi: 10.1111/rda.12556. Epub 2015 Aug 
24.

Bovine Oviduct Epithelial Cells Dedifferentiate Partly in Culture, While
Maintaining their Ability to Improve Early Embryo Development Rate and Quality.

Schmaltz-Panneau B(1), Locatelli Y(1,)(2), Uzbekova S(1), Perreau C(1), Mermillod
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMR7247, Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements, INRA, Nouzilly, 
France. (2)Parc de la Haute Touche, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle,
Obterre, France.

There are convincing arguments to suggest that the success of early reproductive 
events is reliant on a satisfactory dialogue between gametes-embryo and the
oviduct epithelium. The aim of this study was to develop and characterize an
in vitro model to study these interactions. Cattle zygotes produced in vitro were
cultured in either SOF or TCM-199 in the presence or absence of bovine oviduct
cell monolayers (BOEC), under 20% or 5% O2 . The embryonic development rate and
its quality (cell numbers, cryosurvival) were evaluated, as were the BOEC
contents in 11 candidate transcripts (real-time PCR) at different time points. A 
BOEC co-culture did indeed increase the rate of development in both media under
5% O2 (41 vs 27% and 28 vs 10% of Day 8 blastocysts in SOF and TCM-199,
respectively; p < 0.05). The effect of BOEC on the developmental rate was more
pronounced under 20% O2 (35 vs 6% and 27 vs 4% of Day 8 blastocysts in SOF and
TCM-199, respectively; p < 0.05). BOEC significantly increased the embryonic cell
count in TCM-199 (122.5 ± 11.1 vs 70.3 ± 9.6; p < 0.05) and embryonic
cryosurvival in both media. The expression levels of SOD, FGF2 and TGF-ß1 in BOEC
remained steady during culture, although mRNA levels of OGP, C3, PGR and ESR2
were clearly reduced, suggesting a dedifferentiation of BOEC during culture.
However, SSP1 and GPX4 transcripts were slightly increased during culture, this
rise becoming significant by the end of the culture period. In conclusion, our
co-culture system with bovine oviduct epithelial cells used for the development
of bovine zygotes produced in vitro enhanced blastocyst formation and above all
the quality of the resulting embryos, which was associated with specific
transcriptomic changes.

© 2015 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 26302033  [PubMed - in process]


46. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 Sep;1350:52-60. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12872. Epub 2015 Aug 24.

Estrogen receptor-ß in mitochondria: implications for mitochondrial bioenergetics
and tumorigenesis.

Liao TL(1,)(2), Tzeng CR(3,)(4,)(5), Yu CL(6), Wang YP(1,)(2), Kao SH(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Science, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)School of Medical Laboratory Science and
Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei
Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Center for Reproductive Medicine 
and Sciences, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rosalind Franklin
University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, Illinois.

Estrogen enhances mitochondrial function by enhancing mitochondrial biogenesis
and sustaining mitochondrial energy-transducing capacity. Shifts in mitochondrial
bioenergetic pathways from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis have been
hypothesized to be involved in estrogen-induced tumorigenesis. Studies have shown
that mitochondria are an important target of estrogen. Estrogen receptor-ß (ERß) 
has been shown to localize to mitochondria in a ligand-dependent or -independent 
manner and can affect mitochondrial bioenergetics and anti-apoptotic signaling.
However, the functional role of mitochondrial ERß in tumorigenesis remains
unclear. Clinical studies of ERß-related tumorigenesis have shown that ERß
stimulates mitochondrial metabolism to meet the high energy demands of processes 
such as cell proliferation, cell survival, and transformation. Thus, in
elucidating the precise role of mitochondrial ERß in cell transformation and
tumorigenesis, it will be particularly valuable to explore new approaches for the
development of medical treatments targeting mitochondrial ERß-mediated
mitochondrial function and preventing apoptosis.

© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 26301952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Oct;10(10):1413-20. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000646.

Estrogen Receptor Gene Polymorphisms and Lung Adenocarcinoma Risk in
Never-Smoking Women.

Chen KY(1), Hsiao CF, Chang GC, Tsai YH, Su WC, Chen YM, Huang MS, Tsai FY, Jiang
SS, Chang IS, Chen CY, Hsiung CA, Chen CJ, Yang PC; GELAC Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, National
Taiwan University Hospital and College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of 
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Institute of Population Health Sciences,
National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan; Division of Chest Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan; §Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan; <U+2016>Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan;
¶Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan; #Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, and Taipei
Cancer Center, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; **Department of
Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, School of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; National Institute of Cancer
Research, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan; Institute of
Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan; 
§§Institute of Medicine, Chung-Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan;
<U+2016><U+2016>Department of Thoracic Surgery, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan; ¶¶Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan;
and ##Graduate Institute of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: The association between estrogen receptor (ER) gene polymorphism
and lung cancer risk is rarely studied. This study aimed to explore the ER gene
polymorphisms associated with the lung adenocarcinoma risk in never-smoking
women.
METHODS: This study evaluated 532 never-smoking female patients with lung
adenocarcinoma and 532 healthy controls. The ESR1 and ESR2 single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) data were retrieved from a genome-wide association study.
Using a multivariate-adjusted logistic regression assay, the associations of ESR1
and ESR2 SNPs with the lung adenocarcinoma risk were estimated. Expression
quantitative trait loci analysis was performed to investigate the possible
functional roles of ER gene SNPs.
RESULTS: For ESR1, seven tagged SNPs were identified. Among them, rs7753153 and
rs985192 were associated with lung adenocarcinoma risk (rs7753153: odds ratios
[OR], 1.509; 95% confidence intervals [CI], 1.168-1.950; rs985192: OR, 1.309; 95%
CI, 1.001-1.712). For ESR2, only rs3020450 was associated with lung
adenocarcinoma risk (OR, 2.110; 95% CI, 1.007-4.422). Subjects without hormone
replacement therapy (HRT) use carrying at-risk genotypes had a significantly
higher lung adenocarcinoma risk than subjects with HRT carrying no at-risk
genotypes (rs7753153 GG: OR, 2.133; 95% CI, 1.415-3.216; rs985192 AA/AC, OR:
1.752, 95% CI: 1.109-2.768; rs3020450 AG/GG, OR: 7.162, 95% CI: 1.608-31.90).
Risk genotypes of rs7753153 (p = 0.0248) and rs9479122 (p = 0.0251) were
associated with decreased ESR1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: ER gene SNPs are associated with lung adenocarcinoma risk in
never-smoking women. The joint effects of ER gene SNPs and HRT use on lung
adenocarcinoma risk highlight the importance of the gene-environment interaction 
in lung carcinogenesis.

PMID: 26301798  [PubMed - in process]


48. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1457. doi: 10.1007/s11033-015-3892-8.

Retraction Note to: Genetic polymorphisms in VDR, ESR1 and ESR2 genes may
contribute to susceptibility to Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Gao Z, Fu HJ, Xue JJ, Wu ZX, Zhao LB. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jul;41(7):4463-74.

PMID: 26285929  [PubMed - in process]


49. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 16;17:110. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0625-9.

A comprehensive evaluation of interaction between genetic variants and use of
menopausal hormone therapy on mammographic density.

Rudolph A(1), Fasching PA(2,)(3), Behrens S(4), Eilber U(5), Bolla MK(6), Wang
Q(7), Thompson D(8), Czene K(9), Brand JS(10), Li J(11), Scott C(12), Pankratz
VS(13), Brandt K(14), Hallberg E(15), Olson JE(16), Lee A(17), Beckmann MW(18),
Ekici AB(19), Haeberle L(20), Maskarinec G(21), Le Marchand L(22), Schumacher
F(23), Milne RL(24,)(25), Knight JA(26,)(27), Apicella C(28), Southey MC(29),
Kapuscinski MK(30), Hopper JL(31), Andrulis IL(32,)(33), Giles GG(34,)(35),
Haiman CA(36), Khaw KT(37), Luben R(38), Hall P(39), Pharoah PD(40,)(41), Couch
FJ(42), Easton DF(43,)(44), Dos-Santos-Silva I(45), Vachon C(46), Chang-Claude
J(47).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 581, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany. a.rudolph@dkfz.de.
(2)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center
Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany. peter.fasching@uk-erlangen.de. (3)David Geffen
School of Medicine, Department of Medicine Division of Hematology and Oncology,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
peter.fasching@uk-erlangen.de. (4)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
s.behrens@dkfz.de. (5)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
u.eilber@dkfz.de. (6)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public
Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
mkh39@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (7)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
qw232@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (8)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
djt25@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (9)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Kamila.Czene@ki.se. (10)Department of
Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
judith.brand@ki.se. (11)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. jingmei@gmail.com. (12)Division of
Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Scott.Christopher@mayo.edu.
(13)Division of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
vpankratz@salud.unm.edu. (14)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. brandt.kathy@mayo.edu. (15)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Hallberg.emily@mayo.edu. (16)Department of Health
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. olsonj@mayo.edu.
(17)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. lee.adam@mayo.edu. (18)Department of Gynaecology and 
Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany. 
Fk-direktion@uk-erlangen.de. (19)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer
Center Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany. Arif.Ekici@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de.
(20)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center
Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany. lothar.haeberle@uk-erlangen.de. (21)University
of Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI, USA. Gertraud@cc.hawaii.edu.
(22)University of Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI, USA. loic@crch.hawaii.edu. 
(23)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. fschumac@usc.edu. (24)Cancer
Epidemiology Centre, Cancer Council Victoria, Melbourne, Australia.
Roger.Milne@cancervic.org.au. (25)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. Roger.Milne@cancervic.org.au. (26)Prosserman Centre for
Health Research, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute of Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, Canada. knight@lunenfeld.ca. (27)Division of Epidemiology, Dalla Lana
School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
knight@lunenfeld.ca. (28)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne
School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia. capic@unimelb.edu.au. (29)Department of Pathology, The University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. msouthey@unimelb.edu.au. (30)Centre for
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health,
The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. kmk@unimelb.edu.au. (31)Centre
for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and Global
Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
j.hopper@unimelb.edu.au. (32)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute of Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada. andrulis@lunenfeld.ca. (33)Department of
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
andrulis@lunenfeld.ca. (34)Cancer Epidemiology Centre, Cancer Council Victoria,
Melbourne, Australia. Graham.Giles@cancervic.org.au. (35)Centre for Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Graham.Giles@cancervic.org.au.
(36)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Christopher.Haiman@med.usc.edu.
(37)MRC Centre for Nutritional Epidemiology in Cancer Prevention and Survival
(CNC), University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. kk101@medschl.cam.ac.uk.
(38)Clinical Gerontology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Robert.luben@phpc.cam.ac.uk.
(39)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden. Per.Hall@ki.se. (40)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK. pp10001@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (41)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
pp10001@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (42)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. couch.fergus@mayo.edu. (43)Centre for Cancer
Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. dfe20@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (44)Centre for Cancer Genetic 
Epidemiology, Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
dfe20@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (45)Department of Non-Communicable Disease Epidemiology,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
isabel.silva@lshtm.ac.uk. (46)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Vachon.celine@mayo.edu. (47)Division of Cancer
Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581,
D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany. j.chang-claude@dkfz.de.

INTRODUCTION: Mammographic density is an established breast cancer risk factor
with a strong genetic component and can be increased in women using menopausal
hormone therapy (MHT). Here, we aimed to identify genetic variants that may
modify the association between MHT use and mammographic density.
METHODS: The study comprised 6,298 postmenopausal women from the Mayo Mammography
Health Study and nine studies included in the Breast Cancer Association
Consortium. We selected for evaluation 1327 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) showing the lowest P-values for interaction (P int) in a meta-analysis of 
genome-wide gene-environment interaction studies with MHT use on risk of breast
cancer, 2541 SNPs in candidate genes (AKR1C4, CYP1A1-CYP1A2, CYP1B1, ESR2, PPARG,
PRL, SULT1A1-SULT1A2 and TNF) and ten SNPs (AREG-rs10034692, PRDM6-rs186749,
ESR1-rs12665607, ZNF365-rs10995190, 8p11.23-rs7816345, LSP1-rs3817198,
IGF1-rs703556, 12q24-rs1265507, TMEM184B-rs7289126, and SGSM3-rs17001868)
associated with mammographic density in genome-wide studies. We used multiple
linear regression models adjusted for potential confounders to evaluate
interactions between SNPs and current use of MHT on mammographic density.
RESULTS: No significant interactions were identified after adjustment for
multiple testing. The strongest SNP-MHT interaction (unadjusted P int <0.0004)
was observed with rs9358531 6.5kb 5' of PRL. Furthermore, three SNPs in PLCG2
that had previously been shown to modify the association of MHT use with breast
cancer risk were found to modify also the association of MHT use with
mammographic density (unadjusted P int <0.002), but solely among cases
(unadjusted P int SNP×MHT×case-status <0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The study identified potential interactions on mammographic density 
between current use of MHT and SNPs near PRL and in PLCG2, which require
confirmation. Given the moderate size of the interactions observed, larger
studies are needed to identify genetic modifiers of the association of MHT use
with mammographic density.

PMCID: PMC4537547
PMID: 26275715  [PubMed - in process]


50. Environ Health Prev Med. 2015 Sep;20(5):332-7. doi: 10.1007/s12199-015-0471-5.
Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Associations between estrogen receptor genetic polymorphisms, smoking status, and
prostate cancer risk: a case-control study in Japanese men.

Lu X(1), Yamano Y, Takahashi H, Koda M, Fujiwara Y, Hisada A, Miyazaki W, Katoh
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University,
1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-Ku, Kumamoto, 860-8556, Japan, lucyk1984@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the major causes of death among men.
Our study investigated the association of ESR1 and ESR2 genotypes with
susceptibility to PCa in relation to smoking status in Japanese.
METHOD: A case-control study was performed with 750 Japanese prostate cancer
patients and 870 healthy controls. After age-matching in case-controls, 352
controls and 352 cases were enrolled in this study. By using logistic regression 
analysis, the different genotypes from ESR1 and ESR2 were analyzed according to
case/control status.
RESULT: ESR2 rs4986938 AG and AG + AA genotypes were associated with
significantly decreased risk of PCa (AG: OR = 0.68, 95 % CI 0.47-0.97, P < 0.05
and AG + AA: OR = 0.67, 95 % CI 0.47-0.94, P < 0.05). However, there was no
significant association between ESR1 rs2234693 and PCa risk. When patients were
grouped according to smoking status, the ESR2 rs1256049 AA genotype (OR = 0.48,
95 % CI 0.25-0.95, P < 0.05) and ESR2 rs4986938 AG + AA genotype (OR = 0.64, 95 %
CI 0.41-1.00, P < 0.05) showed significantly decreased PCa risk in the
ever-smoker group.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the estrogen receptor ESR2 has a very
important function to predict PCa and that different SNPs have different
predictive values. Smoking may influence estrogenic activity and may influence
PCa together with the estrogen receptor.

PMCID: PMC4550607 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26251204  [PubMed - in process]


51. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Nov 1;294:43-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.07.060. Epub 2015
Aug 1.

Changes in estrogen receptor signaling alters the timekeeping system in male
mice.

Blattner MS(1), Mahoney MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL
61802, United States; Medical Scholars Program, University of Illinois at Urbana 
Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802, United States. (2)Neuroscience Program, University
of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802, United States; Comparative
Biosciences, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 2001 S. Lincoln Ave,
Urbana, IL 61802, United States. Electronic address: Mmm1@illinois.edu.

Circadian rhythms are modulated by steroid hormones; however, the mechanisms of
this action are not fully understood, particularly in males. In females estradiol
regulates activity level, pattern of expression, and free running period (tau).
We tested the hypothesis that activity level and distribution in male mice
includes both classical and "non-classical" actions of estrogens at the estrogen 
receptor subtype 1 (ESR1). We used transgenic mice with mutations in their
estrogen response pathways: ESR1 knock-out (ERKO) mice lack the ability to
respond to estrogens via ESR1. "Non-classical" estrogen receptor knock-in (NERKI)
mice have an inserted ESR1 receptor with a mutation in the
estrogen-response-element binding domain, allowing activation via non-genomic and
second messenger pathways. Gonadectomized male NERKI, ERKO, and wildtype (WT)
littermates were given oil, or low or high dose estradiol and daily activity
parameters were quantified. Estradiol shortened the ratio of activity in the
light relative to dark (LD ratio), shortened tau, advanced the time of activity
onset, and altered responsiveness to light cues administered in the late
subjective night, suggesting modulation by an ESR1-independent mechanism.
Estradiol treatment in NERKI but not WT males altered the timing of activity
onset, LD ratio, and the behavioral response to light cues. These results may
represent disruptions in the balance of genomic/nongenomic or ESR1/ESR2 signaling
pathways. We also found a significant genotype effect on total activity, LD
ratio, tau, and activity duration. These data provide new information about the
role of ESR1-dependent and independent signaling pathways on the timekeeping
system in male mice.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26241171  [PubMed - in process]


52. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Oct;173(4):447-54. doi: 10.1530/EJE-15-0460. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

Is idiopathic hirsutism (IH) really idiopathic? mRNA expressions of skin
steroidogenic enzymes in women with IH.

Taheri S(1), Zararsiz G(1), Karaburgu S(2), Borlu M(2), Ozgun MT(2), Karaca Z(2),
Tanriverdi F(2), Dundar M(2), Kelestimur F(2), Unluhizarci K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical BiologyStatisticsEndocrinologyDermatologyObstetrics and
GynecologyGeneticsErciyes University Medical School, Kayseri 38039,
TurkeyBetul-Ziya Eren Genome and Stem Cell CenterErciyes University, Kayseri,
Turkey Departments of Medical BiologyStatisticsEndocrinologyDermatologyObstetrics
and GynecologyGeneticsErciyes University Medical School, Kayseri 38039,
TurkeyBetul-Ziya Eren Genome and Stem Cell CenterErciyes University, Kayseri,
Turkey. (2)Departments of Medical
BiologyStatisticsEndocrinologyDermatologyObstetrics and GynecologyGeneticsErciyes
University Medical School, Kayseri 38039, TurkeyBetul-Ziya Eren Genome and Stem
Cell CenterErciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey. (3)Departments of Medical
BiologyStatisticsEndocrinologyDermatologyObstetrics and GynecologyGeneticsErciyes
University Medical School, Kayseri 38039, TurkeyBetul-Ziya Eren Genome and Stem
Cell CenterErciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey kursad@erciyes.edu.tr.

OBJECTIVE: Hirsutism results from hyperandrogenemia and/or exaggerated androgen
responsiveness. Among various causes of hirsutism, some patients do not exhibit
androgen excess which is called idiopathic hirsutism (IH). The pathogenesis of IH
could not so far be clearly established.
DESIGN: To investigate the mRNA expression of aromatase enzyme and the other
enzymes having functional roles in the steroidogenic pathway, in freshly obtained
skin tissue from subumbilical skin and the arm of the patients with IH and
healthy women.
METHODS: Twenty-one women with IH and 15 healthy women were included in the
study. We aimed to determine mRNA expressions of genes associated with local
androgen synthesis and metabolism (CYP11A1, STS, CYP19A1, SRD5A1, SRD5A2, HSD3B1,
AR, COMT, ESR1, ESR2, HSD3B2, CYP17A1, SULT2A1, SULT1E1, HSD17B2, IL6, TGFB1,
TNFA) from skin biopsy and blood samples of patients with IH and the data
compared with healthy subjects.
RESULTS: Patients with IH exhibit significantly lower interleukin 6 (IL6) mRNA
expression and higher steroid sulphatase (STS) and hydroxysteroid (17beta)
dehydrogenase 2 (HSD17B2), gene mRNA expression, respectively, in the
subumbilical region skin biopsies. Similarly, patients with IH exhibit
significantly lower IL6 mRNA expression and higher STS and HSD17B2 gene mRNA
expression, respectively, in the arm skin compared to healthy women's
subumbilical region.
CONCLUSIONS: In both arm and subumbilical skin biopsy of patients with IH, we
observed an up-regulation of HSD17B2 and STS, decreased IL6 mRNA expression,
probably determining an increase in the local amount of active androgens, which
could then be used as substrate for other androgen metabolic routes.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 26194504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2015 Aug;23(8):1655-62. doi: 10.1002/oby.21164. Epub
2015 Jul 14.

Fenretinide prevents obesity in aged female mice in association with increased
retinoid and estrogen signaling.

Shearer KD(1), Morrice N(1,)(2), Henderson C(1), Reekie J(1), Mcilroy GD(1),
McCaffery PJ(1), Delibegovic M(1), Mody N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Life Sciences and Medicine,
University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill Health Campus, Aberdeen, Scotland, UK.
(2)Centre for Genome-Enabled Biology and Medicine, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, Scotland, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The synthetic retinoid fenretinide (FEN) inhibits adiposity in male
mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) in association with alterations in retinoic acid
(RA) signaling. Young female mice are protected from obesity via estrogen
signaling. We, therefore, investigated whether FEN also influences adiposity in
aged female mice differing in parity and whether such effects are mediated by
retinoid and estrogen signaling.
METHODS: Aged nulliparous and parous female mice were maintained on HFD<U+2009>±<U+2009>FEN,
and adiposity was assessed. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction was performed 
on white adipose tissue (WAT), liver, and 3T3-L1 adipocytes treated with RA or
FEN<U+2009>±<U+2009>estrogen.
RESULTS: Parous females were more obese than nulliparous mice independent of age.
FEN-HFD prevented the HFD-induced increase in adiposity and leptin levels
independently of parity. FEN-HFD induced retinoid-responsive genes in WAT and
liver. Parous females had reduced expression of hepatic estrogen-responsive
genes, but FEN-HFD up-regulated WAT Cyp19a1 and Esr2 in parous mice. Estrogen and
RA acted synergistically to increase RA receptor-mediated gene expression in
3T3-L1 adipocytes. FEN increased Cyp19a1 and Esr2, similar to our findings in
vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevention of adiposity by FEN in response to HFD in female mice
seems to involve increased retinoid signaling in association with induction of
local estrogen production and estrogen signaling in WAT.

© 2015 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 26179846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Exp Zool A Ecol Genet Physiol. 2015 Nov;323(9):627-36. doi: 10.1002/jez.1953.
Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Rapid changes in ovarian mRNA induced by brief photostimulation in Siberian
hamsters (Phodopus sungorus).

Shahed A(1), McMichael CF(1), Young KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Biology Group, Department of Biological Sciences, California
State University Long Beach, Long Beach, California.

This study sought to characterize the rapid intraovarian mRNA response of key
folliculogenic factors that may contribute to the restoration of folliculogenesis
during 2-10 days of photostimulation in Siberian hamsters. Adult hamsters were
exposed to short photoperiod (8L:16D) for 14 weeks (SD). A subset were then
transferred to long photoperiod (16L:8D) for 2 (PT day-2), 4 (PT day-4), or 10
days (PT day-10). Quantitative real-time PCR was used to measure intraovarian
mRNA expression of: gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH), follicle stimulating
hormone ß-subunit (FSHß-subunit), luteinizing hormone ß-subunit (LHß-subunit),
FSH and LH receptors, estrogen receptors a and ß (Esr1 and Esr2), matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and -9, anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), inhibin-a
subunit, fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA). Compared to SD, plasma FSH concentrations increased on PT day-4
and the number of antral follicles and corpora lutea increased on PT day-10. FSHR
and inhibin-a mRNA expression also increased on PT day-4, whereas LHR and
proliferation marker PCNA both increased on PT day-10 as compared to SD. Esr1
mRNA increased on PT day-2 and remained significantly increased as compared to
SD, whereas Esr1 mRNA increased only on PT day-2, similar to FGF-2 and MMP-2
results. No differences were observed in mRNA expression in ovarian GnRH, FSHß-
and LHß-subunits, AMH, and MMP-9 mRNA with 2-10 days of photostimulation. Rapid
increases in intraovarian FSHR and inhibin-a mRNA and antral follicle/corpora
lutea numbers suggest that the ovary is primed to react quickly to the FSH
released in response to brief periods of photostimulation.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26174001  [PubMed - in process]


55. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2015 Dec;50(12):1893-904. doi:
10.1007/s00127-015-1087-1. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

The role of allelic variation in estrogen receptor genes and major depression in 
the Nurses Health Study.

Keyes K(1), Agnew-Blais J(2), Roberts AL(3), Hamilton A(4), De Vivo I(2), Ranu
H(5), Koenen K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University, Mailman School of Public
Health, 722 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA. kmk2104@columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard University, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA, 02115, USA. (3)Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Harvard
University, 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. (4)Department of
Epidemiology, Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health, 722 West
168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA. (5)Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Harvard University, 655 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

PURPOSE: The role of exogenous and endogenous sex hormones in the etiology of
depression remains elusive, in part because sex hormone variation is often
correlated with behaviors, life stage changes, and other factors that may
influence depression. Estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) are known to
regulate gene expression and estrogen response in areas of the brain associated
with major depression and are unlikely to be correlated with exogenous factors
that may influence depression.
METHODS: We examined whether functional polymorphisms in these genes are
associated with lifetime major depression and chronic major depression among a
sample of women from the Nurses' Health Study II (N = 2527). DSM-IV depressive
disorder symptoms were assessed by structured interview in 2007. Genotyping was
performed on DNA extracted from blood using Taq-man.
RESULTS: Women with the AA alleles of ESR2 RS4986938 had the higher prevalence of
lifetime major depression than women with other allele frequencies (36.7 % for
those with AA versus 28.5 % with GA and 29.1 % with GG, p = 0.02) and chronic
major depression (14.7 % for those with AA versus 9.3 % with GA and 9.1 % with
GG, p = 0.01). History of post-menopausal hormone (PMH) use modified the
association of ESR1 polymorphism RS2234693 with any lifetime depression;
specifically, those with the TT allele had the highest risk of lifetime
depression among PMH users, and the lowest risk of depression among non-PMH users
(p value for interaction = 0.02). Further, carriers of the AA alleles in ESR1
polymorphism RS9340799 had increased prevalence of lifetime major depression only
among lifetime PMH users (p = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the hypothesis that estrogen receptor
polymorphisms influence risk for major depression; the role of estrogen receptors
and other sex steroid-related genetic factors may provide unique insights into
etiology.

PMCID: PMC4655148 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26169989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 4;464(4):1016-21. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.043. Epub 2015 Jul 11.

MTA1 regulation of ERß pathway in salivary gland carcinoma cells.

Ohshiro K(1), Kumar R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, George Washington University, 2300 Eye Street, Washington, DC
20037, USA. Electronic address: bcmkxo@gwu.edu. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, George Washington
University, 2300 Eye Street, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Although Metastatic-tumor antigen 1 (MTA1) is differentially expressed in
metastatic cancer and coregulates the status and activity of nuclear receptors,
its role upon estrogen receptor ß (ERß) - a potent tumor suppressor, remains
poorly understood. Here we investigated whether MTA1 regulates the expression and
functions of ERß, an ER isoform predominantly expressed in salivary gland cancer 
cells. We found that the depletion of the endogenous MTA1 in the HSG and HSY
salivary duct carcinoma cell lines enhances the expression of ERß while MTA1
overexpression augmented the expression of ERß in salivary duct carcinoma cells. 
Furthermore, MTA1 knockdown inhibited the proliferations and invasion of HSG and 
HSY cells. The noted ERß downregulation by MTA1 overexpression involves the
process of proteasomal degradation, as a proteasome inhibitor could block it. In 
addition, both MTA1 knockdown and ERß overexpression attenuated the cell
migration and inhibited the ERK1/2 signaling in the both cell lines. These
findings imply that MTA1 dysregulation in a subset of salivary gland cancer might
promote aggressive phenotypes by compromising the tumor suppressor activity of
ERß, and hence, MTA1-ERß axis might serve a new therapeutic target for the
salivary gland cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4558379 [Available on 2016-09-04]
PMID: 26168722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Reproduction. 2015 Oct;150(4):331-41. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0137. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Estradiol increases IP3 by a nongenomic mechanism in the smooth muscle cells from
the rat oviduct.

Reuquén P(1), Oróstica ML(1), Rojas I(1), Díaz P(1), Parada-Bustamante A(2),
Orihuela PA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología,
Universidad de Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile Laboratorio de
Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de
Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile. (2)Laboratorio de
Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de
Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile. (3)Laboratorio de
Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de
Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile Laboratorio de
Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de
Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile
pedro.orihuela@usach.cl.

Estradiol (E2) accelerates egg transport by a nongenomic action, requiring
activation of estrogen receptor (ER) and successive cAMP and IP3 production in
the rat oviduct. Furthermore, E2 increases IP3 production in primary cultures of 
oviductal smooth muscle cells. As smooth muscle cells are the mechanical
effectors for the accelerated oocyte transport induced by E2 in the oviduct,
herein we determined the mechanism by which E2 increases IP3 in these cells.
Inhibition of protein synthesis by Actinomycin D did not affect the E2-induced
IP3 increase, although this was blocked by the ER antagonist ICI182780 and the
inhibitor of phospholipase C (PLC) ET-18-OCH3. Immunoelectron microscopy for ESR1
or ESR2 showed that these receptors were associated with the plasma membrane,
indicating compatible localization with E2 nongenomic actions in the smooth
muscle cells. Furthermore, ESR1 but not ESR2 agonist mimicked the effect of E2 on
the IP3 level. Finally, E2 stimulated the activity of a protein associated with
the contractile tone, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), in
the smooth muscle cells. We conclude that E2 increases IP3 by a nongenomic action
operated by ESR1 and that involves the activation of PLC in the smooth muscle
cells of the rat oviduct. This E2 effect is associated with CaMKII activation in 
the smooth muscle cells, suggesting that IP3 and CaMKII are involved in the
contractile activity necessary to accelerate oviductal egg transport.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 26159830  [PubMed - in process]


58. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 6;10(7):e0131901. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131901.
eCollection 2015.

Changes in Estrogen Receptor ERß (ESR2) Expression without Changes in the
Estradiol Levels in the Prostate of Aging Rats.

Morais-Santos M(1), Nunes AE(1), Oliveira AG(1), Moura-Cordeiro JD(1), Mahecha
GA(1), Avellar MC(2), Oliveira CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Escola Paulista de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Although the prostate is androgen-dependent, it is also influenced by estrogens, 
which act via the estrogen receptors ERa and ERß. In the prostate, ERß is highly 
expressed in the epithelium and appears to participate in the regulation of cell 
proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation. Evidence shows that ERß is
decreased in malignant prostate, suggesting that it plays an important role in
protecting this tissue. Despite the relationship between reductions in ERß and
abnormal growth of the gland, little is known about the age-dependent variation
of this receptor. Therefore, we aimed to investigate ERß expression in the
prostatic lobes of aging Wistar rats (3 to 24 months). Histopathological
alterations, including hyperplasia, intraluminal concretions, nuclear atypia and 
prostate intraepithelial neoplasias (PIN), were observed in the prostates of
aging rats. Epithelial proliferation led to cribriform architecture in some
acini, especially in the ventral prostate (VP). In the VP, areas of epithelial
atrophy were also observed. Furthermore, in the lateral prostate, there was
frequent prostatitis. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the expression of ERß is
reduced in specific areas related to PIN, atrophic abnormalities and cellular
atypia in the prostate epithelium of senile rats. Corroborating the involvement
of the receptor with proliferative activity, the punctual reduction in ERß
paralleled the increase in cell proliferation especially in areas of PIN and
nuclear atypies. The decrease in ERß reactivity occurred in a hormonal milieu
characterized by a constant concentration of estradiol and decreased plasmatic
and tissue DHT. This paper is a pioneering study that reveals focal ERß reduction
in the prostate of aging rats and indicates a potential disorder in the ERß
pathway. These data corroborate previous data from humans and dogs that silencing
of this receptor may be associated with premalignant or malignant conditions in
the prostate.

PMCID: PMC4492744
PMID: 26147849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dis Markers. 2015;2015:424381. doi: 10.1155/2015/424381. Epub 2015 Apr 30.

Dynamic Changes, Cut-Off Points, Sensitivity, and Specificity of Laboratory Data 
to Differentiate Macrophage Activation Syndrome from Active Disease.

Assari R(1), Ziaee V(2), Mirmohammadsadeghi A(3), Moradinejad MH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Medical Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Pediatric Rheumatology Research Group, Rheumatology Research Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Pediatrics, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (3)Farabi Eye Research Center,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (4)Children's Medical
Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Pediatrics,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

PURPOSE: To compare the laboratory data and changes in these data between
patients with MAS and patients with flare-up of the autoimmune diseases.
METHODS: In a prospective study, the static laboratory data and dynamic changes
in the selected data in 17 consecutive patients with MAS and 53 patients with
active disease of SJIA, PJIA, Kawasaki disease, and SLE were compared. The ROC
curve analysis was used to evaluate cut-off points, sensitivity, and specificity 
of the static and dynamic laboratory data to differentiate between MAS and active
disease.
RESULTS: In the MAS group, the mean CRP3, ALT, AST, total bilirubin, ferritin,
LDH, PT, PTT, and INR were significantly higher and the mean WBC2, PMN2, Lymph2, 
Hgb1, 2, 3, ESR2, serum albumin, and sodium were significantly lower than in
control group. Some of the important cut-off points were PLT2 <
209000/microliter, AST > 38.5, ALT > 38, WBC < 8200 × 103/UL, ferritin > 5277
ng/mL.
CONCLUSION: The dynamic changes in some laboratory data, especially PLT, can
differentiate between MAS and active disease. The changes in WBC, PMN, and ESR
and the levels of the liver enzymes may also be helpful in the early
differentiation. Very high levels of ferritin may also help the diagnosis along
with other clinical and laboratory signs.

PMCID: PMC4430633
PMID: 26063955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2015 Jul;31(7):516-21. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2015.1031102.
Epub 2015 Jun 2.

Association of estrogen receptor gene polymorphisms with human precocious
puberty: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Luo Y(1), Liu Q, Lei X, Wen Y, Yang YL, Zhang R, Hu MY.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Public Health and Management, Research Center for Medicine and
Social Development, Innovation Center for Social Risk Governance in Health,
Chongqing Medical University , Chongqing , P.R. China.

This study aims to estimate the association between ESR1 polymorphisms (PvuII and
XbaI) and ESR2 polymorphisms (RsaI and AluI) with precocious puberty. Relevant
studies published before March 2014 were retrieved by a electronic search among
nine databases. Meta-analysis of the pooled odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) was calculated. Four eligible case-control studies including 491 
precocious puberty patients and 370 healthy controls were identified. Three
studies reported ESR1 PvuII and XbaI polymorphism and one study reported ESR2
RsaI and AluI polymorphism. Increment of precocious puberty risk was associated
with PvuII polymorphism in the heterosis model ((CT) versus TT: OR 1.42, 95% CI: 
1.05-1.91, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). Risk of precocious puberty was associated with XbaI
polymorphism in the dominant model (GG<U+2009>+<U+2009>GA versus AA: OR 1.48, 95% CI:
1.11-1.97, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007) and the heterosis model (GA versus AA: OR 1.68, 95% CI:
1.23-2.29, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). This meta-analysis suggests that ESR1 XbaI and PvuII
polymorphisms are associated with precocious puberty susceptibility, and the
relationship between ESR2 RsaI and AluI polymorphism with precocious puberty
remains to be further investigated. Well-designed studies with large sample size 
among different polymorphisms and ethnicities are in urgent need to provide and
update reliable data for comprehensive and definite conclusion.

PMID: 26036718  [PubMed - in process]


61. Food Funct. 2015 Jun;6(6):2017-25. doi: 10.1039/c5fo00308c.

Determination of the isoflavone composition and estrogenic activity of commercial
dietary supplements based on soy or red clover.

Andres S(1), Hansen U, Niemann B, Palavinskas R, Lampen A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Safety, Federal Institute for Risk Assessment,
Max-Dohrn-Str. 8-10, 10589 Berlin, Germany. Susanne.Andres@bfr.bund.de.

Dietary supplements high in isolated isoflavones are commercially available for
human consumption primarily to alleviate menopausal symptoms in women. The
isoflavone composition, quantity and importantly their estrogenic potency are
poorly standardised and can vary considerably between different products. The aim
of this study was to analyse the isoflavone composition of 11 dietary supplements
based on soy or red clover using the HPLC/MS/MS technique. Furthermore, we
investigated the transactivational potential of the supplements on the estrogen
receptors (ER), ERa and ERß, performing luciferase reporter gene assays. As
expected, we found that the isoflavone composition varies between different
products. The measured total isoflavone contents in various supplements were
mostly comparable to those claimed by the manufacturers in their product
information. However expressing the isoflavone content as isoflavone aglycone
equivalents, soy-based supplements had a clearly lower quantity compared to the
manufacturer information. All supplements transactivated more or less ERa and ERß
with a preference for ERß. The transactivational efficiency exceeded partly the
maximal 17ß-estradiol induced ER activation. While the different soy-based
supplements revealed similar transactivation potential to both ERs, red
clover-based supplements differed considerably. We conclude that different
commercial dietary supplements based on soy or red clover vary in their
isoflavone composition and quantity. They are estrogenically active, although
especially the red clover-based supplements show considerable differences in
their estrogenic potential to ERa and ERß. Thus, different isoflavone-rich
products cannot be necessarily compared regarding possible biological effects.

PMID: 26023053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Reprod Dev. 2015;61(4):351-9. doi: 10.1262/jrd.2014-143. Epub 2015 May 23.

Central estrogen action sites involved in prepubertal restraint of pulsatile
luteinizing hormone release in female rats.

Uenoyama Y(1), Tanaka A, Takase K, Yamada S, Pheng V, Inoue N, Maeda K, Tsukamura
H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya
464-8601, Japan.

The present study aimed to determine estrogen feedback action sites to mediate
prepubertal restraint of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)/luteinizing
hormone (LH) release in female rats. Wistar-Imamichi strain rats were
ovariectomized (OVX) and received a local estradiol-17ß (estradiol) or
cholesterol microimplant in several brain areas, such as the medial preoptic area
(mPOA), paraventricular nucleus, ventromedial nucleus and arcuate nucleus (ARC), 
at 20 or 35 days of age. Six days after receiving the estradiol microimplant,
animals were bled to detect LH pulses at 26 or 41 days of age, representing the
pre- or postpubertal period, respectively. Estradiol microimplants in the mPOA or
ARC, but not in other brain regions, suppressed LH pulses in prepubertal OVX
rats. Apparent LH pulses were found in the postpubertal period in all animals
bearing estradiol or cholesterol implants. It is unlikely that pubertal changes
in responsiveness to estrogen are due to a change in estrogen receptor (ER)
expression, because the number of ERa-immunoreactive cells and mRNA levels of
Esr1, Esr2 and Gpr30 in the mPOA and ARC were comparable between the pre- and
postpubertal periods. In addition, kisspeptin or GnRH injection overrode
estradiol-dependent prepubertal LH suppression, suggesting that estrogen inhibits
the kisspeptin-GnRH cascade during the prepubertal period. Thus,
estrogen-responsive neurons located in the mPOA and ARC may play key roles in
estrogen-dependent prepubertal restraint of GnRH/LH secretion in female rats.

PMCID: PMC4547993
PMID: 26004302  [PubMed - in process]


63. Neurosci Res. 2015 Oct;99:8-15. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2015.05.003. Epub 2015 May 
21.

Gene expression in the CNS of lactating rats with different patterns of maternal 
behavior.

de Moura AC(1), Lazzari VM(1), Becker RO(1), Gil MS(2), Ruthschilling CA(1),
Agnes G(1), Almeida S(1), da Veiga AB(3), Lucion AB(4), Giovenardi M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (2)Biomédica,
Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil. (3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Patologia, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (4)Programa de
Pós-Graduação em Ciências Biológicas: Fisiologia, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (5)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências
da Saúde, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: giovenardi.marcia@gmail.com.

For most mammalian species, maternal behavior has an essential role in the
development of the offspring. The frequency of licking/grooming (LG) the pups has
been used as a parameter to evaluate maternal care, having mothers with high (HL)
or low (LL) frequencies of LG. This study aimed to analyze the gene expression of
the receptors for dopamine (Drd1a), prolactin (Prlr), serotonin (Htr1a, Htr1b),
estrogen (Esr1, Esr2), and of Bdnf in the olfactory bulb (OB), hippocampus (HP), 
prefrontal cortex (PFC), and striatum (ST) of Wistar rats from three groups: LL
(n = 8); HL (n = 8); virgin females in diestrus (D; n = 6). Maternal behavior was
studied between the 1st and 7th postpartum days. Brain parts were analyzed by
qRT-PCR. LL showed a decrease in the frequency of nursing, and an increase of
remaining off the pups. There was an increase in gene expression of Drd1a, Prlr, 
Htr1a, Htr1b and Esr1 in the OB of HL, compared to LL. In the HP, Drd1a, Prlr and
Htr1a were differently expressed when comparing HL, or LL, with D. The main
finding is that HL had higher gene expression levels in the OB, which is a
crucial structure to promote behavioral differences.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26003743  [PubMed - in process]


64. Cancer Genet. 2015 Apr;208(4):135-42. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.02.007. Epub 
2015 Feb 20.

Loss of heterozygosity in tumor tissue in hormonal receptor genes is associated
with poor prognostic criteria in breast cancer.

Iobagiu C(1), Lambert C(2), Raica M(3), Lima S(4), Khaddage A(5), Peoc'h M(5),
Genin C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Laboratory, University Hospital of Saint-Étienne, Saint-Étienne,
France. Electronic address: cristina.iobagiu@ch-roanne.fr. (2)Immunology
Laboratory, University Hospital of Saint-Étienne, Saint-Étienne, France.
(3)Histology Department, University of Medicine of Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania.
(4)Gynecology Department, University Hospital of Saint-Étienne, Saint-Étienne,
France. (5)Anatomo-Pathology Department, University Hospital of Saint-Étienne,
Saint-Étienne, France.

The estrogen receptors (ESRa and ß) and the androgen receptor (AR) mediate
genomic and non-genomic effects on breast tumor growth and proliferation. We
analyzed 101 breast cancer patients for allelic loss in microsatellites located
in regulatory regions of the ESRs and AR genes in breast cancer tumors. The loss 
of heterozygosity (LOH) at these loci was found in 36.2% of tumor tissues (ductal
carcinoma cases), for 19% of cases at the ESRa locus, for 16% at the ESRß locus, 
and for 10% at the AR locus. The LOH in at least one of the two ESR loci was
correlated to poor prognosis criteria: ESR-negative status (P = 0.007),
PR-negative status (P = 0.003), high Scarff-Bloom-Richardson (SBR) grade
(P = 0.0007), high MIB-1 proliferation index (P = 0.02), and diminished apoptosis
potential (TP53-positive status, P = 0.018). When AR was also considered, the LOH
in at least one of the three loci was associated with ESR-negative status
(P = 0.036), PR-negative status (P = 0.027), high SBR grade (P = 0.005), high
mitotic index (P = 0.0002), TP53-positive status (P = 0.029), and proliferating
index (high MIB-1, P = 0.03). Allelic loss was observed in 26% of normal tissue
adjacent to tumor with LOH at the ESRa locus and in 7.1% of tumors with LOH at
the ESRß locus. The LOH in tumor tissue in the regulatory regions of ESRa, ESRß, 
and AR genes has potentially synergistic effects on tumor proliferation,
histological aggressiveness, down-regulation of ESRa and progesterone receptor
(PR) genes, and is an early genetic alteration in cancer that is possibly
involved in passage to estrogen independence.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25979597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Food Funct. 2015 Jun;6(6):1847-54. doi: 10.1039/c5fo00133a.

Estrogen modulation properties of mangiferin and quercetin and the mangiferin
metabolite norathyriol.

Wilkinson AS(1), Taing MW, Pierson JT, Lin CN, Dietzgen RG, Shaw PN, Gidley MJ,
Monteith GR, Roberts-Thomson SJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072,
Australia. sarahrt@uq.edu.au.

Mango fruit contain many bioactive compounds, some of which are transcription
factor regulators. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) and beta (ERß) are two
regulators of gene transcription that are important in a variety of physiological
processes and also in diseases including breast cancer. We examined the ability
of the mango constituents quercetin, mangiferin, and the aglycone form of
mangiferin, norathyriol, to activate both isoforms of the estrogen receptor.
Quercetin and norathyriol decreased the viability of MCF-7 breast cancer cells
whereas mangiferin had no effect on MCF-7 cells. We also determined that
quercetin and mangiferin selectively activated ERa whereas norathyriol activated 
both ERa and ERß. Despite quercetin, mangiferin and norathyriol having similar
polyphenolic structural motifs, only norathyriol activated ERß, showing that
bioactive agents in mangoes have very specific biological effects. Such
specificity may be important given the often-opposing roles of ERa and ERß in
breast cancer proliferation and other cellular processes.

PMID: 25940566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2015 May 15;216:46-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2015.04.010.
Epub 2015 Apr 21.

Matrix metalloproteinase inhibition influences aspects of photoperiod stimulated 
ovarian recrudescence in Siberian hamsters.

Shahed A(1), Simmons JJ(1), Featherstone SL(1), Young KA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Biology Group, Department of Biological Sciences, California
State University Long Beach, Long Beach, CA 90840, United States. (2)Reproductive
Biology Group, Department of Biological Sciences, California State University
Long Beach, Long Beach, CA 90840, United States. Electronic address:
kelly.young@csulb.edu.

Blocking matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity in vivo with inhibitor GM6001
impedes photostimulated ovarian recrudescence in photoregressed Siberian
hamsters. Since direct and indirect effects of MMPs influence a myriad of ovarian
functions, we investigated the effect of in vivo MMP inhibition during
recrudescence on ovarian mRNA expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein (StAR), 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3ß-HSD), Cyp19a1 aromatase,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), amphiregulin (Areg), estrogen receptors 
(Esr1 and Esr2), tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMP-1,-2,-3), proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA), vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), its
receptor VEGFR-2, and angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2). Female Siberian hamsters were
randomly assigned to one of four photoperiod groups: stimulatory long (LD) or
inhibitory short (SD) photoperiods, or transferred from SD to LD for 2 weeks
(post-transfer, PT). Half of the PT hamsters were injected (ip) daily with GM6001
(PTG). SD exposure reduced ovarian StAR, 3ß-HSD, Cyp19a1, Esr1, Esr2, TIMPs 2-3, 
PCNA, VEGFR-2 and Ang-2 mRNA expression (p<0.05), and 2 weeks of photostimulation
restored mRNA expression of 3ß-HSD and PCNA and increased Areg and VEGFA mRNA
expression in the PT group. GM6001 treatment during photostimulation (PTG)
increased TIMP-1, -2 and -3 and PCNA mRNA, but inhibited Areg mRNA expression
compared to PT. Neither photoperiod nor GM6001 altered EGFR expression. Results
of this study suggest that in vivo inhibition of MMP activity by GM6001 may
impede ovarian recrudescence, particularly follicular growth, in two ways: (1)
directly by partially inhibiting the release of EGFR ligands like Areg, thereby
potentially affecting EGFR activation and its downstream pathway, and (2)
indirectly by its effect on TIMPs which themselves can affect proliferation,
angiogenesis and follicular growth.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4457603 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25910436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Apr 21. doi: 10.1071/RD14178. [Epub ahead of print]

Spatio-specific regulation of endocrine-responsive gene transcription by
periovulatory endocrine profiles in the bovine reproductive tract.

Araújo ER, Sponchiado M, Pugliesi G, Van Hoeck V, Mesquita FS, Membrive CM,
Binelli M.

In cattle, pro-oestrous oestradiol and dioestrous progesterone concentrations
modulate endometrial gene expression and fertility. The aim was to compare the
effects of different periovulatory endocrine profiles on the expression of
progesterone receptor (PGR), oestrogen receptor 2 (ESR2), oxytocin receptor
(OXTR), member C4 of aldo-keto reductase family 1 (AKR1C4), lipoprotein lipase
(LPL), solute carrier family 2, member 1 (SLC2A1) and serpin peptidase inhibitor,
clade A member 14 (SERPINA14): (1) between uterine horns ipsi- and contralateral 
to the corpus luteum (CL), (2) between regions of the ipsilateral horn and (3) in
the vagina. Endometrium and vagina tissue samples were collected from cows that
ovulated a larger (large follicle-large CL, LF-LCL; n=6) or smaller follicle
(small follicle-small CL, SF-SCL; n=6) 7 days after oestrus. Cows in the LF-LCL
group had a greater abundance of transcripts encoding ESR2, AKR1C4, LPL, SLC2A1
and SERPINA14, but a reduced expression of PGR and OXTR in the endometrium versus
the SF-SCL group (PPGR and OXTR was greater in the contralateral compared with
the ipsilateral horn (PPGR, ESR2, LPL, SLC2A1 and SERPINA14 (P<0.05). Different
periovulatory endocrine profiles, i.e. LF-LCL or SF-SCL, did not influence gene
expression in the vagina and had no interaction with inter- or intra-uterine horn
gene expression. In conclusion, inter- and intra-uterine horn variations in gene 
expression indicate that the expression of specific genes in the bovine
reproductive tract is location dependent. However, spatial distribution of
transcripts was not influenced by distinct periovulatory sex-steroid
environments.

PMID: 25896641  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


68. Endocrinology. 2015 Jul;156(7):2395-408. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1141. Epub 2015 Apr
17.

Estrogen Receptor-ß Up-Regulates IGF1R Expression and Activity to Inhibit
Apoptosis and Increase Growth of Medulloblastoma.

Cookman CJ(1), Belcher SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0575.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2015 Aug;156(8):L6-7.
    Endocrinology. 2015 Aug;156(8):L8-9.

Medulloblastoma (Med) is the most common malignant brain tumor in children. The
role of ESR2 [estrogen receptor (ER)-ß] in promoting Med growth was
comprehensively examined in three in vivo models and human cell lines. In a novel
Med ERß-null knockout model developed by crossing Esr2(-/-) mice with cerebellar 
granule cell precursor specific Ptch1 conditional knockout mice, the tumor growth
rate was significantly decreased in males and females. The absence of Esr2
resulted in increased apoptosis, decreased B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2), and IGF-1
receptor (IGF1R) expression, and decreased levels of active MAPKs (ERK1/2) and
protein kinase B (AKT). Treatment of Med in Ptch1(+/-) Trp53(-/-) mice with the
antiestrogen chemotherapeutic drug Faslodex significantly increased symptom-free 
survival, which was associated with increased apoptosis and decreased BCL2 and
IGF1R expression and signaling. Similar effects were also observed in nude mice
bearing D283Med xenografts. In vitro studies in human D283Med cells metabolically
stressed by glutamine withdrawal found that 17ß-estradiol and the ERß selective
agonist 2,3-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile dose dependently protected Med
cells from caspase-3-dependent cell death. Those effects were associated with
increased phosphorylation of IGF1R, long-term increases in ERK1/2 and AKT
signaling, and increased expression of IGF-1, IGF1R, and BCL2. Results of
pharmacological experiments revealed that the cytoprotective actions of estradiol
were dependent on ERß and IGF1R receptor tyrosine kinase activity and independent
of ERa and G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (G protein coupled receptor 30).
The presented results demonstrate that estrogen promotes Med growth through
ERß-mediated increases in IGF1R expression and activity, which induce
cytoprotective mechanisms that decrease apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4475721 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25885794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Endocrinol. 2015 Jun;225(3):125-34. doi: 10.1530/JOE-15-0001. Epub 2015 Apr 15.

Steroid regulation of early postnatal development in the corpus epididymidis of
pigs.

Katleba KD(1), Legacki EL(1), Conley AJ(1), Berger T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Animal SciencePopulation Health and ReproductionUniversity of
California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, California 95616, USA.
(2)Departments of Animal SciencePopulation Health and ReproductionUniversity of
California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, California 95616, USA
tberger@ucdavis.edu.

Development of the epididymis including blood-epididymal barrier formation is not
required until sperm reach the epididymis peripuberally. Regulation of this
development in the early postnatal period is largely unknown. The current
objectives were to evaluate potential roles of endogenous estrogen and androgen
signaling during early development of the corpus epididymidis and to determine
the timing of formation of the blood-epididymal barrier in the pig. Effects of
endogenous steroids were evaluated using littermates treated with vehicle, an
aromatase inhibitor (letrozole) to reduce endogenous estrogens, an estrogen
receptor antagonist (fulvestrant) or an androgen receptor antagonist (flutamide).
Phosphorylated histone 3 immunohistochemistry was used to identify proliferating 
epithelial cells. Lanthanum nitrate and electron microscopy were used to analyze 
formation of the blood barrier in the corpus epididymidis. Reducing endogenous
estrogens increased the number of proliferating corpus epithelial cells at 6 and 
6.5 weeks of age compared with vehicle-treated boars (P<0.01 and P<0.001
respectively). Blocking androgen receptors did not alter proliferation rate at
6.5 weeks of age. Although barrier formation was similar between 6 and 6.5 weeks 
of age in vehicle-treated animals, intercellular barriers increased in
letrozole-treated littermates at 6.5 weeks of age. Fulvestrant treatment, which
should mimic aromatase inhibition for regulation through ESR1 and ESR2 signaling 
but potentially stimulate endogenous estrogen signaling through the G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER), had the opposite effect on aromatase
inhibition. These responses in conjunction with the presence of GPER in the
corpus epididymidis suggest early corpus epididymal development is regulated
partially by GPER.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25876610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Chin J Physiol. 2015 Apr 30;58(2):134-40. doi: 10.4077/CJP.2015.BAC239.

Cell Cycle Regulation in the Estrogen Receptor Beta (ESR2)-Overexpressing Hep3B
Hepatocellular Carcinoma Cell Line.

Liu YS(1), Tsai YL(2), Yeh YL(3,)(4), Chung LC(5), Wen SY(6), Kuo CH(7), Lin
YM(3), Padma VV(8), Kumar VB(9), Huang CY(9,)(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Internal Medicine Department, Taichung
Armed Forces General Hospital, Taichung City, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)National Taiwan Sport University, Athletic Training and Health Department,
Taoyuan 33301, Taiwan, Republic of China. (3)Department of Pathology, Changhua
Christian Hospital, Changhua 50006, Taiwan, Republic of China. (4)Department of
Medical Technology, Jen-Teh Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management,
Miaoli 35665, Taiwan, Republic of China. (5)Department of Hospital and Health
Care Administration, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy & Science, Tainan 71710,
Taiwan, Republic of China. (6)Department of Dermatology, Taipei City Hospital,
Renai Branch, Taipei 10629, Taiwan, Republic of China. (7)Laboratory of Exercise 
Biochemistry, University of Taipei, Taipei 11153, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(8)Department of Biotechnology, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore-641 046, India.
(9)Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science,China Medical University, Taichung
40402, Taiwan, Republic of China. (10)Department of Health and Nutrition
Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung 41354, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(11)Graduate Institute of Chinese Medical Science,China Medical University,
Taichung 40402, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Epidemiological studies and experimental data have shown that the incidences of
hepatocellular carcinoma in men are more frequent than in women. Evidence
suggests that imbalance of hormones, including estrogen, androgen, prolactin, and
growth hormone, modifies liver tumorigenesis. In this present study, we
investigated how estrogen and estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2), regulates the cell
cycle mechanism in Hep3B hepatocellular carcinoma cell line. Our results showed
that ESR2 overexpression in the presence of 10<U+207B>8 M 17-ß-estradiol downregulated
c-myc and cyclin D1 expression and simultaneously upregulated p27 expression.
However, flow cytometry and MTT assays showed only minor G1 phase arrest without 
affecting cell viability. Taken together, these observations indicate that ESR2
is required to lower tumorigenesis in males by altering cell cycle proteins in a 
ligand-dependent manner.

PMID: 25858474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11600-13.

Activation of AKR1C1/ERß induces apoptosis by downregulation of c-FLIP in
prostate cancer cells: A prospective therapeutic opportunity.

Yun H(1,)(2), Xie J(1,)(3), Olumi AF(4), Ghosh R(1,)(2,)(5,)(6), Kumar
AP(1,)(2,)(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, The University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (3)Department of Urology, Shanxi Dayi
Hospital, Shanxi Academy of Medical Science, Taiyuan, P.R.China. (4)Department of
Urology, Massachusetts General Hospital Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science
Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (6)Cancer Therapy and Research Center, The
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (7)South Texas
Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.

We provide first-time evidence for ERß-mediated transcriptional upregulation of
c-FLIP as an underlying mechanism in the development of castrate-resistant
cancer. While androgens inhibit apoptosis partly through transcriptional
upregulation of the anti-apoptotic protein, c-FLIP in androgen-responsive cells, 
they downregulate c-FLIP in androgen-independent cells. We found that although
Sp1 and p65 trans-activate c-FLIP, the combination of Sp1 and p65 has
differential effects in a cellular context-dependent manner. We show that
activation of the androgen metabolism enzyme, aldo-keto reductase, AKR1C1,
relieves androgen independence through activation of 3ß-Adiol-mediated
upregulation of ERß. ERß competes with Sp1 and Sp3 to transcriptionally
downregulate c-FLIP in the absence of consensus estrogen-response element in
androgen-independent cells. Forced expression of AR in androgen-independent cells
show that ERß-mediated growth inhibition occurs under conditions of androgen
independence. Reactivation of ERß with the estrogenic metabolite,
2-methoxyestradiol, decreased enrichment ratio of Sp1/Sp3 at the c-FLIP promoter 
with concomitant effects on cell growth and death. Expression of Sp1 and c-FLIP
are elevated while AKR1C1, ERß and Sp3 are significantly low in human prostate
tumor samples. ERß is epigenetically silenced in prostate cancer patients,
therefore our results suggest that combination of ERß agonists with ADT would
benefit men stratified on the basis of high estrogen levels.

PMCID: PMC4484479
PMID: 25816367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Front Neurosci. 2015 Mar 3;9:57. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00057. eCollection 2015.

Bisphenol A and phthalate endocrine disruption of parental and social behaviors.

Rosenfeld CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center, Genetics Area Program, Biomedical Sciences,
University of Missouri Columbia, MO, USA.

Perinatal exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) can induce
promiscuous neurobehavioral disturbances. Bisphenol A and phthalates are two
widely prevalent and persistent EDCs reported to lead to such effects. Parental
and social behaviors are especially vulnerable to endocrine disruption, as these 
traits are programmed by the organizational-activational effects of testosterone 
and estrogen. Exposure to BPA and other EDCs disrupts normal maternal care
provided by rodents and non-human primates, such as nursing, time she spends
hunched over and in the nest, and grooming her pups. Paternal care may also be
affected by BPA. No long-term study has linked perinatal exposure to BPA or other
EDC and later parental behavioral deficits in humans. The fact that the same
brain regions and neural hormone substrates govern parental behaviors in animal
models and humans suggests that this suite of behaviors may also be vulnerable in
the latter. Social behaviors, such as communication, mate choice, pair bonding,
social inquisitiveness and recognition, play behavior, social grooming,
copulation, and aggression, are compromised in animal models exposed to BPA,
phthalates, and other EDCs. Early contact to these chemicals is also correlated
with maladaptive social behaviors in children. These behavioral disturbances may 
originate by altering the fetal or adult gonadal production of testosterone or
estrogen, expression of ESR1, ESR2, and AR in the brain regions governing these
behaviors, neuropeptide/protein hormone (oxytocin, vasopressin, and prolactin)
and their cognate neural receptors, and/or through epimutations. Robust evidence 
exists for all of these EDC-induced changes. Concern also exists for
transgenerational persistence of such neurobehavioral disruptions. In sum,
evidence for social and parental deficits induced by BPA, phthalates, and related
chemicals is strongly mounting, and such effects may ultimately compromise the
overall social fitness of populations to come.

PMCID: PMC4347611
PMID: 25784850  [PubMed]


73. Neuroendocrinology. 2015;101(3):236-45. doi: 10.1159/000381063. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Effects of Age and Estradiol on Gene Expression in the Rhesus Macaque
Hypothalamus.

Eghlidi DH(1), Urbanski HF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton, 
Oreg., USA.

BACKGROUND: The hypothalamus plays a key role in mediating the effects of
estrogen on many physiological functions, including reproduction, metabolism, and
thermoregulation. We have previously observed marked estrogen-dependent gene
expression changes within the hypothalamus of rhesus macaques during aging,
especially in the KNDy neurons of the arcuate-median eminence (ARC-ME) that
produce kisspeptin, neurokinin B, and dynorphin A. Little is known, however,
about the mechanisms involved in mediating the feedback from estrogen onto these 
neurons.
METHODS: We used quantitative real-time PCR to profile age- and
estrogen-dependent gene expression changes in the rhesus macaque hypothalamus.
Our focus was on genes that encode steroid receptors (ESR1, ESR2, PGR, and AR)
and on enzymes that contribute to the local synthesis of 17ß-estradiol (E2; STS, 
HSD3B1/2, HSD17B5, and CYP19A). In addition, we used RT(2) Profiler PCR Arrays
to profile a larger set of genes that are integral to hypothalamic function.
RESULTS: KISS1, KISS1R, TAC3, and NPY2R mRNA levels increased in surgically
menopausal (ovariectomized) old females relative to age-matched ovariectomized
animals that received E2 hormone therapy. In contrast, PGR, HSD17B, GNRH2,
SLC6A3, KISS1, TAC3, and NPY2R mRNA levels increased after E2 supplementation.
CONCLUSION: The rhesus macaque ARC-ME expresses many genes that are responsive to
changes in circulating estrogen levels, even during old age, and these may
contribute to causing the normal and pathophysiological changes that occur during
menopause.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC4475460
PMID: 25765287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015 Apr;17(4):422-30. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntu278. Epub 2015 Mar
11.

Nicotine withdrawal increases stress-associated genes in the nucleus accumbens of
female rats in a hormone-dependent manner.

Torres OV(1), Pipkin JA(1), Ferree P(1), Carcoba LM(1), O'Dell LE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX
lodell@utep.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Previous work led to our hypothesis that sex differences produced
by nicotine withdrawal are modulated by stress and dopamine systems in the
nucleus accumbens (NAcc). We investigated our hypothesis by studying intact
females to determine whether the mechanisms that promote withdrawal are
ovarian-hormone mediated.
METHODS: Female rats were ovariectomized (OVX) or received sham surgery (intact) 
on postnatal day (PND 45-46). On PND 60, they received sham surgery (controls) or
were prepared with nicotine pumps. Fourteen days later, half of the rats had
their pumps removed (nicotine withdrawal) and the other half received sham
surgery (nicotine exposure). Twenty-four hours later, the rats were tested for
anxiety-like behavior using the elevated plus maze and light/dark transfer
procedures. The NAcc was then dissected for analysis of several genes related to 
stress (CRF, UCN, CRF-R1, CRF-R2, CRF-BP, and Arrb2) or receptors for dopamine
(Drd1 and Drd2) and estradiol (Esr2).
RESULTS: During withdrawal, intact females displayed an increase in anxiety-like 
behavior in both tests and CRF, UCN, and Drd1 gene expression. During nicotine
exposure, intact females displayed a decrease in CRF-R1, CRF-R2, Drd3, and Esr2
gene expression and an increase in CRF-BP. This pattern of results was absent in 
OVX females.
CONCLUSIONS: Nicotine withdrawal produced an increase in anxiety-like behavior
and stress-associated genes in intact females that is distinct from changes
produced by nicotine exposure. The latter effects were absent in OVX females,
suggesting that stress produced by withdrawal is ovarian-hormone mediated. These 
findings have important implications towards understanding tobacco use liability 
among females.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4432401
PMID: 25762751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 May 5;406:68-77. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.02.024. Epub
2015 Feb 28.

NGF promotes mouse granulosa cell proliferation by inhibiting ESR2 mediated
down-regulation of CDKN1A.

Wang Y(1), Liu W(2), Du J(3), Yu Y(4), Liang N(1), Liang M(1), Yao G(1), Cui
S(5), Huang H(6), Sun F(7).

Author information: 
(1)International Peace Maternity & Child Health Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200030, China. (2)College of Life Science 
and Technology, Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang, Sichuan
621010, China. (3)Xinxiang Medical College, Henan 453003, China. (4)Jinzhou
Medical College, Liaoning 121001, China. (5)China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100094, China. (6)International Peace Maternity & Child Health Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200030, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
(7)International Peace Maternity & Child Health Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200030, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Reproductive Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address:
sunfei@shsmu.edu.cn.

Nerve growth factor (NGF) is known to play key roles in ovarian follicular
development, such as the assembly of early follicles and follicular ovulation
through its high-affinity receptor, tyrosine kinase receptor A (trkA). Herein,
the molecular mechanism controlling NGF-induced granulosa cell (GC) proliferation
was not clear. In this study, we found that NGF is abundant in preantral GCs and 
knockdown of trkA in GCs attenuated NGF-induced GC proliferation and further
decreased the levels of phosphorylated extracellular regulated protein kinases
1/2 (ERK1/2). Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (CDKN1A), also named p21, a
factor which could be either a negative or a positive regulator via
transformation related protein 53 (TRP53, also named p53)-dependent or
independent pathways in cell proliferation, was up-regulated during the process
of NGF-induced GC proliferation. Blockade of trkA (K252a) and ERK1/2 (U0126) in
GCs decreased NGF-induced expression of CDKN1A and did not alter the expression
of TRP53, indicating that NGF stimulates CDKN1A expression via the trkA-ERK1/2
pathway in a TRP53-independent manner. Meanwhile, ESR2, a tumor suppressor which 
is exclusively expressed in GCs, was suppressed in NGF-induced GC proliferation, 
and this effect was abrogated by U0126. Blockade of ESR2 (ICI182,780) caused the 
promotion of GC proliferation and CDKN1A expression, indicating that ESR2 may be 
downstream of the ERK1/2 pathway in mediating the effect of CDKN1A on NGF-induced
GC proliferation. Therefore, ESR2 may be involved in the integration of
intracellular signal cascades and cell cycle proteins in affecting GC
proliferation. Here, we provide mechanistic insights into the roles of CDKN1A in 
NGF-induced GC proliferation. Understanding potential cross-points between CDKN1A
and ESR2 affecting GC proliferation will help in the discovery of new therapeutic
targets in some female infertility disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25737208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Physiol Sci. 2015 May;65(3):253-63. doi: 10.1007/s12576-015-0363-x. Epub 2015
Feb 26.

Aging-induced changes in sex-steroidogenic enzymes and sex-steroid receptors in
the cortex, hypothalamus and cerebellum.

Munetomo A(1), Hojo Y, Higo S, Kato A, Yoshida K, Shirasawa T, Shimizu T, Barron 
A, Kimoto T, Kawato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences, Univ. Tokyo, Komaba 3-8-1, Meguro, Tokyo, 153, Japan.

We investigated age-induced changes in mRNA expression profiles of
sex-steroidogenic enzymes and sex-steroid receptors in 3-, 12-, and 24-month-old 
male rat brain subregions [cerebral cortex (CC), hypothalamus (Hy) and cerebellum
(CL)]. In many cases, the expression levels of mRNA decreased with age for
androgen synthesis enzyme systems, including Cyp17a1, Hsd17b and Srd5a in the CC 
and CL, but not in the Hy. Estradiol synthase Cyp19a1 did not show age-induced
decline in the Hy, and nearly no expression of Cyp19a1 was observed in the CC and
CL over 3-24 m. Androgen receptor Ar increased in the Hy but decreased in the CC 
with age. Estrogen receptor Esr1 increased in the CC and Hy, and did not change
in the CL with age. Esr2 did not change in the CC and Hy, but decreased in the CL
with age. As a comparison, age-induced changes of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor mRNA were also investigated.

PMID: 25715777  [PubMed - in process]


77. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1887-99. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1852. Epub 2015 Feb 
25.

Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1; ERa), not ESR2 (ERß), modulates estrogen-induced sex
reversal in the American alligator, a species with temperature-dependent sex
determination.

Kohno S(1), Bernhard MC, Katsu Y, Zhu J, Bryan TA, Doheny BM, Iguchi T, Guillette
LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (S.K., J.Z., T.A.B., L.J.G.), Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425; Marine
Biomedicine and Environmental Science Center (S.K., M.C.B., T.A.B., B.M.D.,
L.J.G.), Hollings Marine Laboratory, Charleston, South Carolina 29412; Graduate
Program in Marine Biology at the College of Charleston (M.C.B.), Charleston,
South Carolina 29412; Graduate School of Life Science and Department of
Biological Sciences (Y.K.), Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 060-0808 Japan;
Department of Biology (T.A.B.), University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
32611; Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience (T.I.), National Institute
for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, 444-8585
Japan; and Department of Basic Biology (T.I.), The Graduate University for
Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki, 444-8585 Japan.

All crocodilians and many turtles exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination
where the temperature of the incubated egg, during a thermo-sensitive period
(TSP), determines the sex of the offspring. Estrogens play a critical role in sex
determination in crocodilians and turtles, as it likely does in most nonmammalian
vertebrates. Indeed, administration of estrogens during the TSP induces male to
female sex reversal at a male-producing temperature (MPT). However, it is not
clear how estrogens override the influence of temperature during sex
determination in these species. Most vertebrates have 2 forms of nuclear estrogen
receptor (ESR): ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß). However, there is no direct evidence
concerning which ESR is involved in sex determination, because a specific agonist
or antagonist for each ESR has not been tested in nonmammalian species. We
identified specific pharmaceutical agonists for each ESR using an in vitro
transactivation assay employing American alligator ESR1 and ESR2; these were
4,4',4''-(4-propyl-[1H]-pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT) and
7-bromo-2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-1,3-benzoxazol-5-ol (WAY 200070), respectively.
Alligator eggs were exposed to PPT or WAY 200070 at a MPT just before the TSP,
and their sex was examined at the last stage of embryonic development.
Estradiol-17ß and PPT, but not WAY 200070, induced sex reversal at a MPT.
PPT-exposed embryos exposed to the highest dose (5.0 µg/g egg weight) exhibited
enlargement and advanced differentiation of the Müllerian duct. These results
indicate that ESR1 is likely the principal ESR involved in sex reversal as well
as embryonic Müllerian duct survival and growth in American alligators.

PMID: 25714813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Aquat Toxicol. 2015 Apr;161:146-53. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.02.004. Epub 2015
Feb 11.

Mixture effects of levonorgestrel and ethinylestradiol: estrogenic biomarkers and
hormone receptor mRNA expression during sexual programming.

Säfholm M(1), Jansson E(2), Fick J(3), Berg C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Uppsala University, Department of Environmental Toxicology, Centre for
Reproductive Biology in Uppsala, Norbyvägen 18A, 752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.
Electronic address: moa.kvarnryd@ebc.uu.se. (2)Uppsala University, Department of 
Environmental Toxicology, Centre for Reproductive Biology in Uppsala, Norbyvägen 
18A, 752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address: erika.jansson@ebc.uu.se. (3)Umeå
University, Department of Chemistry, KBC 6A, Linnaeus väg 6, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
Electronic address: jerker.fick@umu.se. (4)Uppsala University, Department of
Environmental Toxicology, Centre for Reproductive Biology in Uppsala, Norbyvägen 
18A, 752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address: cecilia.berg@ebc.uu.se.

Synthetic progesterone (progestins) and estrogens are widely used
pharmaceuticals. Given that their simultaneous unintentional exposure occurs in
wildlife and also in human infants, data on mixture effects of combined exposures
to these hormones during development is needed. Using the Xenopus (Silurana)
tropicalis test system we investigated mixture effects of levonorgestrel (LNG)
and ethinylestradiol (EE2) on hormone sensitive endpoints. After larval exposure 
to LNG (0.1nM), or EE2 (0.1nM) singly, or in combination with LNG (0.01, 0.1,
1.0nM), the gonadal sex ratio was determined histologically and hepatic mRNA
levels of genes encoding vitellogenin (vtg beta1) and the estrogen (esr1, esr2), 
progesterone (ipgr) and androgen (ar) receptors were quantified using
quantitative PCR. All EE2-exposed groups showed female-biased sex ratios and
increased vtg beta1 mRNA levels compared with the controls. Compared with the
EE2-alone group (positive control) there were no significant alterations in vtg
beta1 levels or in sex ratios in the co-exposure groups. Exposure to LNG-alone
caused an increase in ar mRNA levels in females, but not in males, compared to
the controls and the co-exposed groups, indicating that co-exposure to EE2
counteracted the LNG-induced ar levels. No treatment related impacts on the mRNA 
expression of esr1, esr2, and ipgr in female tadpoles were found, suggesting that
these endpoints are insensitive to long-term exposure to estrogen or progestin.
Due to the EE2-induced female-biased sex ratios, the mRNA expression data for the
low number of males in the EE2-exposed groups were not statistically analyzed. In
conclusion, our results suggest that induced vtg expression is a robust biomarker
for estrogenic activity in exposure scenarios involving both estrogens and
progestins. Developmental exposure to LNG caused an induction of hepatic ar mRNA 
expression that was antagonized by combined exposure to EE2 and LNG. To our
knowledge this is the first study to report effects of combined exposures to EE2 
and LNG during the period of sexual programming.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25703176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Front Oncol. 2015 Feb 2;5:19. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00019. eCollection 2015.

Estrogen receptors and their implications in colorectal carcinogenesis.

Caiazza F(1), Ryan EJ(1), Doherty G(1), Winter DC(2), Sheahan K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Colorectal Disease, Saint Vincent's University Hospital , Dublin , 
Ireland ; School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College , Dublin ,
Ireland. (2)Centre for Colorectal Disease, Saint Vincent's University Hospital , 
Dublin , Ireland ; Department of Surgery, St. Vincent's University Hospital, Elm 
Park , Dublin , Ireland. (3)Centre for Colorectal Disease, Saint Vincent's
University Hospital , Dublin , Ireland ; School of Medicine and Medical Science, 
University College , Dublin , Ireland ; Department of Pathology, Saint Vincent's 
University Hospital , Dublin , Ireland.

Upon binding their cognate receptors, ERa (ESR1) and ERß (ESR2), estrogens
activate intracellular signaling cascades that have important consequences for
cellular behavior. Historically linked to carcinogenesis in reproductive organs, 
estrogens have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of different cancer types
of non-reproductive tissues including the colon. ERß is the predominant estrogen 
receptor expressed in both normal and malignant colonic epithelium. However,
during colon cancer progression, ERß expression is lost, suggesting that estrogen
signaling may play a role in disease progression. Estrogens may in fact exert an 
anti-tumor effect through selective activation of pro-apoptotic signaling
mediated by ERß, inhibition of inflammatory signals and modulation of the tumor
microenvironment. In this review, we analyze the estrogen pathway as a possible
therapeutic avenue in colorectal cancer, we report the most recent experimental
evidence to explain the cellular and molecular mechanisms of estrogen-mediated
protection against colorectal tumorigenesis, and we discuss future challenges and
potential avenues for targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC4313613
PMID: 25699240  [PubMed]


80. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:642041. doi: 10.1155/2015/642041. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Potential therapeutic benefit of combining gefitinib and tamoxifen for treating
advanced lung adenocarcinoma.

Liu CM(1), Chiu KL(2), Chen TS(3), Chang SM(2), Yang SY(4), Chen LH(2), Ni YL(2),
Sher YP(5), Yu SL(6), Ma WL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sex Hormone Research Center, Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science,
School of Medicine, China Medical University, 6 Xueshi Rd., North District,
Taichung 40403, Taiwan ; Department of Chest Medicine, Taichung Tzuchi Hospital, 
The Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Chiayi, Taiwan. (2)Department of Chest
Medicine, Taichung Tzuchi Hospital, The Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation,
Chiayi, Taiwan. (3)Department of Pathology, Taichung Tzuchi Hospital, The
Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Chiayi, Taiwan. (4)Sex Hormone Research
Center, Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, School of Medicine, China
Medical University, 6 Xueshi Rd., North District, Taichung 40403, Taiwan.
(5)Center of Molecular Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan. (6)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, 
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are known as
oncogene driver mutations and with EGFR mutations exhibit good response to the
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor Gefitinib. Some studies have shown that activation
of estrogen and estrogen receptor a or ß (ERa/ß) promote adenocarcinoma. We
evaluated the relationship between the two receptors and the potential
therapeutic benefit with Gefitinib and Tamoxifen.
METHODS: We assessed the association between EGFR mutations as well as ERa/ß
expression/location and overall survival in a cohort of 55 patients with LAC from
a single hospital. PC9 (EGFR exon 19 deletion mutant; Gefitinib-vulnerable cells)
and A549 (EGFR wild type; Gefitinib-resistant cells) cancer cells were used to
evaluate the in vitro therapeutic benefits of combining Gefitinib and Tamoxifen.
RESULTS: We found that the cytosolic but not the nuclear expression of ERß was
associated with better OS in LAC tumors but not associated with EGFR mutation.
The in vitro study showed that combined Gefitinib and Tamoxifen resulted in
increased apoptosis and cytosolic expression of ERß. In addition, combining both 
medications resulted in reduced cell growth and increased the cytotoxic effect of
Gefitinib.
CONCLUSION: Tamoxifen enhanced advanced LAC cytotoxic effect induced by Gefitinib
by arresting ERß in cytosol.

PMCID: PMC4321093
PMID: 25692143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Metabolism. 2015 May;64(5):611-7. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2015.01.006. Epub 2015
Jan 22.

Associations of estrogen receptor alpha and Beta gene polymorphisms with lipid
levels and insulin resistance in men.

Efstathiadou ZA(1), Sakka C(2), Polyzos SA(3), Goutou M(2), Stakias N(2),
Bargiota A(2), Koukoulis GN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Clinic, "Hippokration" General Hospital of Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki, Greece. Electronic address: zefsta@endo.gr. (2)Department of
Endocrinology, University of Thessaly School of Medicine, Larissa, Greece.
(3)Endocrine Clinic, "Hippokration" General Hospital of Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: The association of four single nucleotide polymorphisms in estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) genes with lipid levels and insulin
resistance in men.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Lipids, glucose, insulin and HOMA-IR were determined, in a
population-based, cross-sectional, cohort of 170 apparently healthy middle-aged
Greek men, along with body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC) and
percentage of body fat content (%fat). Genotyping of ESR1 for PvuII and XbaI and 
ESR2 for RsaI and AluI polymorphisms was performed.
RESULTS: Associations of AluI with LDL-Chol (mean ± SD, aa 4.3 ± 1.1 vs. Aa 3.7 ±
1.0 and <U+0391><U+0391> 4.2 ± 1.1, p = 0.023) and RsaI with HOMA-IR [median (IQR), RR 1.55
(0.88-2.49) vs. Rr/rr 1.69 (0.72-2.29), p = 0.032] were found. Synergistic
effects of RsaI and AluI of ESR2 gene on LDL-Chol levels, %fat and WC, as well as
a synergistic effect of both ESR1 and ESR2 genes on levels of TChol (p = 0.01)
and LDL-Chol (p = 0.027) were also shown. These findings remained significant
after adjustment for potential confounders. Significant independent associations 
of PvuII with %fat (mean ± SD, pp 24.6 ± 5.3 vs Pp 22.4 ± 5.2 and PP 21.2 ± 6.7, 
p = 0.044), and RsaI with %fat (RR 22.6 ± 5.5 vs. Rr/rr 25.2 ± 6.3, p = 0.015)
and WC (mean ± SD, RR 97.4 ± 10.4 vs. Rr/rr 102.6 ± 12.6, p = 0.013) were found. 
Synergistic effects on %fat, between the ESR1 polymorphisms (p = 0.004), between 
the ESR2 polymorphisms and among all four ESR polymorphisms studied were also
present.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR2 is associated with LDL-Chol levels and HOMA-IR in men
independently of confounders. Body fat is affected by both genes. Furthermore, a 
synergistic effect of ESR1 and ESR2 on TChol, LDL-Chol and %fat, was shown.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25665486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Dec 15;7(12):5031-40. eCollection 2014.

Current evidence on the relationship between rs1256049 polymorphism in estrogen
receptor-ß gene and cancer risk.

Dai ZJ(1), Wang BF(2), Ma YF(3), Kang HF(2), Diao Y(2), Zhao Y(2), Lin S(2), Lv
Y(2), Wang M(2), Wang XJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University Xi'an 710004, China ; Center for Translational Medicine, Frontier
Institute of Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University Xi'an 710049,
China. (2)Department of Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University Xi'an 710004, China. (3)Department of Immunology and
Pathogenic Biology, School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University Xi'an 710061,
China.

Previous studies have suggested that estrogen receptor-ß (ESR2) rs1256049
polymorphism is associated with the susceptibility of cancer. However, the
results are inconsistent. We performed a meta-analysis to evaluate the
association between the rs1256049 polymorphism and cancer risk. PubMed, ISI Web
of Knowledge, and Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), were searched
for eligible studies. The odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence interval (CI)
were used to assess the strength of association. 22 studies including 22,994
cases and 30,514 controls were identified. There was no significant association
between rs1256049 and cancer risk in the overall population. Stratified analysis 
by ethnicity revealed that the rs1256049 polymorphism was associated with cancer 
risk in Caucasians (A vs. G: OR = 1.09, 95% CI = 1.01-1.16; GA vs. GG: OR = 1.10,
95% CI = 1.02-1.18; AA+GA vs. GG: OR = 1.09, 95% CI = 1.02-1.17), but not in
Asians. Further subgroup analysis by cancer type indicated that the rs1256049
polymorphism may contribute to prostate cancer risk (AA vs. GG: OR = 1.41, 95% CI
= 1.02-1.96; AA vs. GG+GA: OR = 1.52, 95% CI = 1.10-2.10), whereas negative
results were obtained for breast cancer in any genetic model. This meta-analysis 
suggested that the ESR2 rs1256049 polymorphism is a candidate gene polymorphism
for cancer susceptibility in Caucasians, especially in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4307449
PMID: 25664002  [PubMed]


83. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Apr;24(4):713-9. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-0756. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Associations between Environmental Exposures and Incident Colorectal Cancer by
ESR2 Protein Expression Level in a Population-Based Cohort of Older Women.

Tillmans LS(1), Vierkant RA(2), Wang AH(2), Samadder NJ(3), Lynch CF(4), Anderson
KE(5), French AJ(1), Haile RW(6), Harnack LJ(5), Potter JD(7), Slager SL(2),
Smyrk TC(1), Thibodeau SN(1), Cerhan JR(8), Limburg PJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota. (2)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota. (3)Department of Medicine (Gastroenterology), Huntsman Cancer
Institute and University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. (4)Department of
Epidemiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa. (5)Department of Epidemiology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (6)Stanford Cancer Institute,
Palo Alto, California. (7)Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, Washington. (8)Division of Epidemiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota. (9)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota. limburg.paul@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cigarette smoking (smoking), hormone therapy (MHT), and folate intake
(folate) are each thought to influence colorectal cancer risk, but the underlying
molecular mechanisms remain incompletely defined. Expression of estrogen receptor
ß (ESR2) has been associated with colorectal cancer stage and survival.
METHODS: In this prospective cohort study, we examined smoking, MHT, and
folate-associated colorectal cancer risks by ESR2 protein expression level among 
participants in the Iowa Women's Health Study (IWHS). Self-reported exposure
variables were assessed at baseline. Archived, paraffin-embedded colorectal
cancer tissue specimens were collected and evaluated for ESR2 protein expression 
by IHC. Multivariate Cox regression models were fit to estimate relative risks
(RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for associations between smoking, MHT, or 
folate and ESR2-defined colorectal cancer subtypes.
RESULTS: Informative environmental exposure and protein expression data were
available for 491 incident colorectal cancer cases. Positive associations between
ESR2-low and -high tumors and several smoking-related variables were noted, most 
prominently with average number of cigarettes per day (RR, 4.24; 95% CI,
1.81-9.91 for ESR2-low and RR, 2.15; 95% CI, 1.05-4.41 for ESR2-high for =40
cigarettes compared with nonsmokers). For MHT, a statistically significant
association with ESR2-low tumors was observed with longer duration of exposure
(RR, 0.54; 95% CI, 0.26-1.13 for >5 years compared with never use). No
associations were found for folate.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, smoking and MHT were associated with ESR2 expression 
patterns.
IMPACT: These data support possible heterogeneous effects from smoking and MHT on
ERß-related pathways of colorectal carcinogenesis in older women.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4383694
PMID: 25650184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Toxicol. 2015 Mar-Apr;34(2):119-28. doi: 10.1177/1091581815569364. Epub
2015 Jan 29.

A human fetal prostate xenograft model of developmental estrogenization.

Saffarini CM(1), McDonnell-Clark EV(1), Amin A(2), Boekelheide K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
RI, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rhode Island
Hospital, Providence, RI, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA kim_boekelheide@brown.edu.

Prostate cancer is a common disease in older men. Rodent models have demonstrated
that an early and later-life exposure to estrogen can lead to cancerous lesions
and implicated hormonal dysregulation as an avenue for developing future prostate
neoplasia. This study utilizes a human fetal prostate xenograft model to study
the role of estrogen in the progression of human disease. Histopathological
lesions were assessed in 7-, 30-, 90-, 200-, and 400-day human prostate
xenografts. Gene expression for cell cycle, tumor suppressors, and
apoptosis-related genes (ie, CDKN1A, CASP9, ESR2, PTEN, and TP53) was performed
for 200-day estrogen-treated xenografts. Glandular hyperplasia was observed in
xenografts given both an initial and secondary exposure to estradiol in both 200-
and 400-day xenografts. Persistent estrogenic effects were verified using
immunohistochemical markers for cytokeratin 10, p63, and estrogen receptor a.
This model provides data on the histopathological state of the human prostate
following estrogenic treatment, which can be utilized in understanding the
complicated pathology associated with prostatic disease and early and later-life 
estrogenic exposures.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMCID: PMC4409475
PMID: 25633637  [PubMed - in process]


85. Ophthalmic Genet. 2015 Jun;36(2):188-91. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2015.1005316. Epub
2015 Jan 27.

Estrogen-related Polymorphisms in Estonian Patients with Age-related Cataract.

kiljic D(1), Nilsson S, Seibt Palmér M, Tasa G, Juronen E, Behndig A, Karlsson
JO, Petersen A, Zetterberg H, Zetterberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Rehabilitation/Ophthalmology,
Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the
University of Gothenburg , Gothenburg , Sweden .

PMID: 25626180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Jan;35(1):98-102.

[Mitochondrial estrogen receptor ß inhibits non-small cell lung cancer cell
apoptosis via interaction with Bad].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie Q(1), Huang Z, Liu Y, Liu X, Huang L.

Author information: 
(1)Armed Police Corps Hospital of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou 510507
China.E-mail: doctorxie@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the molecular mechanisms by which mitochondrial estrogen
receptor ß (ERß) suppresses non-small cell lung cancer cell apoptosis induced by 
apoptotic stimulations.
METHODS: The mitochondrial localization of ERß in non-small cell lung cancer cell
lines A549 and 201T was determined using immunofluorescence and Western blotting.
The changes of apoptosis of the cells with mitochondrial ERß overexpression or
knockdown in response to cisplatin and STS treatments were assessed, and
mitochondrial ERß interaction with the pro-apoptotic protein Bad was detected
using co-immunoprecipitation and Western blotting.
RESULTS: ERß was localized in the mitochondria in A549 and 201T cells. ERß
overexpression significantly reduced while ERß knockdown increased Bax activation
and cell apoptosis induced by cisplatin and STS. Mitochondrial ERß interaction
with pro-apoptotic protein Bad may suppress Bax activation and its translocation 
to the mitochondria.
CONCLUSION: Mitochondrial ERß can suppress apoptosis of non-small cell lung
cancer cells induced by cisplatin or STS through interaction with Bad, suggesting
the value of mitochondrial ERß as a new therapeutic target for treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer.

PMID: 25613618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2015 May;31(5):379-83. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2014.1001733.
Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Estrogen and progesterone receptor subtype expression in granulosa cells from
women with polycystic ovary syndrome.

Artimani T(1), Saidijam M, Aflatoonian R, Amiri I, Ashrafi M, Shabab N,
Mohammadpour N, Mehdizadeh M.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy Department, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences , 
Tehran , Iran .

We evaluated gene expression of estrogen and progesterone nuclear receptors in
granulosa cells (GCs) of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) women compared to women
with normal cycling ovaries (control group) to achieve a better understanding of 
ovarian steroid status in patients with PCOS. In this prospective study, 40
patients with PCOS and 40 women with normal ovulatory function who underwent in
vitro fertilization (IVF) for treatment of tubal and/or male infertility were
recruited. Follicular fluid was collected from patients and GCs were isolated
from follicular fluid and then were purified with Micro Beads conjugated to
monoclonal anti-human CD45 antibodies. RNA was extracted and reverse
transcription was performed. Gene expression of estrogen and progesterone
receptors was determined by quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR). Estrogen
receptor ß (ERß) expression was significantly higher than ERa expression in both 
groups (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.002). ERa and ERß mRNA expression in PCOS was significantly lower
than control group (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.002). The expression levels of PRA and PRB in PCOS was 
significantly lower than control group (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.002). In conclusion, a significant 
reduction of these genes in GCs from follicles of women with PCOS could be
considered as a sign for maturation defect or follicular arrest in GCs.

PMID: 25603724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Toxicology. 2015 Mar 2;329:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.01.002. Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Adult exposure to bisphenol A (BPA) in Wistar rats reduces sperm quality with
disruption of the hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis.

Wisniewski P(1), Romano RM(1), Kizys MM(2), Oliveira KC(2), Kasamatsu T(2),
Giannocco G(2), Chiamolera MI(2), Dias-da-Silva MR(2), Romano MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Toxicology, Department of Pharmacy, State
University of Centro-Oeste, Parana, Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Molecular and
Translational Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Escola Paulista de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo (Unifesp/EPM), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Reproductive Toxicology, Department of Pharmacy, State
University of Centro-Oeste, Parana, Brazil. Electronic address:
maromano17@gmail.com.

Reproductive physiology involves complex biological processes that can be
disrupted by exposure to environmental contaminants. The effects of bisphenol A
(BPA) on spermatogenesis and sperm quality is still unclear. The objective of
this study was to investigate the reproductive toxicity of BPA at dosages
considered to be safe (5 or 25mg BPA/kg/day). We assessed multiple sperm
parameters, the relative expression of genes involved in the central regulation
of the hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis, and the serum concentrations of
testosterone, estradiol, LH and FSH. BPA exposure reduced sperm production,
reserves and transit time. Significant damage to the acrosomes and the plasma
membrane with reduced mitochondrial activity and increased levels of defective
spermatozoa may have compromised sperm function and caused faster movement
through the epididymis. BPA exposure reduced the serum concentrations of
testosterone, LH and FSH and increased the concentration of estradiol. The
relative gene expression revealed an increase in gonadotropin releasing hormone
receptor (Gnrhr), luteinizing hormone beta (Lhb), follicle stimulating hormone
beta (Fshb), estrogen receptor beta (Esr2) and androgen receptor (Ar) transcripts
in the pituitary and a reduction in estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1) transcripts in
the hypothalamus. In this study, we demonstrated for the first time that adult
male exposure to BPA caused a reduction in sperm production and specific
functional parameters. The corresponding pattern of gene expression is indicative
of an attempt by the pituitary to reestablish normal levels of LH, FSH and
testosterone serum concentrations. In conclusion, these data suggest that at
dosages previously considered nontoxic to reproductive function, BPA compromises 
the spermatozoa and disrupts the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, causing a
state of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25575453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Reprod Toxicol. 2015 Jan;51:72-8. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 
Dec 27.

Methoxychlor and its metabolite HPTE inhibit cAMP production and expression of
estrogen receptors a and ß in the rat granulosa cell in vitro.

Harvey CN(1), Chen JC(2), Bagnell CA(2), Uzumcu M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA; Joint Graduate Program in Toxicology, Rutgers, The 
State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA. (2)Department of
Animal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ
08901, USA. (3)Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of
New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA; Joint Graduate Program in Toxicology,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.
Electronic address: uzumcu@aesop.rutgers.edu.

The major metabolite of the estrogenic pesticide methoxychlor (MXC) HPTE is a
stronger ESR1 agonist than MXC and acts also as an ESR2 antagonist. In granulosa 
cells (GCs), FSH stimulates estradiol via the second messenger cAMP. HPTE
inhibits estradiol biosynthesis, and this effect is greater in FSH-treated GCs
than in cAMP-treated GCs. Therefore; we examined the effect of MXC/HPTE on
FSH-stimulated cAMP production in cultured GCs. To test involvement of
ESR-signaling, we used the ESR1 and ESR2 antagonist ICI 182,780, ESR2 selective
antagonist PHTPP, and ESR2 selective agonist DPN. ESR1 and ESR2 mRNA and protein 
levels were quantified. Both HPTE and MXC inhibited the FSH-induced cAMP
production. ICI 182,780 and PHTPP mimicked the inhibitory action of HPTE.
MXC/HPTE reduced FSH-stimulated Esr2 mRNA and protein to basal levels. MXC/HPTE
also inhibited FSH-stimulated Esr1. The greater inhibition on FSH-stimulated GCs 
is likely due to reduced cAMP level that involves ESR-signaling, through ESR2.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4465425
PMID: 25549949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Dec 20;7:114. doi: 10.1186/s13048-014-0114-2.

ESR1 and ESR2 gene polymorphisms are associated with human reproduction outcomes 
in Brazilian women.

de Mattos CS(1), Trevisan CM(2), Peluso C(3), Adami F(4), Cordts EB(5),
Christofolini DM(6), Barbosa CP(7), Bianco B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. dra.clarissa@uol.com.br.
(2)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. camilatrevisan22@gmail.com.
(3)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. carlapeluso@yahoo.com.br.
(4)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Department of Collective Health - 
Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Santo André, SP, Brazil. adamifernando@uol.com.br. 
(5)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. emerson@embryogenesis.com.br. 
(6)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. denise.morf@gmail.com.
(7)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. caiopb@uol.com.br. (8)Human
Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare
and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe de Gales,
821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. bianca.bianco@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Important candidate genes involved in the ovarian response to
exogenous FSH are the estrogen receptor genes (ESRs), since the effects of
estrogens on follicle growth, maturation and oocyte release. It is known that
some markers of ovarian stimulation can help to personalize the treatment,
adjusting the dose of exogenous rFSH, thus preventing excessive wear of the
patient. Inspired on this information we aimed to analyze four different
polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor genes ESR1: rs2234693/T-397C (PvuII) and
rs9340799/A-351G (Xbal) and ESR2: rs4986938/G1082A (RsaI) and rs1256049/A<U+2009>+<U+2009>1730G
(AluI), and their association with assisted reproduction outcomes in Brazilian
women that underwent in vitro fertilization (IVF).
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was performed involving 136 infertile women less
than 39 years of age with normal ovarian reserve. Patients were divided according
to the same COH protocol for statistical analysis. The Taqman assay was used for 
PvuII and XbaI of ESR1, and RsaI and AluI of ESR2 genotyping. Serum estradiol and
FSH were measured by Elisa assay.
RESULTS: The PvuII (ESR1) TT and RsaI (ESR2) GG genotypes were associated with a 
longer induction period and higher doses of medication (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.03). The XbaI
(ESR1) AA genotype was associated with better COH results, including a larger
number of follicles, mature oocytes, embryos, and good quality embryos
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The AluI GG genotype showed an association with the Ovarian
Hyperstimulation Syndrome (OHSS) (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03). According to the haplotype analysis 
of ER1 (PvuII/XbaI), we demonstrated that the CA combination increases by 0.68
the number of good quality embryos while the TG decreases it by 0.71 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04).
CONCLUSION: ER polymorphisms have an association with the assisted reproduction
outcomes in Brazilian women.

PMCID: PMC4302593
PMID: 25526766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Mar;401(1-2):71-86. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2293-y. Epub
2014 Dec 19.

Mitochondrial estrogen receptor ß inhibits cell apoptosis via interaction with
Bad in a ligand-independent manner.

Liang J(1), Xie Q, Li P, Zhong X, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, 510080, China.

Previous studies reported that estrogen receptor ß (ERß) is localized to
mitochondria, whereas little is known about the physiological functions of
mitochondrial ERß. In the present study, we explored the role of mitochondrial
ERß in regulating apoptosis using stable ERß-expressing and ERß knockdown cells
lines. We found that exogenous ERß was mainly expressed in mitochondrial but not 
in nuclear after ERß overexpression and protected cells from apoptosis induced by
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), ultraviolet (UV), and staurosporine (STS). Moreover,
overexpression of ERß prevented Bax activation, cytochrome c release, caspase-3
activation, and PARP cleavage during apoptosis. Furthermore, knockdown of ERß
significantly suppressed the expression of ERß in mitochondrial and promoted cell
apoptosis induced by H2O2, UV, and STS. Downregulation of ERß also enhanced Bax
activation, cytochrome c release, caspase-3 activation and PARP cleavage. In
addition, our study discovered that mitochondrial ERß interacted with
proapoptotic protein Bad in a ligand-independent manner, which suggests that
mitochondrial ERß inhibits Bad, and prevents Bax activation and cytochrome c
release. Collectively, the results of this study support that mitochondrial ERß
prevents cell apoptosis via the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway in a
ligand-independent manner.

PMID: 25524600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Jan;149(1):81-9. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3233-y.
Epub 2014 Dec 12.

HDAC inhibition does not induce estrogen receptor in human triple-negative breast
cancer cell lines and patient-derived xenografts.

de Cremoux P(1), Dalvai M, N'Doye O, Moutahir F, Rolland G, Chouchane-Mlik O,
Assayag F, Lehmann-Che J, Kraus-Berthie L, Nicolas A, Lockhart BP, Marangoni E,
de Thé H, Depil S, Bystricky K, Decaudin D.

Author information: 
(1)APHP Hôpital Saint-Louis, Molecular Oncoloy Unit and University Paris-Diderot,
PRES Paris Cité, INSERM/CNRS UMR944/7212, 1, Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75010,
Paris, France, patricia.de-cremoux@sls.aphp.fr.

Several publications have suggested that histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACis) 
could reverse the repression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) in triple-negative 
breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines, leading to the induction of a functional
protein. Using different HDACis, vorinostat, panobinostat, and abexinostat, we
therefore investigated this hypothesis in various human TNBC cell lines and
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). We used three human TNBC cell lines and three 
PDXs. We analyzed the in vitro toxicity of the compounds, their effects on the
hormone receptors and hormone-related genes and protein expression both in vitro 
and in vivo models. We then explored intra-tumor histone H3 acetylation under
abexinostat in xenograft models. Despite major cytotoxicity of all tested HDAC
inhibitors and repression of deactylation-dependent CCND1 gene, neither ERa nor
ERß, ESR1 or ESR2 genes respectively, were re-expressed in vitro. In vivo, after 
administration of abexinostat for three consecutive days, we did not observe any 
induction of ESR1 or ESR1-related genes and ERa protein expression by RT-qPCR and
immunohistochemical methods in PDXs. This observation was concomitant to the fact
that in vivo administration of abexinostat increased intra-tumor histone H3
acetylation. These observations do not allow us to confirm previous studies which
suggested that HDACis are able to convert ER-negative (ER-) tumors to ER-positive
(ER+) tumors, and that a combination of HDAC inhibitors and hormone therapy could
be proposed in the management of TNBC patients.

PMID: 25503779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Anim Reprod Sci. 2014 Dec 30;151(3-4):169-81. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2014.11.001. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Expression of receptors for ovarian steroids and prostaglandin E2 in the
endometrium and myometrium of mares during estrus, diestrus and early pregnancy.

Silva ES(1), Scoggin KE(2), Canisso IF(2), Troedsson MH(2), Squires EL(2), Ball
BA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia, UNESP-Universidade Estadual
Paulista, Departamento de Reprodução Animal e Radiologia Veterinária, Botucatu,
São Paulo, CEP: 18618-970, Brazil. (2)Reproduction Laboratory, Maxwell H. Gluck
Equine Research, Department of Veterinary Science, University of Kentucky,
Lexington KY 40546-0099, USA. (3)Reproduction Laboratory, Maxwell H. Gluck Equine
Research, Department of Veterinary Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington KY 
40546-0099, USA. Electronic address: b.a.ball@uky.edu.

The objective of this study was to compare expression of estrogen receptor alpha 
(ER-a), ß (ER-ß), progesterone receptor (PR), as well as prostaglandin E2 type 2 
(EP2) and 4 (EP4) receptors in the equine myometrium and endometrium during
estrus, diestrus and early pregnancy. Tissues were collected during estrus,
diestrus, and early pregnancy. Transcripts for ER-a (ESR1), ER-ß (ESR2), PR
(PGR), EP2 (PTGER2) and EP4 (PTGER4) were quantified by qPCR.
Immunohistochemistry was used to localize ER-a, ER-ß, PR, EP2 and EP4.
Differences in transcript in endometrium and myometrium were compared by the <U+0394><U+0394>CT
method. Expression for ESR1 (P<0.05) tended to be higher during estrus than
diestrus in the endometrium (P=0.1) and myometrium (P=0.06). In addition, ESR1
expression was greater during estrus than pregnancy (P<0.05) in the endometrium
and tended to be higher in estrus compared to pregnancy in the myometrium
(P=0.1). Expression for PGR was greater (P<0.05) in the endometrium during estrus
and diestrus than during pregnancy. In the myometrium, PGR expression was greater
in estrus than pregnancy (P=0.05) and tended to be higher during diestrus in
relation to pregnancy (P=0.07). There were no differences among reproductive
stages in ESR2, PTGER2 and PTGER4 mRNA expression (P>0.05). Immunolabeling in the
endometrium appeared to be more intense for ER-a during estrus than diestrus and 
pregnancy. In addition, immunostaining for PR during pregnancy appeared to be
more intense in the stroma and less intense in glands and epithelium compared to 
estrus and diestrus. EP2 immunoreactivity appeared to be more intense during
early pregnancy in both endometrium and myometrium, whereas weak immunolabeling
for EP4 was noted across reproductive stages. This study demonstrates
differential regulation of estrogen receptor (ER) and PR in the myometrium and
endometrium during the reproductive cycle and pregnancy as well as abundant
protein expression of EP2 in the endometrium and myometrium during early
pregnancy in mares.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25465360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Urol. 2015 May;193(5):1625-31. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.11.087. Epub 2014 Nov
21.

Genetic polymorphisms in ESR1 and ESR2 genes, and risk of hypospadias in a
multiethnic study population.

Choudhry S(1), Baskin LS(2), Lammer EJ(3), Witte JS(4), Dasgupta S(2), Ma C(5),
Surampalli A(2), Shen J(2), Shaw GM(5), Carmichael SL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, California.
Electronic address: choudhrys@urology.ucsf.edu. (2)Department of Urology,
University of California, San Francisco, California. (3)Children's Hospital
Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, California. (4)Department of Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, and Institute of Human Genetics, University of California, San
Francisco, California. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.

PURPOSE: Estrogenic endocrine disruptors acting via estrogen receptors a (ESR1)
and ß (ESR2) have been implicated in the etiology of hypospadias, a common
congenital malformation of the male external genitalia. We determined the
association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in ESR1 and ESR2 genes with
hypospadias in a racially/ethnically diverse study population of California
births.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the relationship between hypospadias and
108 ESR1 and 36 ESR2 single nucleotide polymorphisms in 647 cases and 877
population based nonmalformed controls among infants born in selected California 
counties from 1990 to 2003. Subgroup analyses were performed by race/ethnicity
(nonHispanic white and Hispanic subjects) and by hypospadias severity (mild to
moderate and severe).
RESULTS: Odds ratios for 33 of the 108 ESR1 single nucleotide polymorphisms had p
values less than 0.05 (p = 0.05 to 0.007) for risk of hypospadias. However, none 
of the 36 ESR2 single nucleotide polymorphisms was significantly associated. In
stratified analyses the association results were consistent by disease severity
but different sets of single nucleotide polymorphisms were significantly
associated with hypospadias in nonHispanic white and Hispanic subjects. Due to
high linkage disequilibrium across the single nucleotide polymorphisms, haplotype
analyses were conducted and identified 6 haplotype blocks in ESR1 gene that had
haplotypes significantly associated with an increased risk of hypospadias (OR 1.3
to 1.8, p = 0.04 to 0.00001). Similar to single nucleotide polymorphism analysis,
different ESR1 haplotypes were associated with risk of hypospadias in nonHispanic
white and Hispanic subjects. No significant haplotype association was observed
for ESR2.
CONCLUSIONS: The data provide evidence that ESR1 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
and haplotypes influence the risk of hypospadias in white and Hispanic subjects, 
and warrant further examination in other study populations.

Copyright © 2015 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Int J Surg. 2015 Feb;14:17-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2014.10.007. Epub 2014 Nov 7.

The potential role of estrogen receptor ß2 in breast cancer.

Baek JM(1), Chae BJ(1), Song BJ(1), Jung SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, 
222 Banpo-daero, Seocho-gu, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Surgery, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, 222 Banpo-daero, 
Seocho-gu, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
SSJUNG@catholic.ac.kr.

Endocrine therapy is provided to all patients with estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancer, but only a subset of them derives clinical benefit. 
The discovery of ERß and its five isoforms added another layer of complexity in
the regulation of estrogen activity in breast cancer cells. Two large
retrospective studies showed conflicting results with regard to the prognostic
value of the different ERß isoforms in patients treated with tamoxifen in an
adjuvant setting. This study tested the hypothesis that ERß1 and, or ERß2 are
correlated with clinical outcome. We identified patients with breast cancer who
had undergone surgery at Bucheon St. Mary's Hospital, the Catholic University of 
Korea, between January 2004 and March 2006. We evaluated 101 consecutive cases
for ERß1 and ERß2 expression using immunohistochemical staining and obtained
other clinicopathology by reviewing medical records. ERß1 was expressed in 81.2% 
(79 of 97) and ERß2 was expressed in 50.5% (51 of 101) of primary breast cancer
tissues. Disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) of patients with
cancers expressing ERß2 was significantly worse. Moreover, in subgroup analysis
according to the tamoxifen treatment, ERß2 expression was significantly
associated with shorter DFS of tamoxifen-treated patients. This study indicates
that breast cancer with ERß2 expression was associated with worse DFS and OS,
especially in tamoxifen treated patients. Our results suggest a role for ERß2 as 
an independent prognostic marker and might serve as a new therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2015 Surgical Associates Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 25450264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Jan;145:121-30. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2014.11.006. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Epigenetic modifications of gene promoter DNA in the liver of adult female mice
masculinized by testosterone.

Dkhil MA(1), Al-Quraishy S(2), Abdel-Baki AA(3), Ghanjati F(4), Arauzo-Bravo
MJ(5), Delic D(6), Wunderlich F(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, 11451 Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia; Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty of Science, Helwan
University, Cairo, Egypt. Electronic address: mohameddkhil@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, 11451 Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University,
11451 Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Beni-Suef 
University, Beni-Suef, Egypt. (4)Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell
Therapeutics, Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany. (5)Computational
Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health Research Institute, San
Sebastion, Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.
(6)Department of Biology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany;
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Biberach, Germany. (7)Department of Biology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany.

Testosterone (T) is known to masculinize the female phenotype of the liver,
evidenced as up- and down-regulated expressions of male- and female-predominant
genes, respectively, involved in hepatic metabolism. This study is aimed at
identifying epigenetic modifications of promoters of these differently expressed 
genes in the liver after masculinization by T of adult female C57BL/6 mice using 
methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and NimbleGen microarrays. Among the 17,354
promoters examined, 82 promoters in the liver have been identified to be
significantly changed by T (p<0.05), with 47 and 35 promoters exhibiting
increased and decreased DNA methylation, respectively. Most of these promoters
display the changes of DNA methylation in their Ups-regions, which are between
+500 and +2000 bp upstream from the transcription start site (TSS) of the genes. 
Less T-induced modifications have been detected in the Cor-regions of the
promoters, i.e., +500 to -500 bp around the TSS. Only 13 and 7 Cor-promoters are 
hyper- and hypo-methylated, respectively, among which are 10 hyper- and 5
hypo-methylated promoters of genes with annotated functions. Surprisingly, the
promoters are largely unmethylated in those genes whose expression has been
previously found to be permanently deregulated by T in the liver, as e.g. the
T-upregulated male-predominant genes Cyp7b1, Cyp2d9, Cyp4a10, Ugt2b1, Ugt2b38,
Hsd3b5, Slco1a1 as well as the T-downregulated female-predominant genes Cyp2b9,
Cyp2b13, Cyp3a41, Cyp3a44, Fmo3, Sult2a2, respectively. Though methylatable, the 
promoter DNA of Ar, Esr1, and Esr2 remained unaffected by T. However, T decreases
DNA-methylation of the Cor-promoter region of Ddc encoding the AR-coactivator
dopa decarboxylase. Among the identified 15 Cor-promoters of genes with annotated
functions are also those of Defb43, Cst11, and Sele involved in innate immunity. 
Our data support the view that T may exert long-lasting epigenetic effects on
functions of the liver-inherent immune system.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25448745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Chem Biol Interact. 2015 Jun 5;234:309-19. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2014.11.015. Epub
2014 Nov 28.

The endometrial cancer cell lines Ishikawa and HEC-1A, and the control cell line 
HIEEC, differ in expression of estrogen biosynthetic and metabolic genes, and in 
androstenedione and estrone-sulfate metabolism.

Hevir-Kene N(1), Riner TL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Slovenia. (2)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ljubljana, Slovenia. Electronic address: Tea.Lanisnik-Rizner@mf.uni-lj.si.

Estrogens have important roles in the pathogenesis of endometrial cancer. They
can have carcinogenic effects through stimulation of cell proliferation or
formation of DNA-damaging species. To characterize model cell lines of
endometrial cancer, we determined the expression profiles of the estrogen
receptors (ERs) ESR1, ESR2 and GPER, and 23 estrogen biosynthetic and metabolic
genes, and investigated estrogen biosynthesis in the control HIEEC cell line and 
the Ishikawa and HEC-1A EC cell lines. HIEEC and Ishikawa expressed all ERs to
different extents, while HEC-1A cells lacked expression of ESR1. Considering the 
estrogen biosynthetic and metabolic enzymes, these cells showed statistically
significant different gene expression profiles for SULT2B1, HSD3B2, CYP19A1,
AKR1C3, HSD17B1, HSD17B7, HSD17B12, CYP1B1, CYP3A5, COMT, SULT1A1, GSTP1 and
NQO2. In these cells, E2 was formed from E1S and E1, while androstenedione was
not converted to estrogens. HIEEC and Ishikawa had similar profiles of
androstenedione and E1 metabolism, but hydrolysis of E1S to E1 was weaker in
Ishikawa cells. HEC-1A cells were less efficient for activation of E1 into the
potent E2, but metabolized androstenedione to other androgenic metabolites better
than HIEEC and Ishikawa cells. This study reveals that HIEEC, Ishikawa, and
HEC-1A cells can all form estrogens only via the sulfatase pathway. HIEEC,
Ishikawa, and HEC-1A cells expressed all the major genes in the production of
hydroxyestrogens and estrogen quinones, and in their conjugation. Significantly
higher CYP1B1 mRNA levels in Ishikawa cells compared to HEC-1A cells, together
with lack of UGT2B7 expression, indicate that Ishikawa cells can accumulate more 
toxic estrogen-3,4-quinones than HEC-1A cells, as also for HIEEC cells. This
study provides further characterization of HIEEC, Ishikawa, and HEC-1A cells, and
shows that they differ greatly in expression of the genes investigated and in
their capacity for E2 formation, and thus they represent different in vitro
models.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25437045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Biol Reprod. 2015 Jan;92(1):24. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.124206. Epub 2014 Nov
26.

Diosgenin stimulates rat TM4 cell proliferation through activating plasma
membrane translocation and transcriptional activity of estrogen receptors.

Wu L(1), Dong H(1), Zhao J(1), Wang Y(1), Yang Q(1), Jia C(1), Ma J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chinese Medicine, Xijing Hospital affiliated to the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (2)Department of Chinese Medicine,
Xijing Hospital affiliated to the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
China jingma@fmmu.edu.cn.

Sertoli cells (SCs) function as "nurse cells," which play crucial roles in
supporting spermatogenesis through establishing a unique and essential
environment in the male reproductive tract. Given the important roles of SCs in
male fertility, this study was designed to evaluate the effect of diosgenin, an
aglycone of the steroidal saponin, on TM4 cell proliferation and to elucidate the
possible mechanisms. We showed that diosgenin increased the proliferation of TM4 
cell and primary SCs in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Diosgenin
increased cyclins D1 and E as well as CDK4/6 and CDK2 expression but inhibited
P27 expression, with no significant alterations of cyclin B and cdc2 (cell
division cycle 2), resulting in cell-cycle G1/S transition. Diosgenin
significantly inhibited apoptosis, as reflected by decreased percentage of
TUNEL-positive cells; decreased expression of Bax (Bcl-2-associated X protein),
AIF (apoptosis-inducing factor), and cleaved caspases 3 and 9; and increased
expression of Bcl-2 (B-cell lymphoma 2). Diosgenin induced an immediate and
transient plasma membrane translocation of ESR1 and ESR2 from the nucleus, which 
was inhibited by the antiestrogen ICI 182<U+200A>780 and PP2, an inhibitor of SRC.
Moreover, ICI 182<U+200A>780 and PP2 significantly inhibited diosgenin-induced
cell-cycle transition and inhibition of apoptosis. Activation of extracellular
regulated protein kinase (ERK)/Akt signaling was also involved in
diosgenin-induced TM4 cell proliferation, which was SRC- and ESR-dependent.
Furthermore, diosgenin induced late activation of nuclear ESR transcriptional
activity, which in turn directly regulated cell cycle and apoptosis-related
factors, such as cyclin D and Bcl-2. Taken together, the results show that
diosgenin activated SRC-ESR translocation-ERK/Akt-ESR transcriptional activity,
leading to cell-cycle transition and inhibition of apoptosis and thus final cell 
proliferation. These findings may better our understanding of the pharmacological
actions of diosgenin and advance therapeutic approaches to male infertility.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25429088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014 Nov 19;15:383. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-383.

Estrogen receptors genes polymorphisms and age at menarche in idiopathic
scoliosis.

Janusz P(1), Kotwicka M, Andrusiewicz M, Czaprowski D, Czubak J, Kotwicki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Orthopedics and Traumatology, Spine Disorders Unit,
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. mdpjanusz@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The age at menarche (AAM) is commonly in use in patients with IS as
one of the maturity indicator suggesting deceleration of the growth velocity. The
AAM was suggested to be related to predisposition and curve progression potential
of IS. The late age at menarche was reported to be associated with higher
prevalence of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. The age at menarche is determined 
by both genetic and environmental factors as well as their interactions. Estrogen
receptors 1 and 2 polymorphism were reported to be associated with AAM: in ESR1
XbaI and PvuII site polymorphism and in ESR2 AluI site polymorphism.The purpose
of the study was to investigate associations of the ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms
with AAM in IS patients and to evaluate association of AAM with IS severity.
METHODS: 208 females with IS Caucasian females from Central Europe underwent
clinical, radiological and genetic examinations. Four SNPs were selected XbaI
(A/Grs9340799) and PvuII (C/T rs2234693) in ESR1and AluI (A/G rs4986938) and RasI
(A/G rs1256049) in ESR2. Samples were analyzed with polymerase chain reaction
followed by restriction fragments length polymorphism analysis (PCR-RFLP). The
age of a menarche was established during personal interview with the patients and
in case of children with their parents. The Cobb angle was measured.
RESULTS: All genotypes followed HWE. Mean AAM for patients was 154.8 ± 14.7
months (12.9 ± 1.2 years). The earliest AAM was 121 and latest 192 months. There 
was no statistically significant difference between AAM mean values in each
genotype, for the XbaI, PvuII, AluI and RsaI site polymorphisms the p values were
p=0.7141, p=0.9774, p=0.7973 and p=0.2282, respectively. Patients divided
according to Cobb into mild (<30°), moderate (30°-49°) or severe (= 50°) IS
revealed tendency to delay AAM: 151.9 ± 14.7; 155.2 ± 14.8 and 157.9 ± 14.0
months, respectively. There was statistical significant difference between
patients with mild <30° and severe = 50° IS, p=0.0267.
CONCLUSIONS: In IS patients estrogen receptors polymorphisms did not show
association with the AAM. Patients with severe IS form revealed delayed AAM than 
patients with mild IS form.

PMCID: PMC4247216
PMID: 25410117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Sex Med. 2015 Mar;12(3):676-84. doi: 10.1111/jsm.12753. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

A study of possible associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms in the
estrogen receptor 2 gene and female sexual desire.

Gunst A(1), Jern P, Westberg L, Johansson A, Salo B, Burri A, Spector T, Eriksson
E, Sandnabba NK, Santtila P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Logopedics, Åbo Akademi University, Turku,
Finland.

INTRODUCTION: Female sexual desire and arousal problems have been shown to have a
heritable component of moderate size. Previous molecular genetic studies on
sexual desire have mainly focused on genes associated with neurotransmitters such
as dopamine and serotonin. Nevertheless, there is reason to believe that hormones
with more specific functions concerning sexuality could have an impact on sexual 
desire and arousal.
AIM: The aim of the present study was to investigate the possible effects of 17
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in estrogen receptor genes on
female sexual desire and subjective and genital arousal (lubrication). Based on
previous research, we hypothesized that ESR1 and ESR2 are relevant genes that
contribute to female sexual desire and arousal.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The desire, arousal, and lubrication subdomains of the
Female Sexual Function Index self-report questionnaire were used.
METHODS: The present study involved 2,448 female twins and their sisters aged
18-49 who had submitted saliva samples for genotyping. The participants were a
subset from a large-scale, population-based sample.
RESULTS: We found nominally significant main effects on sexual desire for three
ESR2 -linked SNPs when controlled for anxiety, suggesting that individuals
homozygous for the G allele of the rs1271572 SNP, and the A allele of the
rs4986938 and rs928554 SNPs had lower levels of sexual desire. The rs4986938 SNP 
also had a nominally significant effect on lubrication. No effects for any of the
SNPs on subjective arousal could be detected.
CONCLUSIONS: The number of nominally significant results for SNPs in the ESR2
gene before correcting for multiple testing suggests that further studies on the 
possible influence of this gene on interindividual variation in female sexual
functioning are warranted. In contrast, no support for an involvement of ESR1 was
obtained. Our results should be interpreted with caution until replicated in
independent, large samples.

© 2014 International Society for Sexual Medicine.

PMID: 25385158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Jan;8(1):93-104. doi: 10.1242/dmm.018622. Epub 2014 Nov 7.

The impact of low-magnitude high-frequency vibration on fracture healing is
profoundly influenced by the oestrogen status in mice.

Wehrle E(1), Liedert A(1), Heilmann A(1), Wehner T(1), Bindl R(1), Fischer L(1), 
Haffner-Luntzer M(1), Jakob F(2), Schinke T(3), Amling M(3), Ignatius A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Orthopedic Research and Biomechanics, Center of Musculoskeletal
Research, University of Ulm, 89081 Ulm, Germany. (2)Orthopedic Center for
Musculoskeletal Research, Orthopedic Department, University of Würzburg, 97074
Würzburg, Germany. (3)Institute of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany. (4)Institute of Orthopedic
Research and Biomechanics, Center of Musculoskeletal Research, University of Ulm,
89081 Ulm, Germany. anita.ignatius@uni-ulm.de.

Fracture healing is impaired in aged and osteoporotic individuals. Because
adequate mechanical stimuli are able to increase bone formation, one
therapeutical approach to treat poorly healing fractures could be the application
of whole-body vibration, including low-magnitude high-frequency vibration
(LMHFV). We investigated the effects of LMHFV on fracture healing in aged
osteoporotic mice. Female C57BL/6NCrl mice (n=96) were either ovariectomised
(OVX) or sham operated (non-OVX) at age 41 weeks. When aged to 49 weeks, all mice
received a femur osteotomy that was stabilised using an external fixator. The
mice received whole-body vibrations (20 minutes/day) with 0.3 G: peak-to-peak
acceleration and a frequency of 45 Hz. After 10 and 21 days, the osteotomised
femurs and intact bones (contra-lateral femurs, lumbar spine) were evaluated
using bending-testing, micro-computed tomography (µCT), histology and gene
expression analyses. LMHFV disturbed fracture healing in aged non-OVX mice, with 
significantly reduced flexural rigidity (-81%) and bone formation (-80%) in the
callus. Gene expression analyses demonstrated increased oestrogen receptor ß
(ERß, encoded by Esr2) and Sost expression in the callus of the vibrated animals,
but decreased ß-catenin, suggesting that ERß might mediate these negative effects
through inhibition of osteoanabolic Wnt/ß-catenin signalling. In contrast, in OVX
mice, LMHFV significantly improved callus properties, with increased flexural
rigidity (+1398%) and bone formation (+637%), which could be abolished by
subcutaneous oestrogen application (0.025 mg oestrogen administered in a
90-day-release pellet). On a molecular level, we found an upregulation of ERa in 
the callus of the vibrated OVX mice, whereas ERß was unaffected, indicating that 
ERa might mediate the osteoanabolic response. Our results indicate a major role
for oestrogen in the mechanostimulation of fracture healing and imply that LMHFV 
might only be safe and effective in confined target populations.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4283653
PMID: 25381012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. BMC Cancer. 2014 Nov 7;14:817. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-817.

Repeat polymorphisms in ESR2 and AR and colorectal cancer risk and prognosis:
results from a German population-based case-control study.

Rudolph A(1), Shi H, Försti A, Hoffmeister M, Sainz J, Jansen L, Hemminki K,
Brenner H, Chang-Claude J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 581, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. a.rudolph@dkfz.de.

BACKGROUND: Evidence has accumulated which suggests that sex steroids influence
colorectal cancer development and progression. We therefore assessed the
association of repeat polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor ß gene (ESR2) and
the androgen receptor gene (AR) with colorectal cancer risk and prognosis.
METHODS: The ESR2 CA and AR CAG repeat polymorphisms were genotyped in 1798 cases
(746 female, 1052 male) and 1810 controls (732 female, 1078 male), matched for
sex, age and county of residence. Colorectal cancer risk associations overall and
specific for gender were evaluated using multivariate logistic regression models 
adjusted for sex, county of residence and age. Associations with overall and
disease-specific survival were evaluated using Cox proportional hazard models
adjusted for established prognostic factors (diagnosis of other cancer after
colorectal cancer diagnosis, detection by screening, treatment with adjuvant
chemotherapy, tumour extent, nodal status, distant metastasis, body mass index,
age at diagnosis and year of diagnosis) and stratified for grade of
differentiation. Heterogeneity in gender specific associations was assessed by
comparing models with and without a multiplicative interaction term by means of a
likelihood ratio test.
RESULTS: The average number of ESR2 CA repeats was associated with a small 5%
increase in colorectal cancer risk (OR = 1.05, 95% CI 1.01-1.10) without
significant heterogeneity according to gender or tumoural ESR2 expression. We
found no indication for an association between the AR CAG repeat polymorphisms
and risk of colorectal cancer. The ESR2 CA and AR CAG repeat polymorphisms were
not associated with overall survival or disease specific survival after
colorectal cancer diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher numbers of ESR2 CA repeats are potentially associated with a 
small increase in colorectal cancer risk. Our study does not support an
association between colorectal cancer prognosis and the investigated repeat
polymorphisms.

PMCID: PMC4232639
PMID: 25376484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Elife. 2014 Nov 4;3. doi: 10.7554/eLife.04207.

The transcription factor FOXL2 mobilizes estrogen signaling to maintain the
identity of ovarian granulosa cells.

Georges A(1), L'Hôte D(1), Todeschini AL(1), Auguste A(1), Legois B(1), Zider
A(1), Veitia RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.

FOXL2 is a lineage determining transcription factor in the ovary, but its direct 
targets and modes of action are not fully characterized. In this study, we
explore the targets of FOXL2 and five nuclear receptors in murine primary
follicular cells. We found that FOXL2 is required for normal gene regulation by
steroid receptors, and we show that estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) is the main
vector of estradiol signaling in these cells. Moreover, we found that FOXL2
directly modulates Esr2 expression through a newly identified intronic element.
Interestingly, we found that FOXL2 repressed the testis-determining gene Sox9
both independently of estrogen signaling and through the activation of ESR2
expression. Altogether, we show that FOXL2 mobilizes estrogen signaling to
establish a coherent feed-forward loop repressing Sox9. This sheds a new light on
the role of FOXL2 in ovarian maintenance and function.

PMCID: PMC4356143
PMID: 25369636  [PubMed - in process]


104. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2014 Oct;34(10):1511-4.

[Effect of xy2004, a centchroman derivative, on proliferation of MCF-7 cells in
vitro and the mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Hou J(1), Li P, Zeng J, Xu X, Xiong X, Mi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Xi'an Medical College, Xi'an 710068, China.E-mail:
houandjin@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of xy2004, a centchroman derivative, on the 
proliferation of MCF-7 cells and the mechanisms.
METHODS: The effects of xy2004 on MCF-7 cell proliferation and apoptosis were
evaluated with MTT assay and flow cytometry, respectively. The expressions of the
apoptosis-related proteins were examined with Western blotting. Competitive
estrogen-receptor binding assay was used to investigate the affinity of xy2004 to
estrogen receptors (ER).
RESULTS: xy2004 induced proliferation of MCF-7 cells at low concentrations but
inhibited cell proliferation at high concentrations. The application of tamoxifen
inhibited xy2004-induced proliferation of MCF-7 cells. The relative binding
affinity of xy9906 to ERa and ERß, presented as the IC50 value, was 7.38 × 10<U+207B>³
mol/L and 4.12 × 10<U+207B>7 mol/L, respectively. Treatment of MCF-7 cells with
high-concentration xy2004 reduced the cellular expression of Bcl-2 protein and
increased Bax protein expression.
CONCLUSION: At low concentrations, xy2004 directly stimulates the proliferation
of MCF -7 cells through ligand-receptor binding, and at high concentrations, it
inhibits the cell proliferation by regulating the expression levels of the
apoptosis-related proteins.

PMID: 25345952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2014 Dec 15;39(26):E1599-607. doi:
10.1097/BRS.0000000000000643.

Estrogen receptor 2 gene polymorphism in idiopathic scoliosis.

Kotwicki T(1), Janusz P, Andrusiewicz M, Chmielewska M, Kotwicka M.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pediatric Orthopedics and Traumatology, Spine Disorders Unit,
and Department of Cell Biology, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

STUDY DESIGN: A genetic association study of estrogen receptor 2 gene (ESR2)
polymorphisms in idiopathic scoliosis (IS).
OBJECTIVE: To investigate association of the ESR2 polymorphisms with either
predisposition to or progression of IS in Central European population.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: In ESR2 the rs1256120 polymorphism was described to
be associated with predisposition to and severity of IS in Chinese population.
This observation has not been confirmed in Japanese population. The ESR2
rs4986938 and rs1256049 polymorphisms were described to present association with 
breast cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, and bone mineral density, however the
association with IS has not been evaluated.
METHODS: Case-control study of 248 females with IS and 243 healthy females was
performed. Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms were studied using polymerase
chain reaction-restriction fragments length polymorphism technique with the
restriction enzymes: AlwNI (C/T rs1256120), AluI (A/G rs4986938), and RsaI (A/G
rs1256049). The patients' medical history was evaluated, Cobb angle was measured 
and surgery rate established. The patients were analyzed in 3 subgroups according
to curve progression velocity.
RESULTS: Neither the genotypes nor alleles distribution showed significant
differences between patients with IS and healthy controls. There was no
significant difference in genotype or allele frequency. In the AluI site
polymorphism a significant difference in mean Cobb angle between genotypes was
found: (AA, 31.9° ± 14.2°; AG, 43.2° ± 17.8°; and GG, 38.9° ± 19.0°), P = 0.002. 
There was significant difference in genotype distribution between patients with
moderate (<40°) versus severe (=40°) scoliosis, P = 0.0011; the minor allele
frequency (AA) in recessive model of penetration was over-represented in patients
with Cobb angle below 40°, P = 0.0075, odds ratio = 3.65.
CONCLUSION: No association between ESR2 polymorphism and predisposition to IS was
found in Caucasian females. None of the previously reported associations of AlwNI
site polymorphism could be confirmed. ESR2 AluI site polymorphism may be
associated with curve severity.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: N/A.

PMID: 25341980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 1;193(11):5444-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303400. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

X-Chromosome complement and estrogen receptor signaling independently contribute 
to the enhanced TLR7-mediated IFN-a production of plasmacytoid dendritic cells
from women.

Laffont S(1), Rouquié N(1), Azar P(1), Seillet C(1), Plumas J(2), Aspord C(2),
Guéry JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Unité Mixte de Recherche 1043, Toulouse F-31300, France; Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, U5282, Toulouse F-31300, France; Centre de
Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, Université Toulouse 3, Toulouse F-31300,
France; (2)Recherche et Développement Laboratoire, Etablissement Français du Sang
Rhône-Alpes, La Tronche F-38701, France; Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble
F-38041, France; and Immunobiology and Immunotherapy of Cancers, INSERM U823, La 
Tronche F-38701, France. (3)INSERM, Unité Mixte de Recherche 1043, Toulouse
F-31300, France; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, U5282, Toulouse
F-31300, France; Centre de Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, Université
Toulouse 3, Toulouse F-31300, France; Jean-Charles.Guery@inserm.fr.

Human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) play a major role in innate immunity
through the production of type I IFNs after TLR engagement by pathogens.
Sex-based differences in the innate function of human pDCs have been established,
with pDCs from women exhibiting enhanced TLR7-mediated IFN-a production as
compared with pDCs from males. In mice, we recently provided evidence for a role 
of estrogens as a positive regulator of pDC innate functions through
cell-intrinsic estrogen receptor a signaling, but did not exclude a role for
other X-linked factors, particularly in human pDCs. In this study, we
investigated the respective contribution of X chromosome dosage and sex hormones 
using a humanized mouse model in which male or female NOD-SCID-ß2m(-/-) were
transplanted with human progenitor cells purified from either male or female cord
blood cells. We showed that, in response to TLR7 ligands, the frequency of IFN-a-
and TNF-a-producing pDCs from either sex was greater in female than in male host 
mice, suggesting a positive role for estrogens. Indeed, blockade of estrogen
receptor signaling during pDC development in vitro inhibited TLR7-mediated IFN-a 
production by human pDCs, which expressed both ESR1 and ESR2 genes.
Interestingly, we also found that X chromosome dosage contributed to this sex
bias as female pDCs have an enhanced TLR7-mediated IFN-a response as compared
with male ones, irrespective of the sex of the recipient mice. Together, these
results indicate that female sex hormones, estrogens, and X chromosome complement
independently contribute to the enhanced TLR7-mediated IFN-a response of pDCs in 
women.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25339659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Oct 23;7:96. doi: 10.1186/s13048-014-0096-0.

Expression and molecular consequences of inhibition of estrogen receptors in
granulosa cells of bovine follicles.

Rovani MT, Gasperin BG, Ilha GF, Ferreira R, Bohrer RC, Duggavathi R, Bordignon
V, Gonçalves PB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Animal Reproduction - BioRep, Federal
University of Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. bayard@ufsm.br.

BACKGROUND: Estradiol (E2) receptors mediate E2 effects on cell proliferation and
apoptosis under normal and pathological conditions. However, the mechanisms
involved in E2 signaling are not completely understood. The objectives in this
study were to evaluate the expression of estrogen receptors (ESRs) during
follicular selection in cattle, and the effect of intrafollicular injection of
fulvestrant (an antagonist of ESRs) on follicular development and transcript
abundance in granulosa cells.
METHODS: Granulosa cells were obtained from the two largest follicles around
follicular deviation, after FSH treatment and after intrafollicular injection of 
fulvestrant. Ovarian follicular dynamics monitored by ultrasonography and
quantitative real time PCR were used to validate the in vivo model and
investigate the effects of FSH supplementation or ESR blockade on mRNA expression
of estradiol-related genes.
RESULTS: ESR1 and ESR2 were expressed in granulosa cells of both dominant (F1)
and subordinate (F2) follicles, but their transcripts levels were higher in F1
than F2 after follicular deviation. FSH treatment maintained mRNA levels of both 
ESR1 and ESR2 in F2 follicles at similar levels observed in F1 follicles.
Intrafollicular injection of 100 µM fulvestrant inhibited follicular growth and
decreased CYP19A1 mRNA levels. Transcript levels for both ESR1 and ESR2 were not 
affected by fulvestrant injection. Analyses of FSH-regulated genes revealed that 
ESRs inhibition in the dominant follicle decreased the transcript levels of the
GJA1 but not those of PRKAR2B, MRO or LRP11 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that: both ESR1 and ESR2 are regulated during 
follicular deviation and dominance in cattle and in response to FSH treatment,
and ESRs are required for normal gene expression and development of the dominant 
follicle. Furthermore, we have validated an in vivo model to study estrogen
signaling during follicular development that allows paracrine signaling between
different follicular cells in a physiological endocrine environment.

PMCID: PMC4210628
PMID: 25339519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015 Apr;141(4):633-45. doi: 10.1007/s00432-014-1849-2. 
Epub 2014 Oct 17.

Genetic polymorphism of ESR1 rs2881766 increases breast cancer risk in Korean
women.

Son BH(1), Kim MK, Yun YM, Kim HJ, Yu JH, Ko BS, Kim H, Ahn SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of
Ulsan, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: We performed a case-control study to evaluate the association of genetic
polymorphisms of estrogen-metabolizing enzyme genes and estrogen receptor genes
with breast cancer risk according to age group and subtypes in Korean women.
METHODS: Breast cancer patients (n = 830) and the hospital healthy controls (n = 
390) with both clinical information and SNP data were included in the study. Age 
was divided into three groups: premenopausal under 35 years (n = 64),
premenopausal over 35 years (n = 456), and postmenopausal women (n = 310),
respectively. Tumor subtype was classified into four subtypes: luminal A, luminal
B, HER2-overexpressing, and triple-negative, respectively. Genotyping of the
selected SNPs in ESR1, ESR2, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, and COMT was conducted using the
VeraCode Golden Gate Genotyping Assay Technology. Multiple logistic regression
models (dominant, recessive, and additive) were applied to determine the odds
ratio, 95% confidence interval, and p value.
RESULTS: ESR1, rs2881766, rs2077647, rs926778, and rs2273206 polymorphisms
increased breast cancer risk, and rs3798377 decreased the risk in overall
patients. The association between SNP genotype and breast cancer risk was varied 
according to age groups and tumor subtypes. For age subgroups, rs2881766
increased breast cancer risk in the all three age groups, and rs926778 increased 
the risk in premenopausal over 35 years women and in postmenopausal women. For
the tumor subtypes, rs2881766 increased breast cancer risk manly in luminal A,
HER2-overexpressing, and triple-negative subtypes except for luminal B subtype,
and rs926778 increased the risk in luminal A and triple-negative subtypes.
Rs3798577 decreased the risk in luminal B and triple-negative subtypes.
CONCLUSION: The results showed that ESR1 rs2881766 polymorphism increased breast 
cancer risk and rs3798377 decreased the risk in Korean women. Because of wide
variation of the association between SNP genotype and breast cancer risk
according to age group and tumor subtypes, further studies such as a large-scale 
cohort study need for validation and test of biologic significance.

PMID: 25323936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 13;9(10):e109659. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109659.
eCollection 2014.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene expression and its combination with estrogen receptor 2 
or aromatase expression predicts survival in non-small cell lung cancer.

Aresti U(1), Carrera S(2), Iruarrizaga E(2), Fuente N(2), Marrodan I(2), de
Lobera AR(2), Muñoz A(2), Buque A(1), Condori E(2), Ugalde I(2), Calvo B(1),
Vivanco GL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Laboratory, Cruces University Hospital/BioCruces Health
Research Institute, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain. (2)Medical Oncology Department,
Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain.

The biological roles of estrogen receptor 1 (ERS1), estrogen receptor 2 (ERS2),
and aromatase (CYP19A1) genes in the development of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is unclear, as is the use of their expression as a prognostic factor. The
aim of this study was to investigate the prognostic value of estrogen receptors
and aromatase mRNA expression, along with aromatase protein concentration, in
resected NSCLC patients. Tumor and non-tumor lung tissue samples were analyzed
for the mRNA expression of ERS1, ERS2 and CYP19A1 by RT-PCR. Aromatase
concentration was measured with an ELISA. A total of 96 patients were included.
ERS1 expression was significantly higher in non-tumor tissue than in tumor
samples. Two gene expression categories were created for each gene (and protein):
high and low. ERS1 high category showed increased overall survival (OS) when
compared to the low expression category. Aromatase protein concentration was
significantly higher in tumor samples. Higher ERS1 expression in tumor tissues
was related to longer overall survival. The analysis of gene expression
combinations provides evidence for longer OS when both ERS1 and ERS2 are highly
expressed. ESR1, alone or in combination with ERS2 or CYP19A1, is the most
determining prognostic factor within the analyzed 3 genes. It seems that ERS1 can
play a role in NSCLC prognosis, alone or in combination with other genes such as 
ERS2 or Cyp19a1. ERS2 in combination with aromatase concentration could have a
similar function.

PMCID: PMC4195686
PMID: 25310221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Int J Cancer. 2015 May 1;136(9):2099-108. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29256. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

Genetic dissection of the Mss4 locus mediating sex-biased cancer resistance in
the rat peripheral nervous system.

van den Berg L(1), Koelsch BU, Winzen-Reichert B, Fischer C, Kutritz A,
Kindler-Röhrborn A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

The incidence of neural tumors is sexually dimorphic in both, humans and rodents.
The identification of genetic determinants contributing to sex-biased tumor
development is an essential prerequisite for differential tumor prevention in
males and females. F2 hybrids of inbred BDIV and BDIX rats, resistant and
susceptible, respectively, to ethylnitrosourea-induced malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors (MPNST) display a marked sex bias regarding tumor risk. Homozygous 
BDIV alleles at the Mss4 locus (90.9-111.2 Mb, chromosome 6) mediate MPNST
resistance exclusively in female F2 rats according to a genome wide association
analysis. This locus was functionally confirmed and fine mapped through MPNST
induction in males and females of three congenic rat strains (BDIX.BDIV-Mss4a, b,
d). As a consequence, it could be subdivided in Mss4.1 (98.8-99.7 Mb) mediating
cancer resistance, and Mss4.2 (99.7-111.2 Mb) enhancing sex specificity.
Positional candidate genes were selected through DNA sequencing and expression
profiling using RNAs from trigeminal nerve tissue of parental and congenic male
and female animals. The transregulatory fingerprint of BDIV or BDIX alleles at
Mss4.1 and/or Mss4.2, respectively, provided insight into the processes
influencing cancer risk in a sex-biased way. A group of genes, a fraction of
which involved in Schwann cell differentiation, showed low, male-biased
expression in nerve tissues under the control of BDIX susceptibility alleles, but
high, female-biased transcript levels when controlled by BDIV resistance alleles 
at Mss4. The Esr2 gene located in Mss4.1 constitutes an interesting functional
candidate together with a yet unidentified gene/enhancer in Mss4.2.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25303613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 29;9(9):e108578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108578.
eCollection 2014.

Pathway analysis of genetic factors associated with spontaneous preterm birth and
pre-labor preterm rupture of membranes.

Capece A(1), Vasieva O(2), Meher S(1), Alfirevic Z(1), Alfirevic A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Institute of Translational
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom. (2)Institute of
Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Institute of Translational 
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Pre-term birth (PTB) remains the leading cause of infant mortality
and morbidity. Its etiology is multifactorial, with a strong genetic component.
Genetic predisposition for the two subtypes, spontaneous PTB with intact
membranes (sPTB) and preterm prelabor rapture of membranes (PPROM), and
differences between them, have not yet been systematically summarised.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Our literature search identified 15 association studies
conducted in 3,600 women on 2175 SNPs in 274 genes. We used Ingenuity software to
impute gene pathways and networks related to sPTB and PPROM. Detailed insight in 
the defined functional ontologies clearly separated integrated datasets for sPTB 
and PPROM. Our analysis of upstream regulators of genes suggests that
glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1), peroxisome proliferator activated receptor <U+03B3>
(PPARG) and interferon regulating factor 3 (IRF3) may be sPTB specific.
PPROM-specific genes may be regulated by estrogen receptor2 (ESR2) and signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT1). The inflammatory transcription
factor NF<U+03BA>B is linked to both sPTB and PPROM, however, their inflammatory
response is distinctly different.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our analyses, we propose an autoimmune/hormonal regulation 
axis for sPTB, whilst pathways implicated in the etiology of PPROM include
hematologic/coagulation function disorder, collagen metabolism, matrix
degradation and local inflammation. Our hypothesis generating study has
identified new candidate genes in the pathogenesis of PPROM and sPTB, which
should be validated in large cohorts.

PMCID: PMC4181300
PMID: 25264875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Dec;28:118-24. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.09.024. Epub
2014 Sep 26.

Sex-specific association of estrogen receptor 2 polymorphisms with hepatitis C
virus infection outcomes in a high-risk Chinese Han population.

Cai L(1), Gao C(2), Tang S(1), Wang J(1), Xue X(1), Yue M(3), Deng X(3), Su J(1),
Peng Z(1), Lu Y(4), Zhang Y(5), Wang J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing
Medical University, No. 818 East Tianyuan Road, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Institute of Anus and Intestine, The 150th Hospital of PLA, No. 2 West Huaxia 
Road, Luoyang 471031, Henan, China. (3)Institute of Epidemiology and
Microbiology, Huadong Research Institute for Medicine and Biotechnics, No. 293
Zhongshan East Road, Nanjing 210002, Jiangsu, China. (4)Department of Epidemic
Prevention, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 8 Longyuan
Road, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China. (5)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, No. 818 East 
Tianyuan Road, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China; Institute of Epidemiology and
Microbiology, Huadong Research Institute for Medicine and Biotechnics, No. 293
Zhongshan East Road, Nanjing 210002, Jiangsu, China. (6)State Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, No. 818 East Tianyuan Road,
Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China; Department of General Practice, Kangda College,
Nanjing Medical University, No. 818 East Tianyuan Road, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, 
China. Electronic address: wangjiejsnj@163.com.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) has different clinical and biological characteristics in 
women versus men, which suggests the potential involvement of estrogen. Estrogen 
signaling is mediated by the estrogen receptor, and genetic variations in the
estrogen receptor gene might affect the pathology of HCV infection. We performed 
logistic regression analysis to explore the associations between rs1256049,
rs4986938 and rs944459 polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor 2 gene (ESR2) and
HCV infection outcomes. The variant A allele of rs4986938 was associated with an 
increased HCV infection susceptibility in the males (additive model: adjusted
OR=1.493, P=0.010) and a significantly reduced risk of HCV infection in the
female subgroup (GA vs. GG: adjusted OR=0.710, P=0.012; dominant model: adjusted 
OR=0.686, P=0.004; additive model: adjusted OR=0.703, P=0.002). In addition,
females carrying the rs4986938 AA genotype appeared to clear HCV spontaneously
more readily (adjusted OR=0.237, P=0.011), and additive model analyses showed
that each additional allele contributed a decreased risk of approximately 34% for
HCV chronicity (adjusted OR=0.659, P=0.006). Furthermore, a significant
multiplicative interaction between the combined rs1256049 and rs4986938 genotypes
was found to decrease HCV infection risk (adjusted OR=0.583, P=3.000×10(-4)). The
area under the curve, based on the model and including age, gender, HCV genotypes
and the three SNPs, was significantly related to the clearance of HCV (P=0.003). 
We provide here the first report that rs4986938 in the ESR2 gene played a
potential sex-specific role in the etiology of HCV infection in a high-risk
Chinese Han population, suggesting that ESR2 is a candidate susceptibility gene
for HCV infection and viral clearance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25261585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Dec;53(3):355-66. doi: 10.1530/JME-14-0092. Epub 2014 Sep 
25.

In vivo oestrogenic modulation of Egr1 and Pitx1 gene expression in female rat
pituitary gland.

Gajewska A(1), Herman AP(2), Wolinska-Witort E(2), Kochman K(2), Zwierzchowski
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of NeuroendocrinologyThe Kielanowski Institute of Animal Physiology
and Nutrition, Polish Academy of Sciences, Instytucka Street 3, 05-110 Jablonna
n. Warsaw, PolandNeuroendocrinology DepartmentMedical Centre for Postgraduate
Education, Marymoncka 99/103 Street, 01-813 Warsaw, PolandDepartment of Molecular
BiologyInstitute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, 05-552 Magdalenka, Poland a.gajewska@ifzz.pan.pl. (2)Department of
NeuroendocrinologyThe Kielanowski Institute of Animal Physiology and Nutrition,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Instytucka Street 3, 05-110 Jablonna n. Warsaw,
PolandNeuroendocrinology DepartmentMedical Centre for Postgraduate Education,
Marymoncka 99/103 Street, 01-813 Warsaw, PolandDepartment of Molecular
BiologyInstitute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, 05-552 Magdalenka, Poland.

EGR1 and PITX1 are transcription factors required for gonadotroph cell Lhb
promoter activation. To determine changes in Egr1 and Pitx1 mRNA levels in
central and peripheral pituitary stimulations, an in vivo model based on i.c.v.
pulsatile (1 pulse/0.5<U+200A>h over 2<U+200A>h) GnRH agonist (1.5<U+200A>nM buserelin) or antagonist 
(2<U+200A>nM antide) microinjections was used. The microinjections were given to
ovariectomised and 17ß-oestradiol (E2) (3×20<U+200A>µg), ERA (ESR1) agonist propyl
pyrazole triol (PPT) (3×0.5<U+200A>mg), ERB (ESR2) agonist diarylpropionitrile (DPN)
(3×0.5<U+200A>mg) s.c. pre-treated rats 30<U+200A>min after last pulse anterior pituitaries
were excised. Relative mRNA expression was determined by quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR). Results revealed a gene-specific response for GnRH and/or oestrogenic 
stimulations in vivo. Buserelin pulses enhanced Egr1 expression by 66% in
ovariectomised rats, whereas the oestradiol-supplemented+i.c.v.
NaCl-microinjected group showed a 50% increase in Egr1 mRNA expression. The
oestrogenic signal was transmitted via ERA (ESR1) and ERB (ESR2) activation as
administration of PPT and DPN resulted in 97 and 62%, respectively, elevation in 
Egr1 mRNA expression. A synergistic action of GnRH agonist and 17ß-oestradiol
(E2) stimulation of the Egr1 gene transcription in vivo were found. GnRHR
activity did not affect Pitx1 mRNA expression; regardless of NaCl, buserelin or
antide i.c.v. pulses, s.c. oestrogenic supplementation (with E2, PPT or DPN)
consistently decreased (by -46, -48 and -41% respectively) the Pitx1 mRNA in the 
anterior pituitary gland. Orchestrated Egr1 and Pitx1 activities depending on
specific central and peripheral regulatory inputs could be responsible for
physiologically variable Lhb gene promoter activation in vivo.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25258388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 23;9(9):e108287. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108287.
eCollection 2014.

Associations between Individual and Combined Polymorphisms of the TNF and VEGF
Genes and the Embryo Implantation Rate in Patients Undergoing In Vitro
Fertilization (IVF) Programs.

Boudjenah R(1), Molina-Gomes D(1), Torre A(1), Boitrelle F(1), Taieb S(2), Dos
Santos E(2), Wainer R(1), de Mazancourt P(2), Selva J(1), Vialard F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Genetics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
Poissy Saint Germain Medical Centre, Poissy, France; EA 2493, Versailles Saint
Quentin University, Versailles, France. (2)EA 2493, Versailles Saint Quentin
University, Versailles, France.

BACKGROUND: A multiple pregnancy is now considered to be the most common adverse 
outcome associated with in vitro fertilization (IVF). As a consequence, the
identification of women with the best chances of embryo implantation is a
challenge in IVF program, in which the objective is to offer elective
single-embryo transfer (eSET) without decreasing the pregnancy rate. To date, a
range of hormonal and clinical parameters have been used to optimize eSET but
none have significant predictive value. This variability could be due to genetic 
predispositions related to single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Here, we
assessed the individual and combined impacts of thirteen SNPs that reportedly
influence the outcome of in vitro fertilisation (IVF) on the embryo implantation 
rate for patients undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection program (ICSI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A 13 gene polymorphisms: FSHR(Asn680Ser), p53(Arg72Pro),
AMH(Ile49Ser), ESR2(+1730G>A), ESR1(-397T>C), BMP15(-9C>G), MTHFR1(677C>T),
MTHFR2(1298A>C), HLA-G(-725C>G), VEGF(+405G>C), TNFa(-308A>G), AMHR(-482A>G),
PAI-1(4G/5G), multiplex PCR assay was designed to genotype women undergoing ICSI 
program. We analyzed the total patients population (n = 428) and a subgroup with 
homogeneous characteristics (n = 112).
RESULTS: Only the VEGF(+405G>C) and TNFa(-308A>G) polymorphisms impacted
fertilization, embryo implantation and pregnancy rates. Moreover, the combined
VEGF+405.GG and TNFa-308.AG or AA genotype occurred significantly more frequently
in women with high implantation potential. In contrast, the VEGF+405.CC and
TNFa-308.GG combination was associated with a low implantation rate.
CONCLUSION: We identified associations between VEGF(+405G>C) and TNFa(-308A>G)
polymorphisms (when considered singly or as combinations) and the embryo
implantation rate. These associations may be predictive of embryo implantation
and could help to define populations in which elective single-embryo transfer
should be recommended (or, conversely, ruled out). However, the mechanism
underlying the function of these polymorphisms in embryo implantation remains to 
be determined and the associations observed here must be confirmed in a larger,
more heterogeneous cohort.

PMCID: PMC4172632
PMID: 25247819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Nov 4;230(3):375-81. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.08.012. Epub
2014 Aug 13.

Actions of methyl-, propyl- and butylparaben on estrogen receptor-a and -ß and
the progesterone receptor in MCF-7 cancer cells and non-cancerous MCF-10A cells.

Wróbel AM(1), Gregoraszczuk EL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Toxicology of Reproduction, Institute of Zoology,
Jagiellonian University in Kraków, Gronostajowa 9, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.
Electronic address: ania.wrobel@uj.edu.pl. (2)Department of Physiology and
Toxicology of Reproduction, Institute of Zoology, Jagiellonian University in
Kraków, Gronostajowa 9, 30-387 Krakow, Poland. Electronic address:
ewa.gregoraszczuk@uj.edu.pl.

Numerous studies have shown that widely used parabens possess estrogenic
properties. In the present study, we examined the effects of methyl-, propyl- and
butylparaben on the mRNA and protein expression of estrogen receptor (ER)-a
(ESR1) and -ß (ESR2) and the progesterone receptor (PGR). Human MCF-7 breast
cancer cells and MCF-10A non-transformed breast epithelial cells were exposed to 
parabens at a concentration of 20nM; 17ß-estradiol at a concentration of 10nM,
was used as a positive control. Both propyl- and butylparaben stimulated PGR mRNA
expression in MCF-7 cells, whereas methyl- and propylparaben PGR protein
expression. In MCF-10A cells, butyl- and propylparaben increased only PGR mRNA
expression. All parabens increased ESR1 gene and protein expression in MCF-7 and 
with the exception of butylparaben in MCF-10A cells. All parabens significantly
increased ESR2 mRNA and protein expression in MCF-7 cells, but in MCF-10A cells
only ESR2 protein expression. In summary, by virtue of their stimulatory action
on the expression of ESR1, ESR2 and PGR in cancer cells, parabens can be viewed
as potential contributors to breast cancer progression. Extension, the actions of
these parabens on the expression of ERs and PGR in non-cancerous cells point to
possible actions on breast cancer initiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25128701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Reprod Sci. 2015 Mar;22(3):347-57. doi: 10.1177/1933719114542015. Epub 2014 Aug
6.

Genetic polymorphisms in Pakistani women with polycystic ovary syndrome.

Liaqat I(1), Jahan N(2), Krikun G(3), Taylor HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology GC University, Lahore, Pakistan Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA ifiliaqat@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Zoology GC
University, Lahore, Pakistan. (3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the major cause of anovulatory infertility.
Although the genetic basis of PCOS is not well understood, it is a common
metabolic and endocrine disorder. This study investigates the possible genomic
variants associated with PCOS in Pakistani women from the Punjab region. DNA
samples from 96 patients with genetically unrelated PCOS and 96 controls were
analyzed by direct sequencing to determine the polymorphisms of different loci on
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (fshr), follicle-stimulating hormone ß
(fshrß), luteinizing hormone chorionic gonadotropin (lhcgr), luteinizing hormone 
ß (lhß), estrogen receptor a (esr1), and estrogen receptor ß (esr2) genes.
Significant associations were observed within the genotype frequencies, allele
frequencies, and multi-single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) haplotype analysis of
most polymorphisms studied. This study identified new SNPs at positions 605+52
Del/T in lhcgr genes occurring in this particular subpopulation. The strong r (2)
value suggests that polymorphisms in the fshr and esr1 genes were in linkage
disequilibrium. Our study provides evidence of statistically significant
associations between susceptibility to PCOS in Pakistani women and the gene
polymorphisms mentioned earlier. This suggests that the susceptible loci for PCOS
lie within or very close to the chromosomal regions spanning these genes.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 25100445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Andrology. 2014 Sep;2(5):695-701. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2014.00243.x. Epub
2014 Jul 23.

Expression of the oestrogen receptor GPER by testicular peritubular cells is
linked to sexual maturation and male fertility.

Sandner F(1), Welter H, Schwarzer JU, Köhn FM, Urbanski HF, Mayerhofer A.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy III, Cell Biology, LMU München, München, Germany.

Besides the two nuclear oestrogen receptors (ESR1/ESR2), the G protein-coupled
oestrogen receptor (GPER) was described in the human testis but little is known
about testicular GPER during development or male infertility. We performed an
immunohistochemical analysis using human and rhesus monkey testicular samples.
The results obtained in adult primate testes showed GPER in interstitial and
vascular cells as well as in smooth muscle-like peritubular cells, which build
the wall of seminiferous tubules. Expression of GPER was also found in cultured
human testicular peritubular cells (HPTCs) by Western blotting and
RT-PCR/sequencing. Furthermore, as seen in time-lapse videos of cultured cells,
addition of a specific GPER agonist (G1) significantly reduced the numbers of
HTPCs within 24 h. A GPER antagonist (G15) prevented this action, implying a role
for GPER related to the control of cell proliferation or cell death of
peritubular cells. Peritubular cell functions and their phenotype change, for
example, during post-natal development and in the cases of male infertility. The 
study of non-human primate samples revealed that GPER in peritubular cells was
detectable only from the time of puberty onwards, while in samples from infantile
and prepubertal monkeys only interstitial cells showed immunopositive staining.
In testicular biopsies of men with mixed atrophy, a reduction or loss of
immunoreactive GPER was found in peritubular cells surrounding those tubules, in 
which spermatogenesis was impaired. In other cases of impaired spermatogenesis,
namely when the tubular wall was fibrotically remodelled, a complete loss of GPER
was seen. Thus, the observed inverse relation between the state of fertility and 
GPER expression by peritubular cells implies that the regulation of primate
testicular peritubular cells by oestrogens is mediated by GPER in both, health
and disease.

© 2014 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMCID: PMC4134690
PMID: 25052196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2014 Dec;21(24):13964-73. doi:
10.1007/s11356-014-3260-6. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Risk for estrogen-dependent diseases in relation to phthalate exposure and
polymorphisms of CYP17A1 and estrogen receptor genes.

Huang PC(1), Li WF, Liao PC, Sun CW, Tsai EM, Wang SL.

Author information: 
(1)National Environmental Health Research Center (NEHRC), National Health
Research Institutes (NHRI), Miaoli, Taiwan.

Evidence has shown that polymorphisms of various genes known to be involved in
estrogen biosynthesis and function are associated with estrogen-dependent
diseases (EDDs). These genes include CYP17A1, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), and 2
(ESR2). Phthalates are considered estrogenic endocrine disruptors, and recent
research has suggested that they may act as a risk factor for EDDs. However,
extremely few studies have assessed the effects of gene-environment interaction
on these diseases. We recruited 44 patients with endometriosis or adenomyosis, 36
patients with leiomyoma, and 69 healthy controls from a medical center in Taiwan 
between 2005 and 2007. Urine samples were collected and analyzed for seven
phthalate metabolites using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.
Peripheral lymphocytes were used for DNA extraction to determine the genotype of 
CYP17A1, ESR1, and ESR2. Compared to controls, patients with leiomyoma had
significantly higher levels of total urinary mono-ethylhexyl phthalate (SMEHP)
(52.1 vs. 29.6 µg/g creatinine, p = 0.040), mono-n-butyl phthalate (MnBP) (75.4
vs. 51.3 µg/g creatinine, p = 0.019), and monoethyl phthalate (MEP) (103.7 vs.
59.3 µg/g creatinine, p = 0.031). In contrast, patients with endometriosis or
adenomyosis showed a marginally increased level of urinary MEHP only. Subjects
who were homozygous for both the ESR1 C allele (rs2234693) and CYP17A1 C allele
(rs743572) showed a significantly increased risk for leiomyoma (OR = 19.8; 95 %
CI, 1.70; 231.5; p = 0.017) relative to subjects with other genotypes of ESR1 and
CYP17A1. These results were obtained after adjusting for age, cigarette smoking, 
MEHP level, GSTM1 genotype and other covariates. Our results suggested that both 
CYP17A1 and ESR1 polymorphisms may modulate the effects of phthalate exposure on 
the development of leiomyoma.

PMID: 25030786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Aug;146(3):657-67. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3050-3. 
Epub 2014 Jul 10.

ERß splice variant expression in four large cohorts of human breast cancer
patient tumors.

Wimberly H(1), Han G, Pinnaduwage D, Murphy LC, Yang XR, Andrulis IL, Sherman M, 
Figueroa J, Rimm DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, BML116, 310 Cedar
Street, PO Box 208023, New Haven, CT, 06520-8023, USA.

Though the role of Estrogen Receptor (ER)a in breast cancer has been studied
extensively, there is little consensus about the role of alternative ER isoform
ERß in breast cancer biology. ERß has significant sequence homology to ERa but is
located on a different chromosome and maintains both overlapping and unique
functional attributes. Five variants exist, resulting from alternative splicing
of the C-terminal region of ERß. The relevance of ERß variants in breast cancer
outcomes and response to therapy is difficult to assess because of conflicting
reports in the literature, likely due to variable methods used to assess ERß in
patient tumors. Here, we quantitatively assess expression of ERß splice variants 
on over 2,000 breast cancer patient samples. Antibodies against ERß variants were
validated for staining specificity in cell lines by siRNA knockdown of ESR2 and
staining reproducibility on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue by
quantitative immunofluorescence (QIF) using AQUA technology. We found antibodies 
against splice variants ERß1 and ERß5, but not ERß2/cx, which were sensitive,
specific, and reproducible. QIF staining of validated antibodies showed both ERß1
and ERß5 QIF scores, which have a normal (bell shaped) distribution on most
cohorts assessed, and their expression is significantly associated with each
other. Extensive survival analyses show that ERß1 is not a prognostic or
predictive biomarker for breast cancer. ERß5 appears to be a context-dependent
marker of worse outcome in HER2-positive and triple-negative patients, suggesting
an unknown biological function in the absence of ERa.

PMID: 25007965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Hum Fertil (Camb). 2015 Mar;18(1):30-7. doi: 10.3109/14647273.2014.922705. Epub
2014 Jun 19.

Levels of oestrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and aB-crystallin in eutopic 
endometrium in relation to pregnancy in women with endometriosis.

Moberg C(1), Bourlev V, Ilyasova N, Olovsson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University , Uppsala ,
Sweden.

Endometriosis affects fertility in many women and may partly be due to decreased 
endometrial receptivity. Several mechanisms have been suggested, notably,
progesterone resistance for which a number of candidate biomarkers have been
suggested. Here we demonstrate aberrant levels of steroid hormone receptors and
the small heat shock protein aB-crystallin in eutopic endometrial epithelium from
38 women with peritoneal endometriosis diagnosed during investigation for
secondary infertility. Spontaneous pregnancies within 1 year after medical and
surgical treatment for endometriosis were recorded and semi-quantitative
immunohistochemistry data compared between women with endometriosis who did or
did not become pregnant and healthy controls. Stronger immunostaining for ER-a
was detected in luminal and glandular endometrial epithelium from women with
endometriosis who did not become pregnant during the post-treatment observation
period versus endometriosis patients who became pregnant and controls. Staining
levels of PR and PR-B were lower in patients without subsequent pregnancies than 
in the two other groups. Endometrial levels of aB-crystallin in endometriosis
patients similar to those in controls were strongly correlated with the chance of
becoming pregnant, whereas higher or lower levels were not.

PMID: 24945100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Aug;21(4):677-90. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0480. Epub 2014
Jun 17.

Deficiency of ERß and prostate tumorigenesis in FGF8b transgenic mice.

Elo T(1), Yu L(2), Valve E(2), Mäkelä S(3), Härkönen P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and AnatomyPharmacologyDrug Development and
TherapeuticsTurku Center for Disease ModelingInstitute of Biomedicine, University
of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, FinlandFunctional Foods
ForumUniversity of Turku, Turku, FinlandDepartment of Laboratory MedicineMAS
University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden teresa.elo@utu.fi.
(2)Departments of Cell Biology and AnatomyPharmacologyDrug Development and
TherapeuticsTurku Center for Disease ModelingInstitute of Biomedicine, University
of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, FinlandFunctional Foods
ForumUniversity of Turku, Turku, FinlandDepartment of Laboratory MedicineMAS
University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. (3)Departments of Cell
Biology and AnatomyPharmacologyDrug Development and TherapeuticsTurku Center for 
Disease ModelingInstitute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu
10, 20520 Turku, FinlandFunctional Foods ForumUniversity of Turku, Turku,
FinlandDepartment of Laboratory MedicineMAS University Hospital, Lund University,
Malmö, SwedenDepartments of Cell Biology and AnatomyPharmacologyDrug Development 
and TherapeuticsTurku Center for Disease ModelingInstitute of Biomedicine,
University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, FinlandFunctional Foods
ForumUniversity of Turku, Turku, FinlandDepartment of Laboratory MedicineMAS
University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

Estrogens contribute to the development and growth of the prostate and are
implicated in prostate tumorigenesis. In their target tissues, estrogens mediate 
their effects via estrogen receptor a (ERa (ESR1)) and ß (ERß (ESR2)).
Hyperplasia and decreased differentiation of epithelial cells in the prostate
have been reported in ERß knockout (BERKO) mice. Herein, we studied the effect of
ERß deficiency on prostate tumorigenesis by crossing BERKOFVB mice with
prostate-targeted human fibroblast growth factor 8b transgenic (FGF8b-Tg) mice.
Consistent with results described in our previous report, the prostates of
1-year-old FGF8b-Tg mice displayed stromal aberrations, prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (mPIN) lesions, inflammation, and occasionally cancer. The prostates of
BERKOFVB mice exhibited mild epithelial hypercellularity and inflammation. The
prostate phenotypes of FGF8b-Tg-BERKOFVB mice closely resembled those of FGF8b-Tg
mice. However, mucinous metaplasia, indicated by Goblet-like cells in the
epithelium, was significantly more frequent in the prostates of FGF8b-Tg-BERKOFVB
mice when compared with FGF8b-Tg mice. Furthermore, compared with FGF8b-Tg mice, 
there was a tendency for increased frequency of inflammation but milder
hyperplasias in the prostate stroma of FGF8b-Tg-BERKOFVB mice. The expression
levels of mRNAs for FGF8b-regulated genes including osteopontin (Spp1),
connective tissue growth factor (Ctgf), fibroblast growth factor receptors
(Fgfrs), and steroid hormone receptors and cytokines were similar in the
prostates of FGF8b-Tg and FGF8b-Tg-BERKOFVB mice. Our results indicate that ERß
plays a role in the differentiation of the prostatic epithelium and, potentially,
in the defensive mechanism required for protection against inflammation but do
not support a direct tumor-suppressive function of ERß in the prostate of
FGF8b-Tg mice.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24938408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3674-83. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1946. Epub 2014 Jun 
16.

Histone deacetylase inhibition induces long-lasting changes in maternal behavior 
and gene expression in female mice.

Stolzenberg DS(1), Stevens JS, Rissman EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology (D.S.S.), University of California, Davis, Davis,
California 95616; and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics (J.S.S., 
E.F.R.), University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia
22908.

In many species, including mice, maternal responsiveness is experience-dependent 
and permanent, lasting for long periods (months to years). We have shown that
after brief exposures to pups, virgin female mice continue to respond maternally 
toward pups for at least one month. Administration of a histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDACi) reduces the amount of maternal experience required to affect
maternal behavior and gene expression. In this set of studies, we examined the
epigenetic mechanisms that underlie these motivated behaviors. We assessed
whether the effects of HDACi persisted 1 month after the initial experience (in
the absence of continued pup experience or HDACi treatment) and whether the
maintenance of maternal memory was associated with stable changes in gene
expression. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we examined whether Esr2 and Oxt
gene expression might be mediated by recruitment of the histone acetyltransferase
cAMP response element binding protein (CBP) to their promoter regions after
maternal memory consolidation. We report that HDACi treatment induced
long-lasting changes in maternal responsiveness. Maternal learning was associated
with increased recruitment of CBP to the Esr2 and Oxt gene promoters during the
consolidation of maternal memory as well as a persistent increase in estrogen
receptor-ß (Esr2) mRNA and decreased expression of the de novo DNA
methyltransferase Dnmt3a within the medial preoptic area. The consolidation of
the maternal experience may involve the CBP recruitment and stable changes in
gene expression, which maintain increased maternal responsiveness for long
periods of time.

PMCID: PMC4138561
PMID: 24932804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3597-609. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1017. Epub 2014 Jun
10.

Hypothalamic molecular changes underlying natural reproductive senescence in the 
female rat.

Kermath BA(1), Riha PD, Woller MJ, Wolfe A, Gore AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience (B.A.K., A.C.G.), Division of Pharmacology and
Toxicology (P.D.R., A.C.G.), and Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology
(A.C.G.), The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712; Department of
Biology (M.J.W.), University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, Whitewater, Wisconsin
53190; and Department of Pediatrics (A.W.), Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore Maryland 21287.

The role of the hypothalamus in female reproductive senescence is unclear. Here
we identified novel molecular neuroendocrine changes during the natural
progression from regular reproductive cycles to acyclicity in middle-aged female 
rats, comparable with the perimenopausal progression in women. Expression of 48
neuroendocrine genes was quantified within three hypothalamic regions: the
anteroventral periventricular nucleus, the site of steroid positive feedback onto
GnRH neurons; the arcuate nucleus (ARC), the site of negative feedback and
pulsatile GnRH release; and the median eminence (ME), the site of GnRH secretion.
Surprisingly, the majority of changes occurred in the ARC and ME, with few
effects in anteroventral periventricular nucleus. The overall pattern was
increased mRNA levels with chronological age and decreases with reproductive
cycle status in middle-aged rats. Affected genes included transcription factors
(Stat5b, Arnt, Ahr), sex steroid hormone receptors (Esr1, Esr2, Pgr, Ar),
steroidogenic enzymes (Sts, Hsd17b8), growth factors (Igf1, Tgfa), and
neuropeptides (Kiss1, Tac2, Gnrh1). Bionetwork analysis revealed region-specific 
correlations between genes and hormones. Immunohistochemical analyses of
kisspeptin and estrogen receptor-a in the ARC demonstrated age-related decreases 
in kisspeptin cell numbers as well as kisspeptin-estrogen receptor-a dual-labeled
cells. Taken together, these results identify unexpectedly strong roles for the
ME and ARC during reproductive decline and highlight fundamental differences
between middle-aged rats with regular cycles and all other groups. Our data
provide evidence of decreased excitatory stimulation and altered hormone feedback
with aging and suggest novel neuroendocrine pathways that warrant future study.
Furthermore, these changes may impact other neuroendocrine systems that undergo
functional declines with age.

PMCID: PMC4138577
PMID: 24914937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2014 Oct;35(4):550-7. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2014.05.002.
Epub 2014 May 29.

The role of hypothalamic estrogen receptors in metabolic regulation.

Frank A(1), Brown LM(2), Clegg DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Touchstone Diabetes Center, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8854, USA. (2)Food and
Nutrition Sciences Program, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University, Greensboro, NC 27411-0002, USA. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
Touchstone Diabetes Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-8854, USA. Electronic address: deborah.clegg@utsouthwestern.edu.

Estrogens regulate key features of metabolism, including food intake, body
weight, energy expenditure, insulin sensitivity, leptin sensitivity, and body fat
distribution. There are two 'classical' estrogen receptors (ERs): estrogen
receptor alpha (ERS1) and estrogen receptor beta (ERS2). Human and murine data
indicate ERS1 contributes to metabolic regulation more so than ESR2. For example,
there are human inactivating mutations of ERS1 which recapitulate aspects of the 
metabolic syndrome in both men and women. Much of our understanding of the
metabolic roles of ERS1 was initially uncovered in estrogen receptor a-null mice 
(ERS1(-/-)); these mice display aspects of the metabolic syndrome, including
increased body weight, increased visceral fat deposition and dysregulated glucose
intolerance. Recent data further implicate ERS1 in specific tissues and neuronal 
populations as being critical for regulating food intake, energy expenditure,
body fat distribution and adipose tissue function. This review will focus
predominantly on the role of hypothalamic ERs and their critical role in
regulating all aspects of energy homeostasis and metabolism.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4174989
PMID: 24882636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Gene. 2014 Aug 10;546(2):283-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.05.066. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Polymorphisms in the promoter region of ESR2 gene and susceptibility to ovarian
cancer.

Schüler S(1), Lattrich C(1), Skrzypczak M(2), Fehm T(3), Ortmann O(1), Treeck
O(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Medical Center Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany. (2)Second Department of Gynecology, Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin, Poland. (3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (4)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
University Medical Center Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. Electronic address:
otreeck@caritasstjosef.de.

Susceptibility to ovarian cancer might be affected by genetic variations in genes
involved in estrogen biosynthesis, metabolism or signal transduction. In this
study we tested the hypothesis that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
promoter of human ESR2 gene, coding for estrogen receptor ß, may be associated
with increased risk for ovarian cancer. Three SNPs in the promoter region of
human ESR2 gene were genotyped by means of allele-specific tetra-primer PCR. A
total of 184 ovarian cancer cases and the same numbers of controls were included 
in the study. With regard to homozygous analysis, the AA genotype of SNP
rs3020449 was found to be significantly more frequent in ovarian cancer cases
staged as FIGO III+IV than in cases staged as I+II (OR 2.717, p=0.027). With
regard to allele frequency, the G allele of this SNP was less frequent in FIGO
I+II cases than in cases with higher FIGO stages (OR 1.739, p=0.018). With regard
to genotype frequency, allele frequency, allele positivity or haplotype frequency
of SNPs rs2987983, rs3020449 and rs3020450 we did not observe a significant
difference between the cancer and the control group. Our data suggest that SNPs
in the promoter region of ESR2 gene do not affect susceptibility to ovarian
cancer, but SNP rs3020449 might affect progression of this disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24881814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Tumour Biol. 2014 Aug;35(8):8319-28. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2086-7. Epub 2014
May 24.

The influence of ESR1 rs9340799 and ESR2 rs1256049 polymorphisms on prostate
cancer risk.

Fu C(1), Dong WQ, Wang A, Qiu G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong,
510515, China.

Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2) may play a role in the 
development of prostate cancer. Many studies focused on ESR1 rs9340799 and ESR2
rs1256049 polymorphisms to explore associations with prostate cancer risk. These 
studies showed inconsistent and conflicting results. The aim of this
meta-analysis was to investigate the pooled association of ESR1 rs9340799 and
ESR2 rs1256049 polymorphisms with prostate cancer risk. A systematic literature
search was conducted to identify related studies (up to February 2014) in several
online databases including PubMed, Google Scholar, CNKI and Wanfang online
libraries. A total of 16 eligible articles were enrolled in this updated
meta-analysis. The result suggested that ESR1 rs9340799 polymorphism was
significantly associated with prostate cancer in overall populations (GG+GA vs.
AA: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002; G vs. A: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004), Caucasians (GG+GA vs. AA: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008; G vs. A:
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016) and Africans (GG+GA vs. AA: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005; G vs. A: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006), but not in
Asians (GG+GA vs. AA: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.462; G vs. A: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.665). The result also showed that
there was a significant association between ESR2 rs1256049 polymorphism and
prostate cancer in Caucasians (AA+AG vs. GG: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016; A vs. G: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005), but 
no association in overall populations (AA+AG vs. GG: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.826; A vs. G:
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.478), Asians (AA+AG vs. GG: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.177; A vs. G: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.703) and Africans
(AA+AG vs. GG: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.847; A vs. G: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.707). The cumulative meta-analysis and
sensitivity analysis showed the results were robust. In conclusion, this
meta-analysis indicated that ESR1 rs9340799 polymorphism was associated with
prostate cancer risk in overall populations, Caucasians and Africans, while ESR2 
rs1256049 polymorphism was associated with prostate cancer risk in Caucasians.
However, the biological mechanisms need to be further investigated.

PMID: 24859835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Hum Reprod. 2014 Jul;29(7):1471-89. Epub 2014 May 20.

In utero exposure to cigarette smoke dysregulates human fetal ovarian
developmental signalling.

Fowler PA, Childs AJ, Courant F, MacKenzie A, Rhind SM, Antignac JP, Le Bizec B, 
Filis P, Evans F, Flannigan S, Maheshwari A, Bhattacharya S, Monteiro A, Anderson
RA, O'Shaughnessy PJ.

STUDY QUESTION: How does maternal cigarette smoking disturb development of the
human fetal ovary?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Maternal smoking increases fetal estrogen titres and dysregulates
several developmental processes in the fetal ovary.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Exposure to maternal cigarette smoking during gestation
reduces human fetal ovarian cell numbers, germ cell proliferation and subsequent 
adult fecundity.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: The effects of maternal cigarette smoking on the
second trimester human fetal ovary, fetal endocrine signalling and fetal chemical
burden were studied. A total of 105 fetuses were studied, 56 from mothers who
smoked during pregnancy and 49 from those who did not.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING METHODS: Ovary, liver and plasma samples were
collected from electively terminated, normally progressing, second trimester
human fetuses. Circulating fetal hormones, levels of 73 fetal ovarian
transcripts, protein localization, density of oocytes/primordial follicles and
levels of 16 polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in the fetal liver were
determined.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Circulating fetal estrogen levels were very 
high and were increased by maternal smoking (ANOVA, P = 0.055-0.004 versus
control). Smoke exposure also dysregulated (two-way ANOVA, smoking versus
gestation weeks interaction, P = 0.046-0.023) four fetal ovarian genes
(cytochrome P450 scc [CYP11A1], NOBOX oogenesis homeobox [NOBOX], activator of
apoptosis harakiri [HRK], nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group E, member 1
[NR2E1]), shifted the ovarian Inhibin ßA/inhibin a ratio (NHBA/INHA) transcript
ratio in favour of activin (ANOVA, P = 0.049 versus control) and reduced the
proportion of dominant-negative estrogen receptor 2 (ERß: ESR2) isoforms in half 
the exposed fetuses. PAHs, ligands for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), were 
increased nearly 6-fold by maternal smoking (ANOVA, P = 0.011 versus control). A 
fifth transcript, COUP transcription factor 1 (nuclear receptor subfamily 2,
group F, member 1: NR2F1, which contains multiple AHR-binding sites), was both
significantly increased (ANOVA, P = 0.026 versus control) and dysregulated by
(two-way ANOVA, smoking versus gestation weeks interaction, P = 0.021) maternal
smoking. NR2F1 is associated with repression of FSHR expression and smoke-exposed
ovaries failed to show the normal increase in FSHR expression during the second
trimester. There was a significantly higher number of DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box 
polypeptide 4 (DDX4) VASA-positive (ANOVA, P = 0.016 versus control), but not POU
domain, class 1, transcription factor 1 (POU5F1) OCT3/4-positive, oocytes in
smoke-exposed fetuses and this matched with a significantly higher number of
primordial follicles (ANOVA, P = 0.024 versus control).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The effects of maternal smoking on
establishment of the maximum fetal primordial follicle pool cannot be reliably
studied in our population since the process is not completed until 28 weeks of
gestation and normal fetuses older than 21 weeks of gestation are not available
for study. Our data suggest that some fetal ovaries are affected by smoke
exposure while others are not, indicating that additional studies, with larger
numbers, may show more significant effects.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Fetal exposure to chemicals in cigarette
smoke is known to lead to reduced fecundity in women. Our study suggests, for the
first time, that this occurs via mechanisms involving activation of AHR,
disruption of inhibin/activin and estrogen signalling, increased exposure to
estrogen and dysregulation of multiple molecular pathways in the exposed human
fetal ovary. Our data also suggest that alterations in the ESR2 positive and
dominant negative isoforms may be associated with reduced sensitivity of some
fetuses to increased estrogens and maternal smoking.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): The study was supported by grants from the
Chief Scientist Office (Scottish Executive, CZG/1/109, and CZG/4/742), NHS
Grampian Endowments (08/02), the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 212885, a Society for Reproduction &
Fertility summer studentship, Medical Research Scotland (research grant 354 FRG) 
and the Medical Research Council (WBS: U.1276.00.002.00001 and G1100357). The
authors declare they have no competing interests, be it financial, personal or
professional.

PMID: 24847019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Aug;99(8):E1539-46. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4472. Epub
2014 May 13.

Plasma estrogen levels, estrogen receptor gene variation, and ischemic arterial
disease in postmenopausal women: the three-city prospective cohort study.

Scarabin-Carré V(1), Brailly-Tabard S, Ancelin ML, Maubaret C, Guiochon-Mantel A,
Canonico M, Scarabin PY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health (V.S.-C., M.C.,
P.-Y.S.), Unité 1018, Department of Hormones and Cardiovascular Disease, 94807
Villejuif, France; Unité Mixte de Recherche en Santé 1018 (V.S.-C., M.C.,
P.-Y.S.), Université Paris-Sud, 94276 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France; Service de
Génétique Moléculaire, Pharmacogénétique, et Hormonologie (S.B.-T., A.G.-M.),
Hôpital de Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 94275 Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France; INSERM Unité Mixte de Recherche en Santé 693 (S.B.-T.,
A.G.-M.), Université Paris-Sud, 94276 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France; INSERM Unité
1061 (M.-L.A.), University Montpellier, 34493 Montpellier, France; INSERM (C.M.),
Institut de Santé Publique, d'Épidémiologie et de Développement, Center Unité
897, Department of Epidemiology-Biostatistic, 33076 Bordeaux, France; and
Université Bordeaux (C.M.), 33076 Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: In older postmenopausal women, high levels of endogenous estrogen
have been related to adverse health outcomes including ischemic arterial disease 
(IAD). Whether estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) and -ß (ESR2) polymorphisms modulate
the effects of estrogens on IAD has not been investigated.
METHODS: In the Three-City prospective cohort study among subjects older than 65 
years, we used a case-cohort design in which plasma levels of total and
bioavailable 17ß-estradiol were measured. After exclusion of postmenopausal women
using hormone therapy, a random subcohort of 533 women and 105 incident cases of 
first IAD events over 4 years of follow-up were analyzed. Five common
polymorphisms of ESR1 and ESR2 were genotyped. Hazard ratios (HRs) of IAD for a
1-SD increase in hormones levels by the genotypes were estimated from Cox models 
after adjustment for cardiovascular risk factors and a correction for multiple
testing. We also investigated the role of hemostasis and inflammation as
potential mediators.
RESULTS: Neither estrogens nor IAD risk was significantly associated with
estrogen receptor polymorphisms. Overall, IAD risk increased with total estradiol
[HR1.40, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.11-1.77]. Stratified analysis by
genotypes showed that total estradiol was positively related to IAD risk in women
with ESR1 rs9340799-AA genotype but not in women with the AG/GG genotype (HR
1.62, 95% CI 1.22-2.17 and HR 1.03, 95% CI 0.81-1.30, respectively; P for
interaction <.05). An additional adjustment for hemostatic variables reduced the 
HR by about one third in women carrying the rs9340799-AA genotype (HR 1.41, 95%
CI 1.06-1.90).
CONCLUSION: The ESR1 rs9340799 genotype may modify the IAD risk related to high
endogenous estrogens levels in older postmenopausal women. Hypercoagulability may
act as a mediator.

PMID: 24823458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Jul;140(1):190-203. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu074. Epub 2014 Apr
20.

Investigation of the effects of subchronic low dose oral exposure to bisphenol A 
(BPA) and ethinyl estradiol (EE) on estrogen receptor expression in the juvenile 
and adult female rat hypothalamus.

Rebuli ME(1), Cao J(1), Sluzas E(2), Delclos KB(3), Camacho L(3), Lewis SM(3),
Vanlandingham MM(3), Patisaul HB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27695 Keck Center for Behavioral Biology, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695. (2)Department of Biology, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695. (3)National Center for 
Toxicological Research, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079. (4)Department of Biology,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695 Keck Center for
Behavioral Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina
27695 Heather_Patisaul@ncsu.edu.

Concerns have been raised regarding the long-term impacts of early life exposure 
to the ubiquitous environmental contaminant bisphenol A (BPA) on brain
organization. Because BPA has been reported to affect estrogen signaling, and
steroid hormones play a critical role in brain sexual differentiation, there is
also concern that BPA exposure could alter neural sex differences. Here, we
examine the impact of subchronic exposure from gestation to adulthood to oral
doses of BPA below the current no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) of 5
mg/kg body weight (bw)/day on estrogen receptor (ESR) expression in sexually
dimorphic brain regions of prepubertal and adult female rats. The dams were
gavaged daily with vehicle (0.3% carboxymethylcellulose), 2.5, 25, 260, or 2700
µg BPA/kg bw/day, or 0.5 or 5.0 µg ethinyl estradiol (EE)/kg bw/day from
gestational day 6 until labor began. Offspring were then gavaged directly from
the day after birth until the day before scheduled sacrifice on postnatal days 21
or 90. Using in situ hybridization, one or more BPA doses produced significant
decreases in Esr1 expression in the juvenile female rat anteroventral
periventricular nucleus (AVPV) of the hypothalamus and significant decreases in
Esr2 expression in the adult female rat AVPV and medial preoptic area (MPOA),
relative to vehicle controls. BPA did not simply reproduce EE effects, indicating
that BPA is not acting solely as an estrogen mimic. The possible consequences of 
long-term changes in hypothalamic ESR expression resulting from subchronic low
dose BPA exposure on neuroendocrine effects are discussed and being addressed in 
ongoing, related work.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Toxicological Sciences 2014.
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain
in the US.

PMCID: PMC4133590
PMID: 24752507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Exp Bot. 2014 Jul;65(12):3097-110. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru153. Epub 2014 Apr 17.

Arabidopsis floral phytomer development: auxin response relative to biphasic
modes of organ initiation.

Chandler JW(1), Werr W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, Cologne Biocenter, University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany. john.chandler@uni-koeln.de. (2)Institute of Developmental
Biology, Cologne Biocenter, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

In the Arabidopsis inflorescence meristem (IM), auxin is considered a
prepatterning signal for floral primordia, whereas a centripetal mode of
positional information for floral organ identity is inherent to the ABCE model.
However, spatio-temporal patterns of organ initiation in each whorl at the
earliest initiation stages are largely unknown. Evidence suggests that initial
flower development occurs along an abaxial/adaxial axis and conforms to phytomer 
theory. Use of the founder cell marker DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE (DRNL) as a tool in
leafy, puchi, and apetala 1 cauliflower mutant backgrounds suggests that bract
founder cells are marked at the IM periphery. The DRNL transcription domain in
the wild-type IM is spatially discrete from DR5 expression, suggesting that bract
initiation is independent of canonical auxin response. When bracts develop in lfy
and puchi mutant floral primordia the initiation of lateral sepals precedes the
specification of medial sepals compared with wild type, showing an interplay
between bract and abaxial sepal founder cell recruitment. In the perianthia (pan)
mutant background, DRNL expression indicates that a radial outer whorl
arrangement derives from splitting of sepal founder cell populations at abaxial
and adaxial positions. This splitting of incipient sepal primordia is partially
dependent on PRESSED FLOWER (PRS) activity and implies that sepal specification
is independent of WUSCHEL and CLAVATA3 expression, as both marker genes only
regain activity in stage-2 flowers, when patterning of inner floral organs
switches to a centripetal mode. The transition from an initially abaxial/adaxial 
into a centripetal patterning programme, and its timing represent an adaptive
trait that possibly contributes to variation in floral morphology, especially
unidirectional organ initiation.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4071828
PMID: 24744428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Endocrinology. 2014 Jul;155(7):2613-23. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1101. Epub 2014 Apr 
15.

ESR1 and ESR2 differentially regulate daily and circadian activity rhythms in
female mice.

Royston SE(1), Yasui N, Kondilis AG, Lord SV, Katzenellenbogen JA, Mahoney MM.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program (S.E.R., M.M.M.), Medical Scholars Program (S.E.R.), and 
Departments of Chemistry (N.Y., J.A.K.) and Comparative Biosciences (A.G.K.,
S.V.L., M.M.M.), University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61802.

Estrogenic signaling shapes and modifies daily and circadian rhythms, the
disruption of which has been implicated in psychiatric, neurologic,
cardiovascular, and metabolic disease, among others. However, the activational
mechanisms contributing to these effects remain poorly characterized. To
determine the activational impact of estrogen on daily behavior patterns and
differentiate between the contributions of the estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2, 
ovariectomized adult female mice were administered estradiol, the ESR1 agonist
propylpyrazole triol, the ESR2 agonist diarylpropionitrile, or cholesterol
(control). Animals were singly housed with running wheels in a 12-hour light,
12-hour dark cycle or total darkness. Estradiol increased total activity and
amplitude, consolidated activity to the dark phase, delayed the time of peak
activity (acrophase of wheel running), advanced the time of activity onset, and
shortened the free running period (t), but did not alter the duration of activity
(a). Importantly, activation of ESR1 or ESR2 differentially impacted daily and
circadian rhythms. ESR1 stimulation increased total wheel running and amplitude
and reduced the proportion of activity in the light vs the dark. Conversely, ESR2
activation modified the distribution of activity across the day, delayed
acrophase of wheel running, and advanced the time of activity onset.
Interestingly, t was shortened by estradiol or either estrogen receptor agonist. 
Finally, estradiol-treated animals administered a light pulse in the early
subjective night, but no other time, had an attenuated response compared with
controls. This decreased phase response was mirrored by animals treated with
diarylpropionitrile, but not propylpyrazole triol. To conclude, estradiol has
strong activational effects on the temporal patterning and expression of daily
and circadian behavior, and these effects are due to distinct mechanisms elicited
by ESR1 and ESR2 activation.

PMID: 24735329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Histochem Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;142(4):421-32. doi: 10.1007/s00418-014-1216-z. Epub
2014 Apr 2.

Expression pattern of estrogen receptors a and ß and G-protein-coupled estrogen
receptor 1 in the human testis.

Fietz D(1), Ratzenböck C, Hartmann K, Raabe O, Kliesch S, Weidner W, Klug J,
Bergmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of
Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

Estrogen signaling is considered to play an important role in spermatogenesis,
spermiogenesis and male fertility. Estrogens can act via the two nuclear estrogen
receptors ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß) or via the intracellular G-protein-coupled
estrogen receptor 1 (GPER, formerly GPR30). Several reports on the localization
and expression of all three receptors in the human testis have been published but
are controversial particularly in case of ERa. Contrary to previous studies, we
decided therefore to evaluate expression of all three receptors in the testis by 
a number of different methods and in comparison with MCF-7 cells. Using qPCR, we 
could show that mRNA expression of ERa is considerably lower and expression of
ERß and GPER much higher in the testis than in MCF-7 cells. RT-PCR after
laser-assisted microdissection of tubular and interstitial compartments from
normal and Sertoli cell only syndrome testes plus in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemical analyses of the same samples demonstrated that there is very 
low expression of ERa in germ cells and in single interstitial cells, very high
expression of ERß in germ cells and Sertoli cells and high expression of GPER in 
interstitial cells and less in Sertoli cells.

PMID: 24692005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Urol. 2014 May;191(5 Suppl):1564-72. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.10.071. Epub 2014
Mar 26.

Distinctive changes in histone H3K4 modification mediated via Kdm5a expression in
spermatogonial stem cells of cryptorchid testes.

Nishio H(1), Hayashi Y(2), Moritoki Y(1), Kamisawa H(1), Mizuno K(1), Kojima
Y(1), Kohri K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephro-Urology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Nagoya and Department of Urology, Fukushima Medical University 
School of Medicine (YK), Fukushima, Japan. (2)Department of Nephro-Urology,
Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya and Department
of Urology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine (YK), Fukushima,
Japan. Electronic address: yutaro@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.

PURPOSE: Gonocytes differentiate into spermatogonial stem cells, which make it
possible to maintain spermatogenesis continuously throughout life. We previously 
reported attenuated spermatogonial stem cell activity in cryptorchid testes,
which resulted in altered spermatogenesis and affected fertility. However, few
groups have examined the differentiation process from gonocytes to spermatogonial
stem cells. To clarify the underlying mechanisms comprehensively we performed
microarray analysis to assess differential expression of transcripts between
normal and undescended testes in juvenile rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using microarray analysis we compared whole mRNA
expression of normal and cryptorchid testes in a rat model. We subsequently
validated differential expression of candidate genes by real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and performed immunohistochemistry. We
also investigated the methylation status of histone H3K4 in cryptorchid testes
and the GC-1 spermatogonial cell line.
RESULTS: We detected 24 up-regulated and 39 down-regulated genes. Of these genes 
Kdm5a expression was significantly higher in undescended testes.
Immunohistochemistry showed that Kdm5a was localized in the nuclei of gonocytes, 
spermatogonia and spermatocytes. H3K4me2/me3 expression levels were decreased in 
undescended testes at 9 days postpartum. Furthermore, Kdm5a over expression in
GC-1 cells led to increased expression of Esr2, Neurog3, Pou5f1, Ret and Thy1.
CONCLUSIONS: Recent investigations revealed that not only genetic but also
epigenetic regulation has a role in spermatogenesis. Kdm5a is likely involved in 
the transformation of gonocytes into spermatogonial stem cells by transcriptional
regulation of specific genes via H3K4 histone modification. To our knowledge this
is the first report of epigenetic analysis of germ cell differentiation during
early spermatogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24679876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Andrology. 2014 Jul;2(4):510-20. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2014.00194.x. Epub 2014
Mar 28.

Ductuli efferentes of the male Golden Syrian hamster reproductive tract.

Ford J Jr(1), Carnes K, Hess RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL,
USA.

Efferent ductules are responsible for the transportation of spermatozoa from the 
testis to the epididymis and their epithelium is responsible for the reabsorption
of over 90% of the luminal fluid. The purpose of this research was to
characterize the gross morphology and histology of efferent ductules in the male 
Golden Syrian hamster. The efferent ductules emerge from rete testis with a
unique polarity at the apex or cephalic pole of the testis. The number of
efferent ductules varied from 3 to 10 with an average of 6.0 and blind ending
ducts were observed in approximately 56% of the males. The ductules merged into a
single common duct prior to entering the caput epididymidis. The proximal
efferent ductule lumen was wider than the distal (conus and common ducts),
consistent with reabsorption of most of the luminal fluid, as was morphology of
the ductal epithelium. Non-ciliated cells in the proximal region had prominent
endocytic apparatuses, showing both coated pits and apical tubules in the apical 
cytoplasm. Large basolateral, intercellular spaces were also present in the
epithelium of the proximal region. Distal non-ciliated cells had an abundance of 
large endosomes and lysosomal granules. Localisation of sodium/hydrogen
exchanger-3 (NHE3; SLC9A3) and aquaporins 1 and 9 (AQP1, AQP9) along the
microvillus border was also consistent with ion transport and fluid reabsorption 
by this epithelium. In comparison, the caput epididymidis epithelium expressed
only AQP9 immunostaining. Another unusual feature of the hamster efferent
ductules was the presence of glycogen aggregates in the basal cytoplasm of small 
groups of epithelial cells, but only in the proximal ducts near the rete testis. 
Androgen (AR), estrogen (ESR1 and ESR2) and vitamin D receptors (VDR) were also
abundant in epithelial nuclei of proximal and distal efferent ductules. In
comparison, caput epididymidis showed very little immunostaining for ESR1.

© 2014 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMCID: PMC4069219
PMID: 24677666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2014 May;31(5):601-11. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0212-5.
Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Association of polymorphisms in estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2) with male
infertility: a meta-analysis and systematic review.

Ge YZ(1), Xu LW, Jia RP, Xu Z, Li WC, Wu R, Liao S, Gao F, Tan SJ, Song Q, Xin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 68 
Changle Road, Nanjing, 210006, China.

PURPOSE: Estrogens play an important role in male reproduction via interacting
with estrogen receptors (ERs), whose expression can be regulated by the
polymorphisms in different regions of ESR1 and ESR2 genes. However, results from 
published studies on the association between four well-characterized
polymorphisms (PvuII, XbaI, RsaI, and AluI) in the gene of ERs (ESR1 and ESR2)
and male infertility risk are inconclusive.
METHODS: To investigate the strength of relationship of PvuII and XbaI in ESR1
and RsaI and AluI in ESR2 with male infertility, we conducted a meta-analysis of 
12 eligible studies with odds ratio (OR) and its corresponding 95 % confidence
intervals (95 % CI).
RESULTS: Overall, ESR1 PvuII and ESR2 RsaI polymorphisms were significantly
associated with male infertility risk. The subgroup analyses by ethnicities
demonstrated that in Asians, ESR1 PvuII, XbaI and ESR2 RsaI polymorphisms were
significantly associated with a decreased infertility risk, while in Caucasians
both ESR1 PvuII and ESR2 RsaI polymorphisms increased the susceptibility to male 
infertility. As for ESR2 AluI polymorphism, no significant association was
detected in either overall analysis or subgroup analyses by
ethnicities/genotyping methods.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggested that polymorphisms in the genes of ERs 
(ESR1 and ESR2) may have differential roles in the predisposition to male
infertility according to the different ethnic backgrounds. Further well-designed 
and unbiased studies with larger sample size and diverse ethnic backgrounds
should be conducted to verify our findings.

PMCID: PMC4016379
PMID: 24647635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell J. 2014 Fall;16(3):299-308. Epub 2014 Oct 4.

The Comparison of The Effects of Silybin and Silybin-Phosphatidylcholine on
Viability and ESR Expression in Human Breast Cancer T47D Cell Line.

Mahmoodi N(1), Motamed N(1), Paylakhi SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Kish International Campus,
University of Tehran, Kish, Iran ; School of Biology, University College of
Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran. (2)School of Biology, Damghan
University, Damghan, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Silybin is a polyphenol with anti-oxidant and anti-cancer properties. 
The poor bioavailability of some polyphenols can be improved by binding to
phosphatidylcholine. In recent years, studies have been conducted to evaluate the
anti-cancer effect of silybin. We studied the effect of silybin and
silybin-phosphatidylcholine on ESR1 and ESR2 gene expression and viability in the
T47D breast cancer cell line.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, a
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-Yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide test (MTT test) was 
used to determine doses for cell treatment, and the gene expression was analyzed 
by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (real-time RT- PCR).
RESULTS: Significant dose- and time-dependent cell growth inhibitory effects of
silybin and silybin-phosphatidylcholine along with ESR1 down-regulation were
observed in T47D cells. In contrast to ESR1, the T47D cell line showed negligible
ESR2 expression.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that silybin and silybin-phosphatidylcholine
down-regulate ESR1 in ER(+)breast cancers. Results also show that in the T47D
cell line, silybindown-regulation of ESR1 compared with silybin.

PMCID: PMC4204191
PMID: 24611152  [PubMed]


137. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2014 May 1;200:35-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.02.016. Epub
2014 Mar 4.

Stallion spermatozoa: putative target of estrogens; presence of the estrogen
receptors ESR1, ESR2 and identification of the estrogen-membrane receptor GPER.

Arkoun B(1), Gautier C(1), Delalande C(1), Barrier-Battut I(2), Guénon I(1), Goux
D(3), Bouraïma-Lelong H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Normandie Univ, F-14032 Caen, France; UNICAEN, EA2608, OeReCa, F-14032 Caen,
France; USC-INRA 2006, F-14032 Caen, France. (2)Jumenterie du Pin, Institut
Français du Cheval et de l'Equitation, 61310 Exmes, France. (3)Normandie Univ,
F-14032 Caen, France; UNICAEN, CMABIO, F-14032 Caen, France. (4)Normandie Univ,
F-14032 Caen, France; UNICAEN, EA2608, OeReCa, F-14032 Caen, France; USC-INRA
2006, F-14032 Caen, France. Electronic address: helene.bouraima@unicaen.fr.

Among mammals, the stallion produces the largest amount of testicular estrogens. 
These steroid hormones are produced mainly by Leydig and Sertoli cells in the
testis and also in the epididymis. Their role in horse testicular physiology and 
their ability to act on spermatozoa are still unknown. In order to determine if
spermatozoa are targets for estrogens, the presence of estrogen receptors in
mature ejaculated spermatozoa has been investigated. The presence of a single
isoform of ESR1 (66kDa) and ESR2 (61kDa) was found by Western-blot analysis in
samples from seven stallions. Confocal analysis mainly showed a flagellar
localization for both receptors. Immuno-TEM experiments revealed that they are
mostly located near the membranes, which are classically associated with rapid,
non-genomic, effects. Moreover, we evidenced the expression of the seven
transmembrane estradiol binding receptor GPER in colt testis. The protein was
also localized at the connecting piece in mature spermatozoa. In conclusion, our 
results suggest that horse spermatozoa are a target for estrogens, which could
act on several receptors either during the epididymal transit and/or in the
female genital tract.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24607572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jul;41(7):4463-74. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3317-0. Epub 2014
Mar 5.

Genetic polymorphisms in VDR, ESR1 and ESR2 genes may contribute to
susceptibility to Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis.

Gao Z(1), Fu HJ, Xue JJ, Wu ZX, Zhao LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Elderly Neurology, Heilongjiang Hospital, Zhongshan Road No. 82,
Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150000, People's Republic of China.

Retraction in
    Gao Z, Fu HJ, Xue JJ, Wu ZX, Zhao LB. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1457.

We conducted this meta-analysis of relevant case-control studies to investigate
the relationships between genetic polymorphisms in VDR, ESR1 and ESR2 genes to
the susceptibility of Parkinson's disease (PD). A search on electronic databases 
without any language restrictions was conducted: MEDLINE (1966-2013), the
Cochrane Library Database (Issue 12, 2013), EMBASE (1980-2013), CINAHL
(1982-2013), Web of Science (1945-2013) and the Chinese Biomedical Database
(1982-2013). Meta-analysis was performed using the STATA statistical software.
Crude odds ratio (OR) with their 95% confidence interval (95% CI) was calculated.
Fourteen case-control studies with a total of 3,689 PD patients and 4,627 healthy
subjects were included in our meta-analysis. The results of our meta-analysis
demonstrated that the VDR genetic polymorphisms might be closely related to
increased risks of PD (allele model: OR = 1.18, 95% CI 1.09-1.29, P < 0.001;
dominant model: OR = 1.37, 95% CI 1.16-1.63, P < 0.001; respectively), especially
for the polymorphisms rs7976091 and rs10735810. Our findings also illustrated
that ESR1 genetic polymorphisms might increase the risk of PD (allele model: OR =
1.56, 95% CI 1.17-2.07, P = 0.002; recessive model: OR = 1.93, 95 % CI 1.33-2.80,
P < 0.001; homozygous model: OR = 1.35, 95% CI 1.02-1.79, P = 0.038; heterozygous
model: OR = 2.04, 95% CI 1.36-3.07, P = 0.001; respectively), especially for the 
polymorphisms rs2234693 and rs9340799. Furthermore, we found significant
correlations of ESR2 genetic polymorphisms with the risk of PD (allele model: OR 
= 1.78, 95% CI 1.19-2.67, P = 0.005; recessive model: OR = 1.93, 95% CI
1.15-3.27, P = 0.014; homozygous model: OR = 1.77, 95% CI 1.09-2.89, P = 0.022;
heterozygous model: OR = 1.88, 95% CI 1.08-3.27, P = 0.025; respectively),
especially for the rs1256049 polymorphism. Our meta-analysis suggests that
genetic polymorphisms in VDR, ESR1 and ESR2 genes may contribute to increased
risks for PD.

PMID: 24595449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Biol Reprod. 2014 May 8;90(5):98. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.113209. Print 2014 
May.

Epigenetics of human myometrium: DNA methylation of genes encoding
contraction-associated proteins in term and preterm labor.

Mitsuya K(1), Singh N, Sooranna SR, Johnson MR, Myatt L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pregnancy and Newborn Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, San Antonio,
Texas.

Preterm birth involves the interaction of societal and environmental factors
potentially modulating the length of gestation via the epigenome. An established 
form of epigenetic regulation is DNA methylation where promoter hypermethylation 
is associated with gene repression. We hypothesized we would find differences in 
DNA methylation in the myometrium of women with preterm labor of different
phenotypes versus normal term labor. Myometrial tissue was obtained at cesarean
section at term with or without labor, preterm without labor, idiopathic preterm 
labor, and twin gestations with labor. Genomic DNA was isolated, and samples in
each group were combined and analyzed on a NimbleGen 2.1M human DNA methylation
array. Differences in methylation from -8 to +3 kb of transcription start sites
of 22 contraction-associated genes were determined. Cytosine methylation was not 
present in CpG islands of any gene but was present outside of CpG islands in
shores and shelves in 19 genes. No differential methylation was found across the 
tissue groups for six genes (PTGES3L, PTGER2, PTGER4, PTGFRN, ESR2, and GJA1).
For 13 genes, differential methylation occurred in several patterns between
tissue groups. We find a correlation between hypomethylation and increased mRNA
expression of PTGES/mPGES-1, indicating potential functional relevance of
methylation, but no such correlation for PTGS2/COX-2, suggesting other regulatory
mechanisms for PTGS2 at labor. The majority of differential DNA methylation of
myometrial contraction-associated genes with different labor phenotypes occurs
outside of CpG islands in gene promoters, suggesting that the entirety of DNA
methylation across the genome should be considered.

PMID: 24571989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Oct 16;7 Suppl 3:S6. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-S3-S6.

Identification of novel microRNA regulatory pathways associated with
heterogeneous prostate cancer.

Tang Y, Yan W, Chen J, Luo C, Kaipia A, Shen B.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are potential regulators that contribute to the
pathogenesis of cancer. Microarray technologies have been widely used to
characterize aberrant miRNA expression patterns in cancer. Nevertheless, the
miRNAs expression signatures identified for a same cancer differs among
laboratories due to the cancer heterogeneity. In addition, how the deregulated
miRNAs coordinately contribute to the tumourigenic process of prostate cancer
remains elusive.
RESULTS: We evaluated five outlier detection algorithms that take into account
the heterogeneity of cancer samples. ORT was selected as the best method and
applied to four prostate cancer associated microRNA expression datasets. After
microRNA target prediction and pathway enrichment mapping, 38 Gene Ontology
terms, 16 KEGG pathways and 99 GeneGO pathways are found putative prostate cancer
associated. Comparison with our previous studies, we identified two putative
novel pathways important in prostate cancer. The two novel pathways are 1)
ligand-independent activation of ESR1 and ESR2 and 2) membrane-bound ESR1:
interaction with growth factors signalling.
CONCLUSIONS: We proved that expression signatures of at the pathway level well
address the cancer heterogeneity and are more consistent than at the miRNA/gene
levels. Based on this observation, we identified putative novel microRNA
regulatory pathways which will help us to elucidate the cooperative function of
different microRNAs in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3852103
PMID: 24555436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Endocrinol. 2014 Apr 22;221(2):201-13. doi: 10.1530/JOE-13-0475. Print 2014
May.

Bisphenol A enhances kisspeptin neurons in anteroventral periventricular nucleus 
of female mice.

Wang X(1), Chang F, Bai Y, Chen F, Zhang J, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine Department of Physiology,
Nanjing Medical University, Hanzhong Road 140, Nanjing 210029, China MOE-Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Children's Environmental Health, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China.

Bisphenol-A (BPA), an environmental estrogen, adversely affects female
reproductive health. However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown.
We found that oral administration (p.o.) of BPA (20 <U+200A>µg/kg) to adult female mice 
at proestrus, but not at estrus or diestrus, significantly increased the levels
of plasma E2, LH and FSH, and Gnrh mRNA within 6 <U+200A>h. The administration of BPA at
proestrus, but not at diestrus, could elevate the levels of Kiss1 mRNA and
kisspeptin protein in anteroventral periventricular nucleus (AVPV) within 6 <U+200A>h.
In contrast, the level of Kiss1 mRNA in arcuate nucleus (ARC) was hardly altered 
by BPA administration. In addition, at proestrus, a single injection (i.c.v.) of 
BPA dose-dependently enhanced the AVPV-kisspeptin expression within 6 <U+200A>h, this
was sensitive to E2 depletion by ovariectomy and an estrogen receptor a (ERa)
antagonist. Similarly, the injection of BPA (i.c.v.) at proestrus could elevate
the levels of plasma E2, LH, and Gnrh mRNA within 6 <U+200A>h in a dose-dependent
manner, which was blocked by antagonists of GPR54 or ERa. Injection of BPA
(i.c.v.) at proestrus failed to alter the timing and peak concentration of
LH-surge generation. In ovariectomized mice, the application of E2 induced a
dose-dependent increase in the AVPV-Kiss1 mRNA level, indicating 'E2-induced
positive feedback', which was enhanced by BPA injection (i.c.v.). The levels of
Era (Esr1) and Erß (Esr2) mRNAs in AVPV and ARC did not differ significantly
between vehicle-and BPA-treated groups. This study provides in vivo evidence that
exposure of adult female mice to a low dose of BPA disrupts the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal reproductive endocrine system through enhancing
AVPV-kisspeptin expression and release.

PMID: 24532816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Reprod Sci. 2014 Feb 10;21(8):1006-1014. [Epub ahead of print]

Apolipoprotein E Induction in Syrian Hamster Testis Following Tributyltin
Exposure: A Potential Mechanism of Male Infertility.

Kanimozhi V(1), Palanivel K(1), Kadalmani B(2), Krikun G(3), Taylor HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, School of life Sciences, Bharathidasan
University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India. (2)Department of Animal Science, 
School of life Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu,
India kadalmanibdu@rediffmail.com. (3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology &
Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA.

Tributyltin (TBT) is a common environmental contaminant used as the active
ingredient in many products such as a biocides, wood preservatives, disinfecting 
agents, and antifouling paints. The TBT is a known endocrine disruptor. The aim
of the current investigation was to determine the toxicity of TBT in the
reproductive tract of adult male Syrian hamsters and to ascertain whether this
compound results in untoward effects on apolipoprotein E (ApoE), a lipoprotein
central to sex hormone synthesis. The TBT was administered orally to male Syrian 
hamsters at doses of 50, 100, and 150 ppm/kg for 65 days of treatment. We
determined body weight, testis weight, sperm count, sperm morphology, testis
histology, ApoE expression, serum lipid profile, testosterone level,
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR), and steroid hormone receptor
expression compared to vehicle-treated controls. High doses of TBT significantly 
affected each of these parameters in Syrian hamsters. Weight and morphology of
the testis were altered as well as sperm production. Real-time
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed that expression
of ApoE messenger RNA was upregulated in testes from TBT-treated groups compared 
with controls while the expression of androgen receptor, FSHR, estrogen receptor 
a (ESR1), and estrogen receptor ß (ESR2) was decreased. We posit that exposure to
TBT hinders intracellular cholesterol transport resulting in abnormal sex steroid
biosynthesis and subsequent spermatogenic defects. Importantly, these effects may
account for the decreased level of normal sperm observed in hamsters exposed to
TBT.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 24516040  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


143. Reproduction. 2014 Apr 8;147(5):703-17. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0648. Print 2014 May.

Expression of genes involved in the embryo-maternal interaction in the
early-pregnant canine uterus.

Kautz E(1), Gram A, Aslan S, Ay SS, Selçuk M, Kanca H, Koldas E, Akal E, Karakas 
K, Findik M, Boos A, Kowalewski MP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Although there is no acute luteolytic mechanism in the absence of pregnancy in
the bitch, a precise and well-timed embryo-maternal interaction seems to be
required for the initiation and maintenance of gestation. As only limited
information is available about these processes in dogs, in this study, the
uterine expression of possible decidualization markers was investigated during
the pre-implantation stage (days 10-12) of pregnancy and in the corresponding
nonpregnant controls. In addition, the expression of selected genes associated
with blastocyst development and/or implantation was investigated in embryos
flushed from the uteri of bitches used for this study (unhatched and hatched
blastocysts). There was an upregulated expression of prolactin receptor (PRLR)
and IGF2 observed pre-implantation. The expression of PRL and of IGF1 was
unaffected, and neither was the expression of progesterone- or estrogen receptor 
ß (ESR2). In contrast, (ESR1) levels were elevated during early pregnancy.
Prostaglandin (PG)-system revealed upregulated expression of PGE2-synthase and
its receptors, PTGER2 and PTGER4, and of the PG-transporter. Elevated levels of
AKR1C3 mRNA, but not the protein itself, were noted. Expression of
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2) remained unaffected. Most of the
transcripts were predominantly localized to the uterine epithelial cells,
myometrium and, to a lesser extent, to the uterine stroma. PGES (PTGES) mRNA was 
abundantly expressed in both groups of embryos and appeared higher in the hatched
ones. The expression level of IGF2 mRNA appeared higher than that of IGF1 mRNA in
hatched embryos. In unhatched embryos IGF1, IGF2, and PTGS2 mRNA levels were
below the detection limit.

PMID: 24481956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Apr;33(4):897-904. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1637. Epub 2014 Jan
28.

DNA methylation patterns of steroid receptor genes ESR1, ESR2 and PGR in deep
endometriosis compromising the rectum.

Meyer JL(1), Zimbardi D(1), Podgaec S(2), Amorim RL(3), Abrão MS(2), Rainho
CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biosciences, São Paulo State University
(UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
São Paulo University (USP), São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of Clinical
Veterinary Medicine, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo,
Brazil.

Endometriosis is characterized by the presence of endometrial-like tissue located
outside the uterine cavity. Recent evidence suggests that endometriosis may be an
epigenetic disease, as well as an estrogen-dependent disease. Based on the unique
steroid hormone receptor expression profile observed in endometriotic lesions as 
compared to eutopic endometrium, the present study aimed to gain further insight 
into the DNA methylation patterns of alternative promoters of the steroid
receptor genes ESR1, ESR2 and PGR in intestinal deep endometriosis, one of the
most aggressive forms of endometriosis. The DNA methylation patterns were
evaluated by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MS-PCR) after
bisulfite modification in 44 endometriotic tissues as well as in 7 matched
eutopic endometrium. No differences in the DNA methylation were observed for the 
ESR1 and ESR2 genes. Methylation of the PGR gene was observed in 39% (17 out of
44) and 19% (7 out of 37) of the cases in the promoter regions B (PGRB) and A
(PGRA), respectively. Both PGR promoter regions were methylated in 3 cases. PGRB 
methylated alleles were detected exclusively in the endometriotic lesions when
compared to the eutopic endometrium obtained from the same patient. The effect of
DNA methylation in inhibiting the PGR gene expression was corroborated by
immuno-staining for PgR protein in a subset of tissue samples. The present study 
demonstrated that epigenetic changes occur in both promoter regions of the PGR
gene in intestinal endometriosis. Since eutopic and ectopic tissues do not
respond sufficiently to progesterone in women with endometriosis, further study
is necessary to evaluate the effect of epigenetic alterations in
progesterone-resistance in this enigmatic disease.

PMID: 24481237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2014 Jan 16;5:1. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00001.
eCollection 2014.

Role of estrogen receptors and g protein-coupled estrogen receptor in regulation 
of hypothalamus-pituitary-testis axis and spermatogenesis.

Chimento A(1), Sirianni R(1), Casaburi I(1), Pezzi V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Biology, Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutrition
Sciences, University of Calabria , Cosenza , Italy.

Male reproductive function is under the control of both gonadotropins and
androgens through a negative feedback loop that involves the hypothalamus,
pituitary, and testis known as hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG). Indeed,
estrogens also play an important role in regulating HPG axis but the study on
relative contribution to the inhibition of gonadotropins secretion exerted by the
amount of estrogens produced within the hypothalamus and/or the pituitary or by
the amount of circulating estrogens is still ongoing. Moreover, it is known that 
the maintenance of spermatogenesis is controlled by gonadotropins and
testosterone, the effects of which are modulated by a complex network of locally 
produced factors, including estrogens. Physiological effects of estrogens are
mediated by the classical nuclear estrogen receptor alpha and estrogen receptor
beta, which mediate both genomic and rapid signaling events. In addition,
estrogens induce rapid non-genomic responses through a membrane-associated G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER). Ours and other studies reported that,
in the testis, GPER is expressed in both normal germ cells and somatic cells and 
it is involved in mediating the estrogen action in spermatogenesis controlling
proliferative and/or apoptotic events. Interestingly, GPER expression has been
revealed also in the hypothalamus and pituitary. However, its role in mediating
estrogen rapid actions in this context is under investigation. Recent studies
indicate that GPER is involved in modulating gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) release as well as gonadotropins secretion. In this review, we will
summarize the current knowledge concerning the role of estrogen/estrogen
receptors molecular pathways in regulating GnRH, follicle-stimulating hormone,
and luteinizing hormone release at the hypothalamic and pituitary levels in males
as well as in controlling specific testicular functions such as spermatogenesis, 
focusing our attention mainly on estrogen signaling mediated by GPER.

PMCID: PMC3893621
PMID: 24474947  [PubMed]


146. Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):2054-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-517292. Epub 2014 
Jan 27.

Inhibition of lymphoma vascularization and dissemination by estrogen receptor ß
agonists.

Yakimchuk K(1), Hasni MS, Guan J, Chao MP, Sander B, Okret S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum,
Huddinge, Sweden;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):1980-1.

Most lymphomas show an increased incidence and poorer prognosis in males vs
females, suggesting endocrine regulation. We have previously shown that tumor
growth in vivo of a murine T-cell-derived lymphoma is repressed following
activation of estrogen receptor ß (ERß, ESR2). By using ERß-deficient mice, we
now demonstrate that this inhibition is mediated via a direct effect on the tumor
cells and not on the microenvironment. Furthermore, we show that the
growth-suppressing effects of ERß agonist are also valid for human B-cell
lymphomas as demonstrated in tumors derived from Granta-519 mantle cell lymphoma 
(MCL) and Raji Burkitt lymphoma (BL) cells. In Granta-519 MCL tumors, activation 
of ERß reduced expression of BAFF and GRB7, 2 important molecules involved in
B-cell proliferation and survival. Importantly, activation of ERß inhibited
angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis, possibly mediated by impaired vascular
endothelial growth factor C expression. Furthermore, using disseminating Raji BL 
cells, we show that ERß activation reduces dissemination of grafted Raji BL
tumors. We also show by immunohistochemistry that ERß is expressed in primary MCL
tissue. These results suggest that targeting ERß with agonists may be valuable in
the treatment of some lymphomas, affecting several aspects of the malignant
process, including proliferation, vascularization, and dissemination.

PMID: 24470591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4779-84. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1627-4. Epub 2014
Jan 28.

ChIP-seq predicted estrogen receptor biding sites in human breast cancer cell
line MCF7.

Li Q(1), Wang H, Yu L, Zhou J, Chen J, Zhang X, Chen L, Gao Y, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, 200120, China.

The aim of this study was to find estrogen receptor (ER) binding sites of
estradiol (E2)-treated and control groups and discuss the roles of ER activation 
in the tumorigenesis and progression of various human cancers. The ER ChIP-seq
data GSE19013 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database, including
E2-treated data GSM470419 and control data GSM470418. MACS software was utilized 
to identify ER binding sites in two groups. R's ChIPpeakAnno was used to detect
ER-regulated target genes. Motif finding was employed to analyze ER concordant
transcription factors (TFs) in MCF7 cell. The Gene Ontology (GO) was used to
conduct functional enrichment analysis. We identified 9,134 ER binding sites in
E2 stimulation group and 1,969 in control group. GO enrichment analysis of target
genes showed that ER-regulated target genes mainly participated in mRNA catabolic
process, protein complex disassembly, and protein localization to
organelle-related biology process; while in E2 stimulation group, the function of
ER-regulated target genes sharply changed. The effect of E2 in MCF7 cell
suggested that activated ER probably reacted with several TFs and then
co-regulated related genes expression. Furthermore, several TFs, such as PAX6,
SMAD3, and ESR2, had multiply cellular regulation function. Our results showed
that E2 stimulates breast cancer cell growth through ER. This may infer the
function of ER in occurrence and development of breast cancer. Together, our
study would pave ways for discussing ER concordant TFs and studying other
ER-recruited TFs.

PMID: 24470138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4517-27. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1594-1. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

Genetic polymorphisms of ESR1, ESR2, CYP17A1, and CYP19A1 and the risk of breast 
cancer: a case control study from North India.

Chattopadhyay S(1), Siddiqui S, Akhtar MS, Najm MZ, Deo SV, Shukla NK, Husain SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, 110025, India.

Estrogen is a key driver of breast cancer and genes involved in its signaling and
biosynthesis are crucial in breast cancer progression. In this study, we
investigated the role of estrogen signaling and synthesis related genes
polymorphism in susceptibility to breast cancer risk in North India population in
a case-control approach. We examined the association of single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in estrogen receptors, ESR1 (rs2234693) and ESR2 (rs2987983); 
estrogen biosynthesis enzymes, CYP17A1 (rs743572); and aromatase, CYP19A1
(rs700519) with breast cancer risk. Cases (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>360) were matched to controls
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>360) by age, sex, ethnicity, and geographical location. Results provided
evidence that all the genetic variants were significantly associated with breast 
cancer risk among North Indian women. Furthermore, on performing stratified
analysis between breast cancer risk and different clinicopathological
characteristics, we observed strong associations for menopausal status, estrogen 
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), human epidermal growth factor receptor
2 (HER2) status, clinical stage, and histological grade. Our results suggest that
these genes could be used as molecular markers to assess breast cancer
susceptibility and predicting prognosis in North India population.

PMID: 24430361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Acta Histochem. 2014 May;116(4):559-69. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2013.11.004. Epub
2013 Dec 19.

Immunolocalization of estrogen and androgen receptors in the caput epididymidis
of the fat sand rat (Psammomys obesus): Effects of seasonal variations,
castration and efferent duct ligation.

Menad R(1), Smaï S(2), Moudilou E(3), Khammar F(4), Exbrayat JM(5),
Gernigon-Spychalowicz T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Small Vertebrates' Reproduction, Laboratory of Research on Arid Areas, Faculty
of Biological Sciences, Houari Boumediene University of Sciences and Technology, 
El Alia, Algiers, Algeria. Electronic address: menadrafik@gmail.com. (2)Small
Vertebrates' Reproduction, Laboratory of Research on Arid Areas, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, Houari Boumediene University of Sciences and Technology, El 
Alia, Algiers, Algeria. (3)University of Lyon, UMRS 449, Laboratory of General
Biology, Catholic University of Lyon, Reproduction and Comparative
Development/EPHE, Lyon Cedex 02, France. (4)Mammal Ecophysiology, Laboratory of
Research on Arid Areas, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Houari Boumediene
University of Sciences and Technology, El Alia, Algiers, Algeria. (5)University
of Lyon, UMRS 449, Laboratory of General Biology, Catholic University of Lyon,
Reproduction and Comparative Development/EPHE, Lyon Cedex 02, France. Electronic 
address: jmexbrayat@univ-catholyon.fr.

The fat sand rat (Psammomys obesus) is a model to study seasonal reproductive
cycle changes and several metabolic disorders. In order to show a possible
involvement of estrogens in the male reproductive functions, the expression of
estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2) and androgen receptor (AR) were investigated
in the caput epididymidis of fat sand rats during the breeding season, resting
season, after castration, after castration followed by testosterone treatment,
and after ligation of efferent ducts. In the breeding season, principal cells
presented a strong immunostaining of AR in both nuclei and cytoplasm, a strong
staining of ESR1, mainly in the apical zone, and a strong immunoexpression of
ESR2, mainly in nuclei. In the resting season, a moderate immunostaining of AR in
both cytoplasm and nuclei was observed. ESR1 staining showed a strong
immunoreactivity in the nuclei. In contrast, the nuclei were negative for ESR2.
After castration, a low and selective signal distribution was observed: the
nuclei were moderately positive for AR and ESR2, and negative for ESR1. After
castration and testosterone treatment, an androgen-dependence for AR and the
restoration of ESR1 but not ESR2 immunoexpression were observed. After ligation
of the efferent ducts, a considerable reduction of AR immunoreactivity was
observed in contrast to ESR1 and ESR2, which gave a strong immunostaining signal.
These results illustrate the complexity of the regulation of the androgen and
estrogen receptor expression in the epididymis and argue for the coexistence of
both androgenic and estrogenic pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24360974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Reproduction. 2014 Mar 4;147(4):537-54. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0501. Print 2014.

Sex-specific Esr2 mRNA expression in the rat hypothalamus and amygdala is altered
by neonatal bisphenol A exposure.

Cao J(1), Joyner L, Mickens JA, Leyrer SM, Patisaul HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology.

Perinatal life is a critical window for sexually dimorphic brain organization,
and profoundly influenced by steroid hormones. Exposure to endocrine-disrupting
compounds may disrupt this process, resulting in compromised reproductive
physiology and behavior. To test the hypothesis that neonatal bisphenol A (BPA)
exposure can alter sex-specific postnatal Esr2 (Erß) expression in brain regions 
fundamental to sociosexual behavior, we mapped Esr2 mRNA levels in the principal 
nucleus of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNSTp), paraventricular
nucleus (PVN), anterior portion of the medial amygdaloid nucleus (MeA), super
optic nucleus, suprachiasmatic nucleus, and lateral habenula across postnatal
days (PNDs) 0-19. Next, rat pups of both sexes were subcutaneously injected with 
10<U+200A>µg estradiol benzoate (EB), 50<U+200A>µg/kg BPA (LBPA), or 50<U+200A>mg/kg BPA (HBPA) over
the first 3 days of life and Esr2 levels were quantified in each region of
interest (ROI) on PNDs 4 and 10. EB exposure decreased Esr2 signal in most female
ROIs and in the male PVN. In the BNSTp, Esr2 expression decreased in LBPA males
and HBPA females on PND 10, thereby reversing the sex difference in expression.
In the PVN, Esr2 mRNA levels were elevated in LBPA females, also resulting in a
reversal of sexually dimorphic expression. In the MeA, BPA decreased Esr2
expression on PND 4. Collectively, these data demonstrate that region- and
sex-specific Esr2 expression is vulnerable to neonatal BPA exposure in regions of
the developing brain critical to sociosexual behavior in rat.

PMCID: PMC3947720
PMID: 24352099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Br J Dermatol. 2014 Apr;170(4):982-5. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12756.

The oestrogen receptor 2 (ESR2) gene in female-pattern hair loss: replication of 
association with rs10137185 in German patients.

Redler S(1), Birch P, Drichel D, Hofmann P, Dobson K, Böhmer AC, Becker J, Giehl 
KA, Tazi-Ahnini R, Kruse R, Wolff H, Miesel A, Fischer T, Böhm M, Nuwayhid R,
Garcia Bartels N, Lutz G, Becker T, Blume-Peytavi U, Nöthen MM, Messenger AG,
Betz RC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Street 25,
D-53127, Bonn, Germany.

PMID: 24344880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Biol Reprod. 2014 Feb 6;90(2):24. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.113316. Print 2014 
Feb.

The naturally occurring luteinizing hormone surge is diminished in mice lacking
estrogen receptor Beta in the ovary.

Jayes FL(1), Burns KA, Rodriguez KF, Kissling GE, Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.

Female ESR2-null mice (betaERKO) display defects in ovarian function and are
subfertile. Follicular maturation is impaired and explains smaller litters, but
betaERKO also produce fewer litters, which may be partially due to inadequate
ovulatory signals. To test this, the amplitude and timing of the naturally
occurring luteinizing hormone (LH) surge was measured in individual intact
betaERKO and wild-type (WT) mice. Vaginal cytology was evaluated daily, and blood
samples were taken from mice in proestrus. The amplitude of the LH surge was
severely blunted in betaERKO mice compared to WT, but pituitary LH levels
revealed no differences. The betaERKO mice did not produce a preovulatory
estradiol surge. To determine if the smaller LH surges and the reduced number of 
litters in betaERKO were due to the lack of ESR2 in the hypothalamic-pituitary
axis or due to the absence of ESR2 in the ovary, ovaries were transplanted from
WT into betaERKO mice and vice versa. The size of the LH surge was reduced only
in mice lacking ESR2 within the ovary, and these mice had fewer litters.
Fertility and size of the LH surge were rescued in betaERKO mice receiving a WT
ovary. These data provide the first experimental evidence that the LH surge is
impaired in betaERKO females and may contribute to their reduced fertility. ESR2 
is not necessary within the pituitary and hypothalamus for the generation of a
normal LH surge and for normal fertility, but ESR2 is essential within the ovary 
to provide proper signals.

PMCID: PMC4076404
PMID: 24337314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;40(1):83-93. doi: 10.3233/JAD-130551.

Estrogen receptor ß variants modify risk for Alzheimer's disease in a multiethnic
female cohort.

Janicki SC(1), Park N(2), Cheng R(2), Lee JH(3), Schupf N(4), Clark LN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA Department of Neurology, College of Physicians &
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. (2)Taub Institute for Research 
on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of 
Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. (3)Taub Institute 
for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA Gertrude H. Sergievsky
Center, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 
Center for Human Genetics, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University,
New York, NY, USA Departments of Epidemiology and Psychiatry, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. (4)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's 
Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of
Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA Departments of
Epidemiology and Psychiatry, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY,
USA. (5)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA Center
for Human Genetics, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New
York, NY, USA Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians &
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Few studies of gene variants that affect estrogen activity
investigate their association with age at onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in
women of different ethnicities. We investigated the influence of ESR2
polymorphisms on age at onset of AD in a multiethnic cohort of women.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether gene variants would affect risk for AD
differently in women of different population ancestries.
METHODS: Among 1,686 women participating in the Washington Heights Inwood
Columbia Aging Project (WHICAP), association with risk for AD was assessed for 20
ESR2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using multivariate logistic
regression, adjusting for age at time of study enrollment, presence of an APOE e4
allele, years of education, and body mass index.
RESULTS: Increased risk for AD was associated with four ESR2 SNPs in women of
predominantly Caucasian AIMS-defined ancestry: rs944045, rs1256062, rs10144225,
and rs2274705 (OR range 1.6-1.9, empiric p-value range 0.002-0.004). A separate
SNP (rs10137185) was associated with decreased risk for AD in women who
identified themselves as Black (OR 0.6, 95% CI = 0.4-0.9). When vascular risk
factors were included in the model, a separate SNP (rs1256059) was associated
with increased risk for AD in women of admixed/Hispanic ancestry (OR 1.5, 95% CI 
= 1.1-2.4).
CONCLUSIONS: ESR2 polymorphisms affect risk for AD in women, and risk alleles
vary by AIMs-defined ancestry and self-identified ethnicity. These effects are
possibly due to different linkage disequilibrium patterns or differences in
comorbid risk factors mediating SNP effect on risk for AD by group.

PMID: 24326520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2013 Nov 28;4(4):193-206. eCollection 2013.

Fine mapping of variants associated with endometriosis in the WNT4 region on
chromosome 1p36.

Luong HT(1), Painter JN, Shakhbazov K, Chapman B, Henders AK, Powell JE, Nyholt
DR, Montgomery GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Computational Biology, QIMR Berghofer Medical
Research Institute Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Genome-wide association studies show strong evidence of association with
endometriosis for markers on chromosome 1p36 spanning the potential candidate
genes WNT4, CDC42 and LINC00339. WNT4 is involved in development of the uterus,
and the expression of CDC42 and LINC00339 are altered in women with
endometriosis. We conducted fine mapping to examine the role of coding variants
in WNT4 and CDC42 and determine the key SNPs with strongest evidence of
association in this region. We identified rare coding variants in WNT4 and CDC42 
present only in endometriosis cases. The frequencies were low and cannot account 
for the common signal associated with increased risk of endometriosis. Genotypes 
for five common SNPs in the region of chromosome 1p36 show stronger association
signals when compared with rs7521902 reported in published genome scans. Of
these, three SNPs rs12404660, rs3820282, and rs55938609 were located in DNA
sequences with potential functional roles including overlap with transcription
factor binding sites for FOXA1, FOXA2, ESR1, and ESR2. Functional studies will be
required to identify the gene or genes implicated in endometriosis risk.

PMCID: PMC3852639
PMID: 24319535  [PubMed]


155. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Mar;35(3):645-54. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.026. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Brain volumes in late life: gender, hormone treatment, and estrogen receptor
variants.

Ryan J(1), Artero S, Carrière I, Scali J, Maller JJ, Meslin C, Ritchie K,
Scarabin PY, Ancelin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1061, Montpellier F-34093, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier,
France; Cancer & Disease Epigenetics Group, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: joanne.ryan@inserm.fr.

Structural imaging studies suggest gender differences in brain volumes; however, 
whether hormone treatment (HT) can protect against age-related structural changes
remains unknown, and no prior neuroimaging study has investigated potential
interactions between HT and estrogen receptor (ESR) polymorphisms. Magnetic
resonance imaging was used to measure gray and white matter, hippocampal volume, 
corpus callosum, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), total intracranial volume (ICV) and
white matter lesions (WML) in 582 non-demented older adults. In multivariable
analysis, when compared to women who had never used HT, men and women currently
on treatment, but not past users, had significantly smaller ratios of gray matter
to ICV and increased atrophy (CSF/ICV ratio). Hippocampal and white matter volume
as well as the corpus callosum area were not significantly different across
groups. ESR2 variants were not significantly associated with brain measures, but 
women with the ESR1 rs2234693 C allele had significantly smaller WML. Furthermore
this association was modified by HT use. Our results do not support a beneficial 
effect of HT on brain volumes in older women, but suggest the potential
involvement of ESR1 in WML.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Reproduction. 2014 Mar 2;147(4):419-26. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0423. Print 2014.

Bisphenol A modulates the metabolic regulator oestrogen-related receptor-a in
T-cells.

Cipelli R(1), Harries L, Okuda K, Yoshihara S, Melzer D, Galloway T.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4
4PS, UK.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is a widely used plastics constituent that has been associated 
with endocrine, immune and metabolic effects. Evidence for how BPA exerts
significant biological effects at chronic low levels of exposure has remained
elusive. In adult men, exposure to BPA has been associated with higher expression
of two nuclear receptors, oestrogen receptor-ß (ERß) and
oestrogen-related-receptor-a (ERRa), in peripheral white blood cells in vivo. In 
this study, we explore the expression of ESR2 (ERß) and ESRRA (ERRa) in human
leukaemic T-cell lymphoblasts (Jurkat cells) exposed to BPA in vitro. We show
that exposure to BPA led to enhanced expression of ESRRA within 6<U+200A>h of exposure
(mean±s.e.m.: 1.43±0.08-fold increase compared with the control, P<0.05). After
72<U+200A>h, expression of ESRRA remained significantly enhanced at concentrations of
BPA =1<U+200A>nM. Oxidative metabolism of BPA by rat liver S9 fractions yields the
potent oestrogenic metabolite, 4-methyl-2,4-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)pent-1-ene (MBP).
Exposure of cells to 1-100<U+200A>nM MBP increased the expression of both ESRRA
(significantly induced, P<0.05, at 1, 10, 100<U+200A>nM) and ESR2 (1.32±0.07-fold
increase at 100<U+200A>nM exposure, P<0.01). ERRa is a major control point for oxidative
metabolism in many cell types, including T-cells. Following exposure to both BPA 
and MBP, we found that cells showed a decrease in cell proliferation rate. Taken 
together, these results confirm the bioactivity of BPA against putative T-cell
targets in vitro at concentrations relevant to general human exposure.

PMID: 24231368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Int J Oncol. 2013 Dec;43(6):2039-45. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2112. Epub 2013 Sep
25.

Regulation of estrogen receptor ß1 expression in breast cancer by epigenetic
modification of the 5' regulatory region.

Al-Nakhle H(1), Smith L, Bell SM, Burns PA, Cummings M, Hanby AM, Lane S, Parker 
MD, Hughes TA, Speirs V.

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Institute of Cancer and Pathology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF,
UK.

ERß1 is often down-regulated in breast cancer compared to normal breast but
mechanisms surrounding this are unclear. We examined whether loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) or methylation at ERß promoters (0N, 0K) and/or untranslated
exon 0N were involved in ERß down-regulation in breast cancer tissues and cell
lines and if treatment with the de-methylating agent 5-aza-deoxycytidine and/or
the histone deacetylase inhibitor Trichostatin A could influence expression in
vitro. We found no evidence of correlation between LOH at 14q22-24 (genomic locus
containing ERß/ESR2), and ERß1 expression in primary breast cancers. A negative
correlation between ERß1 mRNA expression and methylation status was observed for 
promoter 0N in BT-20, MDA-MB-453 and T47D cells. Promoter 0K was consistently
unmethylated. In primary breast tumours, methylation of the untranslated exon 0N,
downstream of promoter 0N, but not of promoter 0N itself, correlated with
down-regulation of ERß. In MDA-MB-453 cells, treatment with 5-aza-deoxycytidine
was sufficient to induce ERß1 expression from the 0N promoter while in BT-20 both
agents were required. Examination of various sites on ESR2 highlighted epigenetic
but not genetic regulation of ERß1. In particular methylation adjacent to
promoter 0N was a key regulatory event for ERß1 silencing. A combination of
de-methylating agents and histone deacetylase inhibitors fully restored ERß1
expression which may offer a novel therapeutic angle for breast cancer
management.

PMID: 24068253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Oncogenesis. 2013 Sep 23;2:e72. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.32.

Estrogen receptor ß activation impairs mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and
affects malignant mesothelioma cell growth in vitro and in vivo.

Manente AG(1), Valenti D, Pinton G, Jithesh PV, Daga A, Rossi L, Gray SG, O'Byrne
KJ, Fennell DA, Vacca RA, Nilsson S, Mutti L, Moro L.

Author information: 
(1)Department Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Piemonte Orientale 'A.
Avogadro', Novara, Italy.

Estrogen receptor (ER)-ß has been shown to possess a tumor suppressive effect,
and is a potential target for cancer therapy. Using gene-expression meta-analysis
of human malignant pleural mesothelioma, we identified an ESR2 (ERß coding gene) 
signature. High ESR2 expression was strongly associated with low succinate
dehydrogenase B (SDHB) (which encodes a mitochondrial respiratory chain complex
II subunit) expression. We demonstrate that SDHB loss induced ESR2 expression,
and that activated ERß, by over-expression or by selective agonist stimulation,
negatively affected oxidative phosphorylation compromising mitochondrial complex 
II and IV activity. This resulted in reduced mitochondrial ATP production,
increased glycolysis dependence and impaired cell proliferation. The observed in 
vitro effects were phenocopied in vivo using a selective ERß agonist in a
mesothelioma mouse model. On the whole, our data highlight an unforeseen
interaction between ERß-mediated tumor suppression and energy metabolism that may
be exploited to improve on the therapy for clinical management of malignant
mesothelioma.

PMCID: PMC3816222
PMID: 24061575  [PubMed]


159. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jan 25;382(1):84-96. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.09.015.
Epub 2013 Sep 18.

Differential role of the estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 on the regulation of
proteins involved with proliferation and differentiation of Sertoli cells from
15-day-old rats.

Lucas TF(1), Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Três de maio 100,
INFAR, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, SP 04044-020, Brazil.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of each estrogen
receptors on the regulation of proteins involved with proliferation and
differentiation of Sertoli cells from 15-day-old rats. Activation of ESR1 by
17ß-estradiol (E2) and ESR1-selective agonist PPT increased CCND1 expression, and
this effect was dependent on NF-kB activation. E2 and the ESR2-selective agonist 
DPN, but not PPT, increased, in a PI3K and CREB-dependent manner, the expression 
of CDKN1B and the transcription factors GATA-1 and DMRT1. Analyzing the
expression of ESR1 and ESR2 in different stages of development of Sertoli cells, 
we observed that the ESR1/ESR2 ratio decreased with age, and this ratio seems to 
be important to determine the end of cell proliferation and the start of cell
differentiation. In Sertoli cells from 15-day-old rats, the ESR1/ESR2 ratio
favors the effect of ESR1 and the activation of this receptor increased
[Methyl-(3)H]thymidine incorporation. We propose that in Sertoli cells from
15-day-old rats E2 modulates Sertoli cell proliferation through
ESR1/NF-kB-mediated increase of CCND1, and cell cycle exit and differentiation
through ESR2/CREB-mediated increase of CDKN1B, GATA-1 and DMRT1. The present
study reinforces the important role of estrogen for normal testis development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24056172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Gene. 2014 Jan 10;533(2):515-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.001. Epub 2013 Sep
18.

Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament related genes identification 
using microarray gene expression profiling and bioinformatics analysis.

He H(1), Mao L, Xu P, Xi Y, Xu N, Xue M, Yu J, Ye X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Changzheng Hospital, The Second Military Medical
University, No. 415, Fengyang Road, Huangpu District, Shanghai 200003, China.
Electronic address: hailonghe@hotmail.com.

Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) is a kind of disease
with physical barriers and neurological disorders. The objective of this study
was to explore the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in OPLL patient ligament
cells and identify the target sites for the prevention and treatment of OPLL in
clinic. Gene expression data GSE5464 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus;
then DEGs were screened by limma package in R language, and changed functions and
pathways of OPLL cells compared to normal cells were identified by DAVID (The
Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery); finally, an
interaction network of DEGs was constructed by string. A total of 1536 DEGs were 
screened, with 31 down-regulated and 1505 up-regulated genes. Response to
wounding function and Toll-like receptor signaling pathway may involve in the
development of OPLL. Genes, such as PDGFB, PRDX2 may involve in OPLL through
response to wounding function. Toll-like receptor signaling pathway enriched
genes such as TLR1, TLR5, and TLR7 may involve in spine cord injury in OPLL.
PIK3R1 was the hub gene in the network of DEGs with the highest degree; INSR was 
one of the most closely related genes of it. OPLL related genes screened by
microarray gene expression profiling and bioinformatics analysis may be helpful
for elucidating the mechanism of OPLL.

© 2013.

PMID: 24055420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. BMJ Open. 2013 Sep 18;3(9):e003200. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003200.

Oestrogen receptor polymorphisms are an associated risk factor for mild cognitive
impairment and Alzheimer disease in women APOE {varepsilon}4 carriers: a
case-control study.

Fernández-Martínez M(1), Elcoroaristizabal Martín X, Blanco Martín E, Galdos
Alcelay L, Ugarriza Serrano I, Gómez Busto F, Alvarez-Álvarez M, Molano Salazar
A, Bereincua Gandarias R, Inglés Borda S, Uterga Valiente JM, Indakoetxea
Juanbeltz B, Gómez Beldarraín MÁ, Moraza López J, Barandiarán Amillano M, M de
Pancorbo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario Cruces, BioCruces Health
Research Institute, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: Examine the role of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
oestrogen receptor (ER) genes: rs9340799, rs2234693, rs2228480 (in the ESR1 gene)
and rs4986938 (in the ESR2 gene) as a risk factor for amnesic mild cognitive
impairment (MCIa) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) and its possible association with 
the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene.
DESIGN: We have investigated the independent and combined association of
different alleles of the oestrogen receptor genes and APOE*e4 allele with
cognitive impairment using a case-control design.
SETTING: Participants were prospectively recruited from the neurology departments
of several Basque Country hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS: This study comprised 816 Caucasian participants who were aged 50
years and older: 204 MCIa, 350 sporadic patients with AD and 262 healthy
controls.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical criteria and neuropsychological 
tests were used to establish the diagnostic groups (MCIa, AD and healthy
controls). A dichotomous variable was used for each allele and genotype and the
association with MCIa and AD was established using Logistic Regression Models.
RESULTS: Neither alleles nor genotypes of SNPs rs9340799, rs2234693, rs2228480
and rs4986938 of oestrogen receptor genes (ESR1 and ESR2) are independently
associated with the risk of MCIa or AD. However, the genetic profile created with
the combination of the less represented alleles of these SNPs (expressed as XPAA)
was associated with an increased risk for MCIa (OR=3.30, 95% CI 1.28 to 8.54,
p=0.014) and AD (OR=5.16, 95% CI 2.19 to 12.14, p<0.001) in women APOE*e4 allele 
carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: The less represented alleles of SNPs studied are associated with
MCIa and AD in APOE*E4 carriers. In particular, the genetic profile created with 
the less represented alleles of ESR1 and ESR2 SNPs are associated with an
increased risk for MCIa and AD in women APOEe4 allele carriers.

PMCID: PMC3780298
PMID: 24052609  [PubMed]


162. Physiol Genomics. 2013 Nov 15;45(22):1072-83. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00096.2013. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Feeding soy protein isolate and treatment with estradiol have different effects
on mammary gland morphology and gene expression in weanling male and female rats.

Miousse IR(1), Sharma N, Blackburn M, Vantrease J, Gomez-Acevedo H, Hennings L,
Shankar K, Cleves MA, Badger TM, Ronis MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, Little Rock Arkansas;

Isoflavones are phytochemical components of soy diets that bind weakly to
estrogen receptors (ERs). To study potential estrogen-like actions of soy in the 
mammary gland during early development, we fed weanling male and female
Sprague-Dawley rats a semipurified diet with casein as the sole protein source
from postnatal day 21 to 33, the same diet substituting soy protein isolate (SPI)
for casein, or the casein diet supplemented with estradiol (E2) at 10 µg/kg/day. 
In contrast to E2, the SPI diet induced no significant change in mammary
morphology. In males, there were 34 genes for which expression was changed
=2-fold in the SPI group vs. 509 changed significantly by E2, and 8 vs. 174 genes
in females. Nearly half of SPI-responsive genes in males were also E2 responsive,
including adipogenic genes. Serum insulin was found to be decreased by the SPI
diet in males. SPI and E2 both downregulated the expression of ERa (Esr1) in
males and females, and ERß (Esr2) only in males. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
revealed an increased binding of ERa to the promoter of the progesterone receptor
(Pgr) and Esr1 in both SPI- and E2-treated males compared with the casein group
but differential recruitment of ERß. ER promoter binding did not correlate with
differences in Pgr mRNA expression. This suggests that SPI fails to recruit
appropriate co-activators at E2-inducible genes. Our results indicate that SPI
behaves like a selective estrogen receptor modulator rather than a weak estrogen 
in the developing mammary gland.

PMID: 24046281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Anim Sci. 2013 Nov;91(11):5229-39. doi: 10.2527/jas.2013-6450. Epub 2013 Sep
17.

Effect of nutrition on plasma lipid profile and mRNA levels of ovarian genes
involved in steroid hormone synthesis in Hu sheep during luteal phase.

Ying SJ(1), Xiao SH, Wang CL, Zhong BS, Zhang GM, Wang ZY, He DY, Ding XL, Xing
HJ, Wang F.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Engineering Technology Research Center of Meat Sheep and Goat
Industry, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, Jiangsu Province,
China.

Ovarian steroid hormones regulate follicular growth and atresia. This study aims 
to determine whether key ovarian sterol-regulatory genes are differentially
expressed in Hu sheep under different short-term nutritional regimens. Estrus was
synchronized using intravaginal progestagen sponges. The ewes were assigned
randomly to 3 groups. On d 6 to 12 of their estrous cycle, the control (CON)
group received a maintenance diet (1.0×M), the supplemented (SUP) group received 
1.5×M, and the restricted (R) group received 0.5×M. On d 7 to 12, blood samples
were taken. The sheep were slaughtered at the end of the treatment, and their
organs and ovaries were collected. The plasma concentrations of urea (P<0.01),
total cholesterol (P<0.01), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (P<0.01), NEFA
(P<0.01), FSH (P<0.05), and estradiol (P<0.05) increased with decreasing dietary 
intake, whereas plasma triglyceride (P<0.01) and triiodothyronine (T3)
concentrations decreased (P<0.05). The ewes in the R group had higher spleen
weight and percentage of spleen to BW and lower liver and small intestine weights
and percentage of liver/stomach to BW than the SUP group ewes (P<0.05).
Nutritional restriction decreased the cytochrome p450 (CYP17A1) and estrogen
receptor 1 (ESR1) mRNA expression (P<0.05) and increased the cytochrome p450
aromatase (CYP19A1) mRNA expression (P<0.05) in follicles>2.5 mm. Follicle size
affected the mRNA expression of very low density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR),
estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2), FSH receptor (FSHR), CYP17A1, and CYP19A1 (P<0.05).
In conclusion, we suggest that a potential mechanism by which short-term negative
energy balance inhibits follicular growth may involve responses to disrupted
reproductive hormone concentrations and influenced the intrafollicular expression
of CYP17A1, CYP19A1, and ESR1. This result may be due to increased plasma urea
and lipid concentrations.

PMID: 24045481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Jun;19(6):724-32. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.91. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Evidence for the role of EPHX2 gene variants in anorexia nervosa.

Scott-Van Zeeland AA(1), Bloss CS(1), Tewhey R(2), Bansal V(1), Torkamani A(3),
Libiger O(4), Duvvuri V(5), Wineinger N(1), Galvez L(6), Darst BF(1), Smith
EN(5), Carson A(1), Pham P(1), Phillips T(1), Villarasa N(1), Tisch R(1), Zhang
G(1), Levy S(3), Murray S(3), Chen W(7), Srinivasan S(7), Berenson G(7), Brandt
H(8), Crawford S(8), Crow S(9), Fichter MM(10), Halmi KA(11), Johnson C(12),
Kaplan AS(13), La Via M(14), Mitchell JE(15), Strober M(16), Rotondo A(17),
Treasure J(18), Woodside DB(19), Bulik CM(20), Keel P(21), Klump KL(22),
Lilenfeld L(23), Plotnicov K(24), Topol EJ(3), Shih PB(5), Magistretti P(25),
Bergen AW(26), Berrettini W(27), Kaye W(5), Schork NJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] The Scripps Translational Science Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA [2] Scripps 
Health, La Jolla, CA, USA. (2)1] Scripps Health, La Jolla, CA, USA [2] Department
of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
CA, USA. (3)1] The Scripps Translational Science Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA [2]
Scripps Health, La Jolla, CA, USA [3] Department of Molecular and Experimental
Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)1] The Scripps
Translational Science Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA [2] Department of Molecular
and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA. (6)The Scripps Translational Science Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA. (9)Department of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA. (10)Roseneck Hospital for Behavioral Medicine, Prien,
Germany. (11)Eating Disorder Research Program Weill Cornell Medical College,
White Plains, NY, USA. (12)Eating Recovery Center, Denver, CO, USA. (13)1] Center
for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Department of
Psychiatry, Toronto General Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, ON,
Canada [3] Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
(14)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA. (15)1] Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, Fargo, ND, USA [2]
Department of Clinical Neuroscience, University of North Dakota School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Grand Forks, ND, USA. (16)Department of Psychiatry 
and Biobehavioral Sciences, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (17)Department of Psychiatry,
Neurobiology, Pharmacology, and Biotechnology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(18)Department of Academic Psychiatry, Bermondsey Wing Guys Hospital, University 
of London, London, UK. (19)1] Department of Psychiatry, Toronto General Hospital,
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Department of Psychiatry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada [3] Department of Psychology, Florida 
State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA. (20)1] Department of Psychiatry,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA [2] Department 
of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 
(21)Department of Psychology, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA.
(22)Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(23)Clinical Psychology Program, American School of Professional Psychology at
Argosy University, Washington, DC, USA. (24)Department of Psychiatry, University 
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (25)Laboratory of Neuroenergetics and
Cellular Dynamics, The University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (26)Center 
for Health Sciences, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA, USA. (27)Department of
Psychiatry, The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) and related eating disorders are complex, multifactorial
neuropsychiatric conditions with likely rare and common genetic and environmental
determinants. To identify genetic variants associated with AN, we pursued a
series of sequencing and genotyping studies focusing on the coding regions and
upstream sequence of 152 candidate genes in a total of 1205 AN cases and 1948
controls. We identified individual variant associations in the Estrogen
Receptor-ß (ESR2) gene, as well as a set of rare and common variants in the
Epoxide Hydrolase 2 (EPHX2) gene, in an initial sequencing study of 261
early-onset severe AN cases and 73 controls (P=0.0004). The association of EPHX2 
variants was further delineated in: (1) a pooling-based replication study
involving an additional 500 AN patients and 500 controls (replication set
P=0.00000016); (2) single-locus studies in a cohort of 386 previously genotyped
broadly defined AN cases and 295 female population controls from the Bogalusa
Heart Study (BHS) and a cohort of 58 individuals with self-reported eating
disturbances and 851 controls (combined smallest single locus P<0.01). As EPHX2
is known to influence cholesterol metabolism, and AN is often associated with
elevated cholesterol levels, we also investigated the association of EPHX2
variants and longitudinal body mass index (BMI) and cholesterol in BHS female and
male subjects (N=229) and found evidence for a modifying effect of a subset of
variants on the relationship between cholesterol and BMI (P<0.01). These findings
suggest a novel association of gene variants within EPHX2 to susceptibility to AN
and provide a foundation for future study of this important yet poorly understood
condition.

PMCID: PMC3852189
PMID: 23999524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2014 Jan;35(1):8-30. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2013.08.001.
Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Estrogen: a master regulator of bioenergetic systems in the brain and body.

Rettberg JR(1), Yao J(2), Brinton RD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Department, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90033, United States. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
United States. (3)Neuroscience Department, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, United States; Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 
90033, United States; Department of Neurology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, United States.
Electronic address: rbrinton@usc.edu.

Estrogen is a fundamental regulator of the metabolic system of the female brain
and body. Within the brain, estrogen regulates glucose transport, aerobic
glycolysis, and mitochondrial function to generate ATP. In the body, estrogen
protects against adiposity, insulin resistance, and type II diabetes, and
regulates energy intake and expenditure. During menopause, decline in circulating
estrogen is coincident with decline in brain bioenergetics and shift towards a
metabolically compromised phenotype. Compensatory bioenergetic adaptations, or
lack thereof, to estrogen loss could determine risk of late-onset Alzheimer's
disease. Estrogen coordinates brain and body metabolism, such that peripheral
metabolic state can indicate bioenergetic status of the brain. By generating
biomarker profiles that encompass peripheral metabolic changes occurring with
menopause, individual risk profiles for decreased brain bioenergetics and
cognitive decline can be created. Biomarker profiles could identify women at risk
while also serving as indicators of efficacy of hormone therapy or other
preventative interventions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4024050
PMID: 23994581  [PubMed - in process]


166. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2014 Mar;289(3):631-5. doi: 10.1007/s00404-013-3012-8. Epub 
2013 Aug 24.

Polymorphisms in the promoter region of estrogen receptor ß gene in endometrial
cancer.

Lattrich C(1), Häring J, Schüler S, Skrzypczak M, Ortmann O, Treeck O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center Regensburg,
93053, Regensburg, Germany, clattrich@caritasstjosef.de.

INTRODUCTION: The development of endometrial cancer is known to be affected by
estrogens. Thus, genetic variations like single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in genes involved in estrogen biosynthesis, metabolism, and signal transduction
might affect risk for endometrial cancer. In this study, we tested the hypothesis
that polymorphisms in the promoter of ESR2 gene may be associated with
susceptibility to this disease.
METHODS: We compared the frequency of three SNPs in the promoter region of ESR2
gene (rs2987983, rs3020450, and rs3020449) in 135 women with endometrial cancer
and 135 healthy women serving as controls by means of allele-specific
tetra-primer PCR.
RESULTS: Regarding allele frequency, allele positivity or genotype frequencies of
these SNPs we did not observe any significant difference between healthy women
and women with endometrial cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our data clearly suggest that the tested SNPs in the promotor region 
of human ESR2 gene are not associated with the development of endometrial cancer.

PMID: 23974281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Nucl Med. 2013 Oct;54(10):1697-702. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.112.113373. Epub 2013
Aug 22.

Feasibility and predictability of perioperative PET and estrogen receptor ligand 
in patients with invasive breast cancer.

Gemignani ML(1), Patil S, Seshan VE, Sampson M, Humm JL, Lewis JS, Brogi E,
Larson SM, Morrow M, Pandit-Taskar N.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York.

The presence of estrogen receptor (ER) in breast cancer is a prognostic indicator
for both disease-free and overall survival. 16a-(18)F-fluoro-17ß-estradiol
((18)F-FES) with PET is a noninvasive test for evaluation of ER expression and
has been used for predicting response to endocrine therapy in patients with
ER-positive metastatic breast cancer. The purpose of this study was to correlate 
(18)F-FES PET and ER expression in patients with primary, operable breast
cancer.METHODS: Forty-eight patients were prospectively enrolled in an
institutional review board-approved protocol and signed an informed consent form.
All patients had undergone (18)F-FES PET preoperatively. Clinical
characteristics, tumor characteristics, and treatment outcomes were recorded.
Immunohistochemical analysis for ER and progesterone receptor (PgR) percentage
expression (46 surgical, 2 core biopsy specimens) was performed. (18)F-FES PET
standardized uptake value (SUV) of the breast lesion was correlated with
percentage immunohistochemistry ER and PgR expression. (18)F-FES PET SUV was
quantified, with a value of 1.5 or more considered positive, and ER and PgR was
quantified, with 1% or more considered positive. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue was available for 44 patients (42 surgical, 2 core biopsy specimens). We
used a microarray platform, and estrogen-related gene expression data (ESR1,
ESR2, and PGR) were compared with (18)F-FES PET SUV (Spearman rank correlation). 
Tumor size, ductal histology, grade, HER2-neu overexpression, PgR expression,
estradiol level, body mass index (BMI), and lean BMI were compared with (18)F-FES
PET uptake using univariate and multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: Forty-eight patients completed our protocol, and 2 patients did not
undergo surgery because bone metastases were identified preoperatively on
(18)F-FES PET. Eighty-three percent of our patients were stage I or II, with a
median tumor size of 1.9 cm. Forty-one patients underwent a sentinel node biopsy.
Twenty-one patients had nodal involvement. (18)F-FES PET identified 5 patients
with axillary nodal uptake (median SUV, 3.0; range, 1.7-6.9). These 5 patients
had ER-positive breast cancer, and all had more than 4 positive nodes at the time
of axillary node dissection. (18)F-FES PET SUV was associated with
immunohistochemistry ER expression. The sensitivity and specificity of the
(18)F-FES PET for the breast lesion were 0.85 and 0.75, respectively. Estrogen
and progesterone gene expression (ESR1, ESR2, and PGR) was not associated with
(18)F-FES PET SUV (Spearman rank correlation). We found a significant correlation
between (18)F-FES PET SUV and tumor size (P = 0.0015) but not with ductal
histology, grade, HER2-neu overexpression, PgR, estradiol, BMI, or lean BMI
(logistic regression). ER expression (P < 0.001) and tumor size (P < 0.0001) were
significant on multivariate regression analysis.
CONCLUSION: (18)F-FES PET SUV correlated with ER immunohistochemistry expression 
but not gene expression in our patients with early breast cancer. We found that
size of primary tumor was significantly associated with (18)F-FES PET SUV.
(18)F-FES PET is highly predictive for metastatic disease and helped in the
identification of patients with metastatic disease in a preoperative setting.

PMCID: PMC4404505
PMID: 23970364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Gene. 2013 Nov 1;530(1):66-74. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.052. Epub 2013 Aug 14.

DAX1 regulatory networks unveil conserved and potentially new functions.

Martins RS(1), Power DM, Fuentes J, Deloffre LA, Canário AV.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Marine Sciences, CCMAR-CIMAR Associate Laboratory, University of
Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal. Electronic address:
rsmartin@ualg.pt.

DAX1 is an orphan nuclear receptor with actions in mammalian sex determination,
regulation of steroidogenesis, embryonic development and neural differentiation. 
Conserved patterns of DAX1 gene expression from mammals to fish have been taken
to suggest conserved function. In the present study, the European sea bass,
Dicentrarchus labrax, DAX1 promoter was isolated and its conserved features
compared to other fish and mammalian DAX1 promoters in order to derive common
regulators and functional gene networks. Fish and mammalian DAX1 promoters share 
common sets of transcription factor frameworks which were also present in the
promoter region of another 127 genes. Pathway analysis clustered these into
candidate gene networks associated with the fish and mammalian DAX1. The networks
identified are concordant with described functions for DAX1 in embryogenesis,
regulation of transcription, endocrine development and steroid production. Novel 
candidate gene network partners were also identified, which implicate DAX1 in ion
homeostasis and transport, lipid transport and skeletal development. Experimental
evidence is provided supporting roles for DAX1 in steroid signalling and
osmoregulation in fish. These results highlight the usefulness of the in silico
comparative approach to analyse gene regulation for hypothesis generation.
Conserved promoter architecture can be used also to predict potentially new gene 
functions. The approach reported can be applied to genes from model and non-model
species.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23954228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Dec;23(12):1763-8. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.06.003. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Prospective analysis of the association between estrogen receptor gene variants
and the risk of cognitive decline in elderly women.

Ryan J(1), Carrière I, Amieva H, Rouaud O, Berr C, Ritchie K, Scarabin PY,
Ancelin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1061, Neuropsychiatry: Epidemiological and Clinical Research,
Montpellier F-34093, France; Université Montpellier1, Montpellier F-34000,
France; Cancer & Disease Epigenetics, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Flemington Road Parkville, 3052 Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
joanne.ryan@inserm.fr.

A plethora of data suggests a role for estrogen in cognitive function and genetic
variants in the estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 have been implicated in a range 
of hormone-sensitive diseases. It remains unknown however, whether ESR
polymorphisms are associated with the risk of decline in specific domains of
cognitive function. Data came from 3799 non-demented, community-dwelling elderly 
women recruited in France to the 3C Study. A short cognitive test battery was
administered at baseline and 2, 4 and 7 years follow-up to assess global
function, verbal fluency, visual memory, psychomotor speed and executive
function. Detailed socio-demographic, behavioral, physical and mental health
information was also gathered and genotyping of five common ESR1 and ESR2
polymorphisms was also performed. In multivariable-adjusted Cox analysis, ESR1
rs2234693 and rs9340799 were not significantly associated with the risk of
decline on any of the cognitive tasks. However, significant associations with
ESR2 polymorphisms were identified. The A allele of rs1256049 was associated with
an increased risk of substantial decline in visual memory (HR:1.64, 95% CI:
1.23-2.18, p=0.0007), psychomotor speed (HR:1.43, 95% CI: 1.12-1.83, p=0.004),
and on the incidence of Mild Cognitive Impairment (HR:1.31, 95% CI: 1.05-1.64,
p=0.02). There was also a weaker association between the A allele of rs4986938
and a decreased risk of decline in psychomotor speed. Our large multicentre
prospective study provides preliminary evidence that ESR2 genetic variants may be
associated with specific cognitive domains and suggests that further examination 
of the role of this gene in cognitive function is warranted.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23932494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Endocrinology. 2013 Nov;154(11):4158-69. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1446. Epub 2013 Aug
8.

Morpholino-mediated knockdown of ERa, ERßa, and ERßb mRNAs in zebrafish (Danio
rerio) embryos reveals differential regulation of estrogen-inducible genes.

Griffin LB(1), January KE, Ho KW, Cotter KA, Callard GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Mall, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215. gvc@bu.edu.

Genetically distinct estrogen receptor (ER) subtypes (ERa and ERß) play a major
role in mediating estrogen actions in vertebrates, but their unique and
overlapping functions are not entirely clear. Although mammals have 1 gene of
each subtype (ESR1 and ESR2), teleost fish have a single esr1 (ERa) and 2 esr2
(ERßa and ERßb) genes. To determine the in vivo role of different ER isoforms in 
regulating estrogen-inducible transcription targets, zebrafish (Danio rerio)
embryos were microinjected with esr-specific morpholino (MO) oligonucleotides to 
disrupt splicing of the exon III/intron III junction in the DNA-binding domain.
Each MO knocked down its respective normal transcript and increased production of
variants with a retained intron III (esr1 MO) or a deleted or mis-spliced exon
III (esr2a and esr2b MOs). Both esr1 and esr2b MOs blocked estradiol induction of
vitellogenin and ERa mRNAs, predominant hepatic genes, but esr2b was the only MO 
that blocked induction of cytochrome P450 aromatase B mRNA, a predominant brain
gene. Knockdown of ERßa with the esr2a MO had no effect on estrogen induction of 
the 3 mRNAs but, when coinjected with esr1 MO, attenuated the effect of ERa
knockdown. Results indicate that ERa and ERßb, acting separately or cooperatively
on specific gene targets, are positive transcriptional regulators of estrogen
action, but the role of ERßa, if any, is unclear. We conclude that MO technology 
in zebrafish embryos is an advantageous approach for investigating the interplay 
of ER subtypes in a true physiological context.

PMCID: PMC3800766
PMID: 23928376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 19;8(7):e68798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068798. Print 2013.

Indications of clinical and genetic predictors for aromatase inhibitors related
musculoskeletal adverse events in Chinese Han women with breast cancer.

Wang J(1), Lu K, Song Y, Xie L, Zhao S, Wang Y, Sun W, Liu L, Zhao H, Tang D, Ma 
W, Pan B, Xuan Q, Liu H, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, China.

BACKGROUND: Women with breast cancer treated with aromatase inhibitors (AIs) may 
experience musculoskeletal symptoms that lead to discontinuation of effective
therapy. The purpose of the current study is to evaluate the clinical and genetic
predictors for AIs-related musculoskeletal adverse events(MS-AEs).
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We recruited 436 postmenopausal Chinese Han
women receiving adjuvant AIs therapy for early-stage hormone-sensitive breast
cancer. Patients completed a self-administered questionnaire assessing the
presence of musculoskeletal symptoms that started or worsened after initiating
AIs. 27 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of ESR1, ESR2 and PGR were analyzed
by Sequenom MassARRAY assays and /or PCR-based TaqMan assays.Of the 436 enrolled 
women, 206 cases experienced musculoskeletal symptoms.Patients who received
taxane chemotherapy were more than two times more likely than other patients to
have AIs-related MS-AEs. Genetic assay had showed that only two ESR1 SNPs,
rs2234693 and rs9340799 were associated with AIs-related MS-AEs.TT genotype and
the T allele in rs2234693 was statistically significantly lower in AIs-Related
MS-AEs group than controls (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.49E-7). The frequency of AA genotype
and the A allele in rs9340799 was higher (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.20E-5; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.09E-4).
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Our results suggested that prior taxane-based
chemotherapy was the clinical predictor, while rs2234693 and rs9340799 were the
genetic predictors for AIs-related MS-AEs.

PMCID: PMC3716812
PMID: 23894347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Andrology. 2013 Sep;1(5):670-81. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00103.x. Epub 2013
Jul 9.

Experimental varicocoele in rats affects mechanisms that control expression and
function of the androgen receptor.

Soares TS(1), Fernandes SA, Lima ML, Stumpp T, Schoorlemmer GH, Lazari MF, Porto 
CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology, São Paulo, 
Brazil.

Varicocoele is an important cause of male infertility. Normal male reproductive
function and fertility depends on a delicate balance between androgen receptor
(AR) and the classic oestrogen receptors ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß). Using a model
of surgically induced varicocoele in rats, this study aimed to investigate the
effects of varicocoele on the expression of AR, ESR1, ESR2 and G-protein coupled 
oestrogen receptor (GPER). Varicocoele did not affect the mRNA and protein
expression of ESR1 and ESR2 in both testes. Varicocoele did not affect the mRNA
and protein expression of GPER in the right testis, but slightly reduced the mRNA
and increased the protein levels in the left testis. Varicocoele did not affect
the mRNA for AR, but reduced the protein levels in both testes. A proteomic
approach was used in an attempt to find differentially expressed targets with
possible correlation with AR downregulation. Varicocoele caused the differential 
expression of 29 proteins. Six proteins were upregulated, including the receptor 
for activated C kinase 1 (RACK1), and 23 were downregulated, including
dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase, alpha-enolase and pyrophosphatase 1. Western blot
analysis confirmed that varicocoele upregulated the expression of RACK1, a
protein involved with tyrosine phosphorylation and regulation of AR
transcriptional activity, AR metabolism and dynamics of the blood-testis barrier.
In conclusion, this study suggests that varicocoele affects mechanisms that
control AR expression and function. This regulation of AR may play an important
role in the varicocoele-induced testicular dysfunction. Furthermore, varicocoele 
downregulates several other proteins in the testis that may be useful markers of 
spermatozoa function and male infertility.

© 2013 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 23836701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Feb 1;522(2):358-71. doi: 10.1002/cne.23400.

Estrogen receptor ß expression in the mouse forebrain: age and sex differences.

Zuloaga DG(1), Zuloaga KL, Hinds LR, Carbone DL, Handa RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Arizona College of
Medicine-Phoenix, Phoenix, Arizona, 85004-2157.

Estrogen receptors regulate multiple brain functions, including stress, sexual,
and memory-associated behaviors as well as controlling neuroendocrine and
autonomic function. During development, estrogen signaling is involved in
programming adult sex differences in physiology and behavior. Expression of
estrogen receptor a changes across development in a region-specific fashion. By
contrast, estrogen receptor ß (ERß) is expressed in many brain regions, yet few
studies have explored sex and developmental differences in its expression,
largely because of the absence of selective reagents for anatomical localization 
of the protein. This study utilized bacterial artificial chromosome transgenic
mice expressing ERß identified by enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) to
compare expression levels and distribution of ERß in the male and female mouse
forebrain on the day of birth (P0), on postnatal day 4 (P4), and on P21. By using
qualitative analysis, we mapped the distribution of ERß-EGFP and found
developmental alterations in ERß expression within the cortex, hippocampus, and
hypothalamic regions including the arcuate, ventromedial, and paraventricular
nuclei. We also report a sex difference in ERß in the bed nucleus of the stria
terminalis, with males showing greater expression at P4 and P21. Another sex
difference was found in the anteroventral periventricular nucleus of P21, but not
P0 or P4, mice, in which ERß-EGFP-immunoreactive cells were densely clustered
near the third ventricle in females but not males. These developmental changes
and sex differences in ERß indicate a mechanism through which estrogens might
differentially affect brain functions or program adult physiology at select times
during development.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4815281
PMID: 23818057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Shock. 2013 Sep;40(3):182-7. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31829de02f.

Major blunt trauma evokes selective upregulation of oxidative enzymes in
circulating leukocytes.

Brandfellner HM(1), Ruparel SB, Gelfond JA, Hargreaves KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, 
San Antonio, TX, USA. hargreaves@uthscsa.edu

Tissue injury, such as burns or inflammation, can lead to the generation of
oxidized lipids capable of regulating hemodynamic, pulmonary, immune, and
neuronal responses. However, it is not known whether traumatic injury leads to a 
selective upregulation of transcripts encoding oxidative enzymes capable of
generating these mediators. Here, we analyzed microarrays taken from circulating 
leukocytes of 187 trauma subjects compared with 97 control volunteers for changes
in the expression of 105 oxidative enzymes and related receptors. The results
indicate that major blunt trauma triggers a selective change in gene expression, 
with some transcripts undergoing highly significant upregulation (e.g., CYP2C19),
while others display significantly reduced expression (e.g., CYP2U1). This
pattern in gene expression was maintained for up to 28 days after injury. In
addition, the level of expression of CYP2A7, CYP2B7P1, CYP2C19, CYP2E1, CYP4A11, 
CYP4F3, CYP8B1, CYP19A1, CYP20A1, CYP51A1, HMOX2, NCF1, NCF2, and NOX1 and the
receptors PTGER2 and ESR2 were correlated with clinical trauma indices such as
APACHE II, Max Denver Scale, and the Injury Severity Score. Demonstration of a
selective alteration in expression of transcripts encoding oxidative enzymes
reveals a complex molecular response to major blunt trauma in circulating
leukocytes. Furthermore, the association between changes in gene expression and
clinical trauma scores suggests an important role in integrating pathophysiologic
responses to blunt force trauma.

PMCID: PMC3821164
PMID: 23817354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Toxicology. 2013 Aug 9;310:29-38. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.05.002. Epub 2013 May
22.

Neonatal exposure to zearalenone induces long term modulation of ABC transporter 
expression in testis.

Koraïchi F(1), Inoubli L, Lakhdari N, Meunier L, Vega A, Mauduit C, Benahmed M,
Prouillac C, Lecoeur S.

Author information: 
(1)CarMeN, INRA 1235/INSERM 1060/UCBL1/INSA Lyon/HCL, Faculté de Médecine, LYON
SUD-BP 12, 165 Chemin du Grand Revoyet, 69921 Oullins Cedex, France.

Mycotoxin zearalenone (ZEN) is a cereal contaminant produced by various species
of Fusarium fungi. When interacting with estrogen receptors, ZEN leads to animal 
fertility disturbances and other reproductive pathologies. Few data are available
on the effects of perinatal exposure to ZEN, particularly in the blood-testis
barrier. The aim of this study was to assess the impact of ZEN in adult rats
exposed neonatally. We focused on the expression and cellular localization of
major ABC transporters expressed in adult rat testis, comparing ZEN effects with 
those of Estradiol Benzoate (EB) neonatal exposure. Dose-dependent and long term 
modulations of mRNA and protein levels of Abcb1, Abcc1, Abcg2, Abcc4 and Abcc5
were observed, along with Abcc4 protein cellular delocalization. ZEN exposure of 
SerW3 Sertoli cells showed modulation of Abcb1, Abcc4 and Abcc5. Comparison with 
EB exposure showed similar modulation profiles for Abcg2 but differential
modulations for Abcb1, Abcc1, Abcc4 and Abcc5 in vivo, and a similar profile for 
Abcb1 modulation by ZEN and EB, but differential modulation for Abcc4 and Abcc5
in vitro. ZEN and EB effects were inhibited by in vitro addition of the pure
anti-estrogen ICI 182.780, suggesting the at least partial implication of ZEN
estrogenic activity in these modulations. These results suggested that ZEN
neonatal exposure could affect the exposure of testis to ABC transporter
substrates, and negatively influence spermatogenesis and male fertility.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 Jun 27;20(4):515-25. doi: 10.1530/ERC-12-0308. Print
2013 Aug.

A novel shift in estrogen receptor expression occurs as estradiol suppresses
inflammation-associated colon tumor formation.

Armstrong CM(1), Billimek AR, Allred KF, Sturino JM, Weeks BR, Allred CD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Nutrition and Food Science Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Postmenopausal women on estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) have a reduced risk of
developing colon cancer compared with postmenopausal women not on ERT, suggesting
a role for estradiol (E2) in protection against this disease. To determine
whether E2 protects against inflammation-associated colon cancer when
administered following the initiation of colonic DNA damage, in this study, we
implanted E2-containing pellets into mice after co-treatment with azoxymethane
and two rounds of dextran sulfate sodium (DSS). Wild-type (WT) E2-treated mice
had reduced numbers and average area of adenocarcinomas compared with the control
mice. These effects were lost in estrogen receptor-ß (Erß (Esr2)) knockout mice. 
Surprisingly, apoptosis was reduced and cell proliferation was increased in
sections from tumors of the WT E2 mice compared with the WT control mice. These
findings are probably due, in part, to a reduction in ERß expression in colonic
epithelial cells as the cells progressed from a non-malignant to a cancerous
state as enhanced apoptosis was observed in normal colonocytes expressing higher 
levels of ERß. Furthermore, epithelial cells within the tumors had dramatically
increased ERa mRNA and protein expression compared with the non-diseased mice. We
conclude that while E2 treatment resulted in an overall suppression of colonic
adenocarcinoma formation, reduced ERß expression accompanied by enhanced ERa
expression caused an altered colonocyte response to E2 treatment compared with
the earlier stages of colon cancer development. These data are the first examples
of decreased ERß expression concurrent with increased ERa expression as a disease
develops and highlight the importance of understanding the timing of E2 exposure 
with regard to the prevention of inflammation-associated colon cancer.

PMID: 23702470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Andrology. 2014 Jan;2(1):155. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00097.x. Epub 2013
May 20.

Retracted: Impact of polymorphisms in the oestrogen receptors alpha and beta
(ESR1, ESR2) genes on risk of vasculogenic erectile dysfunction.

[No authors listed]

Erratum in
    Andrology. 2014 Jan;2(1):155.

Retraction of
    Andrology. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00097.x.

The above article from Andrology, 'Impact of polymorphisms in the oestrogen
receptors alpha and beta (ESR1, ESR2) genes on risk of vasculogenic erectile
dysfunction' by M. R. Safarinejad, A. Taghva, N. Shafiei and S. Safarinejad
published online on 20 May 2013 in Wiley Online Library has been retracted by
agreement between the journal Editors-in-Chief, Douglas Carrell and Ewa
Rajpert-De Meyts and John Wiley and Sons Ltd. The retraction has been decided due
to failure by the lead author to verify the data contained in the study, and to
provide evidence of the role of co-authors and their institutional affiliations.

© 2013 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 23686919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Br Poult Sci. 2013;54(2):252-8. doi: 10.1080/00071668.2013.767439.

The phytoestrogen daidzein may affect reproductive performance of Zhedong White
geese by regulating gene mRNA levels in the HPG axis.

Zhao X(1), Shao T, Wang YQ, Lu XL, Luo JB, Zhou WD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science, Zhejiang Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, 310021.

1. The effect of daidzein, a naturally occurring phytoestrogen, on the
reproductive performance of 120 female Zhedong White geese was determined. The
geese were divided into 4 groups which were fed on diets containing 0 (Control), 
10 (Da1), 20 (Da2) and 30 (Da3) mg daidzein per kg diet. Egg production and
weight, fertility and hatchability rates, concentrations of estradiol (E2),
triiodothyronine (T3), progesterone (P4), thyroxine (T4) and growth hormone (GH) 
in serum, and mRNA levels of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH), ß-follicle
stimulating hormone (FSHß), follicle stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR),
oestrogen receptor1 (ESR1), oestrogen receptor2 (ESR2), prolactin (PRL),
prolactin receptor (PRLR), and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
in the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPGA) were measured. 2. Daidzein
increased egg weight and fertility but had no detectable effect on egg production
and hatchability. 3. Daidzein affected serum P4 and GH concentrations and T4
rhythm, up-regulated GnRH mRNA and PRLR mRNA levels in the hypothalamus,
down-regulated PRLR mRNA in the hypothalamus, PRL mRNA in the pituitary, and ESR2
mRNA levels in the ovary, respectively. The mRNA rhythms of PRLR in the
hypothalamus, PRL, PRLR and FSHß in the pituitary, FSHR, ESR1 and ESR2 in the
ovary were significantly changed in the Da2 group. 4. It is suggested that an
appropriate dose of daidzein might improve reproductive performance by affecting 
serum hormone concentrations and rhythms and regulating gene mRNA levels in the
HPGA of female Zhedong White geese.

PMID: 23647190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Endocrinol. 2013 Jun 1;218(1):135-49. doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0520. Print 2013 Jul.

Repression of mammary adipogenesis by genistein limits mammosphere formation of
human MCF-7 cells.

Montales MT(1), Rahal OM, Nakatani H, Matsuda T, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, Departments of Pediatrics, Physiology
and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 15 Children's Way,
Little Rock, Arkansas 72202, USA.

Mammary adipose tissue may contribute to breast cancer development and
progression by altering neighboring epithelial cell behavior and phenotype
through paracrine signaling. Dietary exposure to soy foods is associated with
lower mammary tumor risk and reduced body weight and adiposity in humans and in
rodent breast cancer models. Despite the suggested linkage between obesity and
breast cancer, the local influence of bioactive dietary components on mammary
adiposity for antitumor effects remains unknown. Herein, we report that
post-weaning dietary exposure to soy protein isolate and its bioactive isoflavone
genistein (GEN) lowered mammary adiposity and increased mammary tumor suppressor 
PTEN and E-cadherin expression in female mice, relative to control casein diet.
To ascertain GEN's role in mammary adipose deposition that may affect underlying 
epithelial cell phenotype, we evaluated GEN's effects on SV40-immortalized mouse 
mammary stromal fibroblast-like (MSF) cells during differentiation into
adipocytes. MSF cells cultured in a differentiation medium with 40<U+200A>nM GEN showed 
reductions in mature adipocyte numbers, triglyceride accumulation, and Ppar<U+03B3>
(Pparg) and fatty acid synthase transcript levels. GEN inhibition of adipose
differentiation was accompanied by increased estrogen receptor ß (Erß (Esr2))
gene expression and was modestly recapitulated by ERß-selective agonist
2,3-bis-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile (DPN). Reduction of Erß expression by
siRNA targeting increased Ppar<U+03B3> transcript levels and stromal fibroblast
differentiation into mature adipocytes; the latter was reversed by GEN but not by
DPN. Conditioned medium from GEN-treated adipocytes diminished
anchorage-independent mammosphere formation of human MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Our results suggest a mechanistic pathway to support direct regulation of mammary
adiposity by GEN for breast cancer prevention.

PMID: 23645249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Endocrinol. 2013 Jun 1;218(1):125-33. doi: 10.1530/JOE-13-0029. Print 2013 Jul.

Oestrogen action on thyroid progenitor cells: relevant for the pathogenesis of
thyroid nodules?

Xu S(1), Chen G, Peng W, Renko K, Derwahl M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, St Hedwig Hospital, Berlin,
Germany.

Benign and malignant thyroid nodules are more prevalent in females than in males.
Experimental data suggest that the proliferative effect of oestrogen rather than 
polymorphisms is responsible for this gender difference. This study analysed
whether both differentiated thyroid cells and thyroid stem and progenitor cells
are targets of oestrogen action. In thyroid stem/progenitor cells derived from
nodular goitres, the ability of 17ß-oestradiol (E2) to induce the formation of
thyrospheres and the expression of oestrogen receptors (ERs) and the effect of E2
on the growth and expression of markers of stem cells and thyroid differentiation
(TSH receptor, thyroperoxidase, thyroglobulin and sodium iodide symporter (NIS)) 
were analysed. E2 induced thyrosphere formation, albeit to a lower extent than
other growth factors. Thyroid stem and progenitor cells expressed ERa (ESR1) and 
ERß (ESR2) with eight times higher expression levels of ERa mRNA compared with
the differentiated thyrocytes. E2 was a potent stimulator of the growth of
thyroid stem/progenitor cells. In contrast, TSH-induced differentiation of
progenitor cells, in particular, the expression of NIS, was significantly
inhibited by E2. In conclusion, oestrogen stimulated the growth and
simultaneously inhibited the differentiation of thyroid nodule-derived
stem/progenitor cells. From these data and based on the concept of cellular
heterogeneity, we hypothesize a supportive role of oestrogen in the propagation
of thyroid stem/progenitor cells leading to the selection of a progeny of
growth-prone cells with a decreased differentiation. These cells may be the
origin of hypofunctioning or non-functioning thyroid nodules in females.

PMID: 23645248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cancer Epidemiol. 2013 Aug;37(4):518-22. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2013.03.020. Epub
2013 Apr 23.

Genetic variation in ESR2 and estrogen receptor-beta expression in lung tumors.

Song JY(1), Siegfried JM, Diergaarde B, Land SR, Bowser R, Stabile LP, Dacic S,
Dhir R, Nukui T, Romkes M, Weissfeld JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh and University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between inherited variation in the
estrogen receptor beta (ERß) gene (ESR2) and ERß lung tumor expression, a
phenotype that possibly affects survival differently in men and women.
METHODS: We genotyped 135 lung cancer patients for 22 ESR2 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and measured nuclear and cytoplasmic ERß expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in their primary lung tumor. Distributing Allred ERß
IHC scores according to ESR2 genotype classified under a dominant genetic model, 
we used rank sum tests to identify ESR2 SNPs significantly associated (p<0.05)
with ERß expression.
RESULTS: 35%, 35%, and 29% of lung tumors showed no/low (Allred<6), intermediate 
(Allred 6-7), and maximal (Allred 8) cytoplasmic ERß expression, whereas 13%,
27%, and 60% showed no/low, intermediate, and maximal nuclear ERß expression. For
SNPs rs8021944, rs1256061 and rs10146204, ERß expression was higher according to 
the rank sum test in lung tumors from patients with at least one minor allele.
For each of these three SNPs, the odds of maximal (Allred 8) relative to no/low
(Allred<6) ERß expression was 3-fold higher in tumors from patients with at least
one minor allele than in tumors from patients homozygous for the common allele.
CONCLUSION: Inherited variability in ESR2 may determine ERß lung tumor
expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3684046
PMID: 23619141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Curr Drug Targets. 2013 Jul;14(8):850-5.

The impact of genetics profile (gene polymorphisms) in obese non-PCOS women
entering an IVF/ICSI program.

Anagnostou E(1), Drakakis P, Marinopoulos S, Mavrogianni D, Loutradis D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Reproduction, IVF Unit, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece.

Data concerning the effects of increased body mass index (BMI) on ovarian and
pregnancy outcome are rich, but the results are rather controversial. Regarding
pharmacogenetics, gene polymorphisms of hormonal receptor genes, such as Estrogen
Receptor alpha (ESR1), Estrogen Receptor beta (ESR2) and FSH receptor (FSHR)
genes, are associated with ovarian stimulation and pregnancy outcome and may
constitute a useful tool for ART experts for the prediction of this outcome. The 
aim of this study is to track differences in the distribution of gene
polymorphisms among obese non-PCOS and non-obese patients concerning three
distinct genes which are involved in the ovarian stimulation mechanism: PvuII
polymorphism of ESR1 gene, RsaI polymorphism of ESR2 gene and Ser680Asn variation
of FSHR gene, using restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and
real-time polymerase chain reaction. A total of 151 normally ovulating female
patients underwent IVF or ICSI. Interestingly, the pregnancy rate in the BMI=30
kg/m² group was higher in a statistically significant way (40.9% versus 17.8%,
p=0.023). The obese patients of this study were in need of increased total FSH
dose in order to achieve a satisfactory oocyte number (p<0.001) and needed more
days of stimulation (p=0.002), but also presented lower basal FSH levels
(p=0.032), which may explain, to an extend, the better pregnancy outcome.
Concerning the polymorphisms of ESR1, ESR2 and FSHR genes, we did not observe
differences in the genotype distribution when we compared the obese non-PCOS
population with the non-obese population. Thus, obesity does not constitute an
additional indication to perform a genetic analysis before entering an IVF/ICSI
program.

PMID: 23614677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2013;75(4):235-42. doi: 10.1159/000345936. Epub 2013 Apr
11.

Genistein inhibits cell proliferation and stimulates apoptosis in human coronary 
artery endothelial cells.

Kayisli UA(1), Guzeloglu-Kayisli O, Guzel E, Arici A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Conn., 06520-8063, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Isoflavone genistein is a plant-derived compound structurally
similar to estradiol, which behaves weakly estrogenic or anti-estrogenic in a
cell- and concentration-dependent manner. Genistein has been hypothesized to have
beneficial effects on vascular diseases, although the mechanism has been unclear.
Here, we investigated whether genistein may play a role in atherogenesis by
regulating human coronary artery endothelial cell (HCAEC) survival.
METHODS: HCAECs obtained from 48- to 53-year-old women (n = 3) were used and
immunocytochemistry, cell proliferation assay and apoptosis assay were carried on
HCAECs treated by genistein.
RESULTS: Immunocytochemistry confirmed that HCAECs in culture express
predominantly ESR2. Cell proliferation assay revealed that following 72 h of
genistein treatment, HCAEC proliferation decreased in a concentration-dependent
(10(-10) to 10(-6)M) manner compared to control (p < 0.01). The
anti-proliferative effect of genistein is inhibited by estradiol. Genistein
(10(-8)M) also induced a time-dependent increase in the number of apoptotic
HCAECs after 24-, 48- and 72-hour treatments as detected by TUNEL and
morphological analyses.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that genistein acts as an anti-proliferative
agent on HCAECs. The anti-proliferative and proapoptotic effects of genistein on 
vascular cells underlie the proposed anti-atherogenic and cardioprotective role
of genistein.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23594697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Environ Sci Technol. 2013 May 21;47(10):5372-82. doi: 10.1021/es3044888. Epub
2013 May 2.

Estrogen-like effects in male goldfish co-exposed to fluoxetine and 17
alpha-ethinylestradiol.

Silva de Assis HC(1), Simmons DB, Zamora JM, Lado WE, Al-Ansari AM, Sherry JP,
Blais JM, Metcalfe CD, Trudeau VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Federal University of Paraná, 81531-980, Curitiba,
Paraná, Brazil. helassis@ufpr.br

The antidepressant fluoxetine (FLX) and the synthetic estrogen, 17
alpha-ethinylestradiol (EE2), are present in municipal sewage discharges. To
better understand possible interactions between them, male goldfish were exposed 
to an ethanol control or to nominal concentrations of FLX (0.54 µg/L) and EE2 (5 
ng/L) alone and in combination for 14 days. Real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction was used to assess effects on hepatic gene expression
and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry to analyze the plasma
proteome. The results showed an increase in estrogen receptor alpha (esr1) and
vitellogenin (vtg) gene expression by 1.9-2.4-fold in the FLX and EE2 groups, but
this did not reach statistical significance. In contrast, co-exposure up
regulated esr1 and vtg gene expression by 5.5- and 5.3-fold, respectively.
Fluoxetine and EE2 alone did not affect estrogen receptor beta (esr2), but the
co-exposure down regulated esr2 expression by 50%. There was a significant
increase in the number of plasma proteins that were related to endocrine system
disorders in the FLX and FLX plus EE2 groups. The level of VTG protein was
increased in the plasma from goldfish exposed to EE2, FLX, and FLX plus EE2. Our 
study demonstrates that low concentrations of FLX and EE2 in a simple mixture
produce strong estrogen-like effects in the male goldfish.

PMID: 23590834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nat Rev Urol. 2013 Jun;10(6):317-26. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2013.53. Epub 2013 Apr
16.

Role of oestrogen receptors in bladder cancer development.

Hsu I(1), Vitkus S, Da J, Yeh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, University of
Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Early studies documented the existence of sexual dimorphism in bladder cancer
occurrence and progression, with a greater bladder cancer incidence in males than
females. However, the progression of bladder cancer after diagnosis is much
quicker in females than males. These findings can be explained by the effects of 
female hormones (predominantly oestrogens) and their binding receptors, including
oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1; also known as ERa), oestrogen receptor 2 (ESR2; also 
known as ERß), and GPR30 protein on bladder cancer incidence and progression.
Results from studies using various in vitro cell lines and in vivo mouse models
demonstrate differential roles of oestrogen receptors in cancer initiation and
progression. ERa suppresses bladder cancer initiation and invasion, whereas ERß
promotes bladder cancer initiation and progression. Mechanistic studies suggest
that ERa and ERß exert these effects via modulation of the AKT pathway and DNA
replication complex, respectively. Targeting these signalling pathways--for
example, with ERa agonists, ERß antagonists, or selective oestrogen receptor
modulators such as
4-[2-phenyl-5,7-bis(trifluoromethyl)pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidin-3-yl]phenol (also
known as PHTPP)--could lead to the development of new therapeutic approaches for 
controlling bladder cancer progression.

PMID: 23588401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 1;73(11):3306-15. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4051. Epub
2013 Apr 12.

Colorectal cancer risk associated with hormone use varies by expression of
estrogen receptor-ß.

Rudolph A(1), Toth C, Hoffmeister M, Roth W, Herpel E, Schirmacher P, Brenner H, 
Chang-Claude J.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Cancer Epidemiology, Clinical Epidemiology and Aging Research,
and Molecular Tumor Pathology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany.

The risk of colorectal cancer is reduced among users of oral contraceptives or
menopausal hormone therapy, but associations with reproductive characteristics
that are markers of a woman's endogenous hormone milieu have not been
consistently observed. To help understand possible mechanisms through which
exogenous and endogenous hormonal exposures are involved in colorectal cancer, we
assessed the risk of these malignancies according to tumor expression of estrogen
receptor-ß (ESR2). In a population-based study of postmenopausal women (503 cases
and 721 controls matched for sex and age), immunohistochemical expression of ESR2
was determined in 445 cases of incident colorectal cancer. Unconditional logistic
regression was used in case-case analyses to assess heterogeneity between risk
associations according to ESR2 status and in case-control analyses to estimate
associations separately for ESR2-negative and ESR2-positive tumors. For
ESR2-positive tumors but not ESR2-negative tumors, colorectal cancer risk
significantly decreased with duration of oral contraceptive use [per five-year
increments OR ESR2-positive, 0.87, 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.77-0.99; OR
ESR2-negative, 1.02, 95% CI, 0.91-1.15; Pheterogeneity = 0.07] and with duration 
of menopausal hormone therapy use (per five-year increments OR ESR2-positive,
0.84, 95% CI, 0.74-0.95; OR ESR2-negative, 0.94, 95% CI 0.84-1.05; Pheterogeneity
= 0.06). Significant heterogeneity according to ESR2 expression was found for the
association with current use of menopausal hormone therapy (<0.5 years ago;
Pheterogeneity = 0.023) but not for associations with reproductive factors. In
conclusion, our results suggest that hormone use decreases risk for ESR2-positive
but not ESR2-negative colorectal cancer.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23585455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e59173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059173. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Multi-analytic approach elucidates significant role of hormonal and
hepatocanalicular transporter genetic variants in gallstone disease in North
Indian population.

Srivastava A(1), Mishra A, Singh R, Rai R, Srivastava N, Mittal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences (SGPGIMS) Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

OBJECTIVE: Cholesterol gallstone disease (CGD) is a multifactorial and multistep 
disease. Apart from female gender and increasing age being the documented
non-modifiable risk factor for gallstones the pathobiological mechanisms
underlying the phenotypic expression of CGD appear to be rather complex, and one 
or more variations in genes could play critical roles in the diverse pathways
further progressing to cholesterol crystal formation. In the present study we
performed genotyping score, Multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) and
Classification and Regression Tree analysis (CART) to identify combinations of
alleles among the hormonal, hepatocanalicular transporter and adipogenesis
differentiation pathway genes in modifying the risk for CGD.
DESIGN: The present case-control study recruited total of 450 subjects, including
230 CGD patients and 220 controls. We analyzed common ESR1, ESR2, PGR, ADRB3,
ADRA2A, ABCG8, SLCO1B1, PPAR<U+03B3>2, and SREBP2 gene polymorphisms to find out
combinations of genetic variants contributing to CGD risk, using multi-analytical
approaches (G-score, MDR, and CART).
RESULTS: Single locus analysis by logistic regression showed association of ESR1 
IVS1-397C>T (rs2234693), IVS1-351A>G (rs9340799) PGR ins/del (rs1042838)
ADRB3-190 T>C (rs4994) ABCG8 D19H (rs11887534), SLCO1B1 Exon4 C>A (rs11045819)
and SREBP2 1784G>C (rs2228314) with CGD risk. However, the MDR and CART analysis 
revealed ESR1 IVS1-397C>T (rs2234693) ADRB3-190 T>C (rs4994) and ABCG8 D19H
(rs11887534) polymorphisms as the best polymorphic signature for discriminating
between cases and controls. The overall odds ratio for the applied
multi-analytical approaches ranged from 4.33 to 10.05 showing an incremental risk
for cholesterol crystal formation. In conclusion, our muti-analytical approach
suggests that, ESR1, ADRB3, in addition to ABCG8 genetic variants confer
significant risk for cholesterol gallstone disease.

PMCID: PMC3620121
PMID: 23577061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Aug;34(8):1889-99. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt107. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

MicroRNA-191, an estrogen-responsive microRNA, functions as an oncogenic
regulator in human breast cancer.

Nagpal N(1), Ahmad HM, Molparia B, Kulshreshtha R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi, India.

Estrogen- and microRNA-mediated gene regulation play a crucial role in breast
cancer biology. However, a functional link between the two major players remains 
unclear. This study reveals miR-191 as an estrogen-inducible onco-miR in breast
cancer, which promotes several hallmarks of cancer including enhanced cell
proliferation, migration, chemoresistance and survival in tumor microenvironment.
miR-191 is a direct estrogen receptor (ER) target and our results suggest
existence of a positive regulatory feedback loop. We show miR-191 as critical
mediator of estrogen-mediated cell proliferation. Investigations of mechanistic
details of miR-191 functions identify several cancer-related genes like BDNF,
CDK6 and SATB1 as miR-191 targets. miR-191 and SATB1 show inverse correlation of 
expression. miR-191-mediated enhanced cell proliferation and migration are partly
dependent on targeted downregulation of SATB1. Further, functional validation of 
estrogen:miR-191:SATB1 link suggests a cascade initiated by estrogen that induces
miR-191 in ER-dependent manner to target SATB1, a global chromatin remodeler,
thereby contributing to estrogen-specific gene signature to regulate genes like
ANXA1, PIWIL2, CASP4, ESR1/ESR2, PLAC1 and SOCS2 involved in breast cancer
progression and migration. Overall, the identification of
estrogen/ER/miR-191/SATB1 cascade seems to be a significant pathway in estrogen
signaling in breast cancer with miR-191 as oncogenic player.

PMID: 23542418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Aging Male. 2013 Jun;16(2):52-7. doi: 10.3109/13685538.2013.772134. Epub 2013 Mar
19.

Estrogen receptor alpha single nucleotide polymorphism as predictor of diabetes
type 2 risk in hypogonadal men.

Linnér C(1), Svartberg J, Giwercman A, Giwercman YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Molecular Genetic Reproductive Medicine, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden. carl.linner@med.lu.se

Estradiol (E2) is, apart from its role as a reproductive hormone, also important 
for cardiac function and bone maturation in both genders. It has also been shown 
to play a role in insulin production, energy expenditure and in inducing
lipolysis. The aim of the study was to investigate if low circulating
testosterone or E2 levels in combination with variants in the estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) and estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) genes were of importance for the
risk of type-2 diabetes. The single nucleotide polymorphisms rs2207396 and
rs1256049, in ESR1 and ESR2, respectively, were analysed by allele specific PCR
in 172 elderly men from the population-based Tromsø study. The results were
adjusted for age. In individuals with low total (=11<U+2009>nmol/L) or free testosterone
(=0.18<U+2009>nmol/L) being carriers of the variant A-allele in ESR1 was associated with
7.3 and 15.9 times, respectively, increased odds ratio of being diagnosed with
diabetes mellitus type 2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.018, respectively). Lower
concentrations of E2 did not seem to increase the risk of being diagnosed with
diabetes. In conclusion, in hypogonadal men, the rs2207396 variant in ESR1
predicts the risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 23506158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Jan;10(1):27-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.12.008. Epub
2013 Mar 13.

Estrogen receptor polymorphisms and incident dementia: the prospective 3C study.

Ryan J(1), Carrière I(2), Carcaillon L(3), Dartigues JF(4), Auriacombe S(4),
Rouaud O(5), Berr C(2), Ritchie K(6), Scarabin PY(3), Ancelin ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1061, Neuropsychiatry: Epidemiological and Clinical Research,
Montpellier, France; Université Montpellier1, Montpellier, France; Murdoch
Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Victoria, Australia.
Electronic address: joanne.ryan@inserm.fr. (2)Inserm, U1061, Neuropsychiatry:
Epidemiological and Clinical Research, Montpellier, France; Université
Montpellier1, Montpellier, France. (3)Inserm, U1018, Université Paris Sud 11,
Villejuif, France. (4)Inserm, U897, Université Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France.
(5)CHRU Dijon, Centre Mémoire Ressources et Recherche, Dijon, France. (6)Inserm, 
U1061, Neuropsychiatry: Epidemiological and Clinical Research, Montpellier,
France; Université Montpellier1, Montpellier, France; Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Genetic variation in the estrogen receptor (ESR) may be associated
with the incidence of Alzheimer's disease (AD), but this association could be
modified by genetic and environmental factors.
METHODS: The association between five ESR a (ESR1) and ß (ESR2) polymorphisms
with 7-year dementia incidence was examined among 6959 older men and women from
the Three City Study using multivariate-adjusted Cox regression models with
delayed entry. Gender, the apolipoprotein E (APOE) e4 allele, and hormone
treatment were considered as potential effect modifiers of this association.
RESULTS: Among women, the CC genotype of ESR1rs2234693 was specifically
associated with a small increased risk of AD (adjusted hazard ratio [HR]: 1.54,
95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.03-2.28, P = .03). However, women with this
genotype had a substantially increased risk of AD associated with the APOE e4
allele (adjusted HR: 3.24, 95% CI: 1.81-5.79 for women rs2234693 CC; compared
with HR: 1.87, 95% CI: 1.37-2.56 for all women). There was also evidence of a
nominally significant interaction between the ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms on the 
risk of all dementias (P = .04). Hormone treatment did not modify these
associations, and there were no significant associations in men.
CONCLUSIONS: Although there was only weak support for a gender-specific
association between the common ESR1rs2234693 polymorphism and AD, this
polymorphism may act as an effect modifier, modifying the association between an 
ESR2 polymorphism and dementia, as well as the risk of AD associated with the
APOE e4 allele.

Copyright © 2014 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23491264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Toxicol Sci. 2013 May;133(1):157-73. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft035. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Prenatal bisphenol A exposure alters sex-specific estrogen receptor expression in
the neonatal rat hypothalamus and amygdala.

Cao J(1), Rebuli ME, Rogers J, Todd KL, Leyrer SM, Ferguson SA, Patisaul HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, NCSU, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA.

Bisphenol A (BPA) exposure is ubiquitous, and in laboratory animals, early-life
BPA exposure has been shown to alter sex-specific neural organization,
neuroendocrine physiology, and behavior. The specific mechanisms underlying these
brain-related outcomes, however, remain largely unknown, constraining the
capacity to ascertain the potential human relevance of neural effects observed in
animal models. In the perinatal rat brain, estrogen is masculinizing, suggesting 
that BPA-induced perturbation of estrogen receptor (ESR) expression may underpin 
later in-life neuroendocrine effects. We hypothesized that prenatal BPA exposure 
alters sex-specific ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß) expression in postnatal limbic
nuclei. Sprague Dawley rats were mated and gavaged on gestational days (GDs) 6-21
with vehicle, 2.5 or 25 µg/kg bw/day BPA, or 5 or 10 µg/kg bw/day ethinyl
estradiol. An additional group was restrained but not gavaged (naïve control).
Offspring were sacrificed the day after birth to quantify ESR gene expression
throughout the hypothalamus and amygdala by in situ hybridization. Relative to
the vehicle group, significant effects of BPA were observed on ESR1 and ESR2
expression throughout the mediobasal hypothalamus and amygdala in both sexes.
Significant differences in ESR expression were also observed in the mediobasal
hypothalamus and amygdala of the naïve control group compared with the vehicle
group, highlighting the potential for gavage to influence gene expression in the 
developing brain. These results indicate that ESR expression in the neonatal
brain of both sexes can be altered by low-dose prenatal BPA exposure.

PMCID: PMC3627558
PMID: 23457122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Apr;6(4):339-48. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-12-0311. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

The role of estrogen receptor ß in transplacental cancer prevention by
indole-3-carbinol.

Benninghoff AD(1), Williams DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal, Dairy and Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University,
4815 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84322, USA. abby.benninghoff@usu.edu

In the present study, the efficacy of indole-3-carbinol (I3C), a key bioactive
component of cruciferous vegetables, for prevention of cancer in offspring
exposed in utero to the environmental carcinogen dibenzo[def,p]chrysene (DBC) was
evaluated using an estrogen receptor ß (ERß) knockout mouse model. I3C was
provided either through the maternal diet coincident with carcinogen exposure
during pregnancy or directly to offspring postinitiation with DBC. I3C was
effective at reducing T-cell acute lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia
(T-ALL)-related mortality in offspring only if provided via the maternal diet,
although a gender difference in the role of ERß in mediating this response was
evident. In female offspring, chemoprevention of T-ALL by maternal dietary I3C
required expression of ERß; survival in Esr2 wild-type and heterozygous female
offspring was more than 90% compared with 66% in Esr2 null females.
Alternatively, ERß status did not significantly impact the transplacental
chemoprevention by I3C in males. The possible role of ERß in mediating lung
carcinogenesis or chemoprevention by I3C was similarly complicated. Lung tumor
incidence was unaltered by either dietary intervention, whereas lung tumor
multiplicity was substantially reduced in Esr2 null females on the control diet
and marginally lower in Esr2 null males exposed to I3C via the maternal diet
compared with their wild-type and heterozygous counterparts. These findings
suggest that I3C may act via ERß to prevent or suppress DBC-initiated
transplacental carcinogenesis but that the involvement of this receptor seems to 
differ depending on the cancer type and gender of the offspring.

PMCID: PMC3618583
PMID: 23447562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54751. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054751. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Genetic polymorphisms related to testosterone metabolism in intellectually gifted
boys.

Celec P(1), Tretinárová D, Minárik G, Ficek A, Szemes T, Lakatoová S, Schmidtová
E, Turna J, Kádai L, Ostatníková D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovak
Republic. petercelec@gmail.com

Prepubertal testosterone levels are lower in intellectually gifted boys. The aim 
of this pilot study was to analyze potential genetic factors related to
testosterone metabolism in control and gifted boys. Intellectually gifted
(IQ>130; n = 95) and control (n = 67) boys were genotyped. Polymorphisms of
interests were chosen in genes including androgen and estrogen receptors, 5-alpha
reductase, aromatase and sex hormone binding globulin. Significant differences
between control and gifted boys in genotype distributions were found for ESR2
(rs928554) and SHBG (rs1799941). A significantly lower number of CAG repeats in
the AR gene were found in gifted boys. Our results support the role of genetic
factors related to testosterone metabolism in intellectual giftedness. Increased 
androgen signaling might explain previous results of lower testosterone levels in
intellectually gifted boys and add to the understanding of variability in
cognitive abilities.

PMCID: PMC3559825
PMID: 23382957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Prostate. 2013 Jun;73(8):813-26. doi: 10.1002/pros.22625. Epub 2012 Dec 31.

Single-cell analysis of circulating tumor cells identifies cumulative expression 
patterns of EMT-related genes in metastatic prostate cancer.

Chen CL(1), Mahalingam D, Osmulski P, Jadhav RR, Wang CM, Leach RJ, Chang TC,
Weitman SD, Kumar AP, Sun L, Gaczynska ME, Thompson IM, Huang TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cancer Therapy and Research Center,
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostate tumors shed circulating tumor cells (CTCs) into the blood
stream. Increased evidence shows that CTCs are often present in metastatic
prostate cancer and can be alternative sources for disease profiling and
prognostication. Here we postulate that CTCs expressing genes related to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) are strong predictors of metastatic
prostate cancer.
METHODS: A microfiltration system was used to trap CTCs from peripheral blood
based on size selection of large epithelial-like cells without CD45 leukocyte
marker. These cells individually retrieved with a micromanipulator device were
assessed for cell membrane physical properties using atomic force microscopy.
Additionally, 38 CTCs from eight prostate cancer patients were used to determine 
expression profiles of 84 EMT-related and reference genes using a
microfluidics-based PCR system.
RESULTS: Increased cell elasticity and membrane smoothness were found in CTCs
compared to noncancerous cells, highlighting their potential invasiveness and
mobility in the peripheral circulation. Despite heterogeneous expression patterns
of individual CTCs, genes that promote mesenchymal transitioning into a more
malignant state, including IGF1, IGF2, EGFR, FOXP3, and TGFB3, were commonly
observed in these cells. An additional subset of EMT-related genes (e.g., PTPRN2,
ALDH1, ESR2, and WNT5A) were expressed in CTCs of castration-resistant cancer,
but less frequently in castration-sensitive cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The study suggests that an incremental expression of EMT-related
genes in CTCs is associated with metastatic castration-resistant cancer. Although
CTCs represent a group of highly heterogeneous cells, their unique EMT-related
gene signatures provide a new opportunity for personalized treatments with
targeted inhibitors in advanced prostate cancer patients.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23280481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Feb;137(3):849-62. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2367-z. 
Epub 2012 Dec 29.

Given breast cancer, is fat better than thin? Impact of the estrogen receptor
beta gene polymorphisms.

Borgquist S(1), Hjertberg M, Henningson M, Ingvar C, Rose C, Jernström H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Skåne University Hospital, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. signe.borgquist@med.lu.se

The role of estrogen receptor beta (ERß) in breast cancer has been investigated
since its identification in 1996. Studies based on protein expression have
indicated that ERß is a favorable prognostic marker. Further, ERß expression is
lower in obese breast cancer patients. Fewer studies have focused on the
prognostic impact of ERß polymorphisms. Therefore, we analyzed the associations
between four previously identified haplotype tagging single nucleotide
polymorphisms (htSNPs), associated haplo- and diplotypes, and breast cancer-free 
survival according to body constitution. The patient cohort included 634 women
from the prospective breast cancer and blood study (BC Blood study, Sweden) with 
a median follow-up of 4.92 years. Four htSNPs (i.e., rs4986938, rs1256049,
rs1256031, rs3020450) in the ESR2 gene and the correlating haplo- and diplotypes 
were analyzed and correlated to selected patient and tumor characteristics and to
disease-free survival, including stratification for BMI. Based on the four
htSNPs, seven haplotypes and eight diplotypes were identified. The patient and
tumor characteristics were well-balanced across all geno- and haplotypes.
Disease-free survival differed according to rs4986938 and rs1256031 (Log-Rank
P = 0.045 and P = 0.041, respectively) and the number of haplotype copies of the 
wildtype CCGC and TCAC (Log-Rank P = 0.027 and P = 0.038, respectively). In the
survival analyses stratified for BMI, significant survival differences between
alleles were observed among overweight women (rs4986938 and rs1256031 with
Log-Rank P = 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively). The BMI-stratified survival
analyses based on haplotypes showed shorter disease-free survival for overweight 
women with null copies of CCGC (Log-Rank P = 0.001) and for overweight women with
any TCAC copy (Log-Rank P < 0.0001). Markedly impaired disease-free survival was 
found for genotypes in two out of four ESR2 htSNPs and for two haplotypes. ESR2
polymorphisms seem to divide patients into good and poor survivors based on BMI, 
stressing the need of taking host factors into consideration in the evaluation of
prognostic markers.

PMID: 23274843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 Feb;80(2):102-17. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22141.

Estrus synchronization and ovarian hyper-stimulation treatments have negligible
effects on cumulus oocyte complex gene expression whereas induction of ovulation 
causes major expression changes.

Agca C(1), Yakan A, Agca Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

The effects of exogenous hormones, used for estrus synchronization and ovarian
hyper stimulation, on cumulus oocyte complexes (COCs) gene expression in sexually
mature rats were determined using microarrays. Gene expression in COCs collected 
from GnRH (G(trt)), GnRH + eCG (G + E(trt)), and GnRH + eCG + hCG (G + E +
H(trt)) treatments were compared to COCs from naturally cycling (NC) rats before 
the preovulatory luteninizing hormone surge. There was no significant difference 
in gene expression among NC, G(trt), and G + E(trt); however, over 2,600 genes
were significantly different between NC and G + E + H(trt) (P < 0.05). Genes
upregulated in G + E + H(trt) encode for: proteins that are involved in
prostaglandin synthesis (Ptgs2, Pla2g4a, and Runx1) and cholesterol biosynthesis 
(Hmgcr, Sc4mol, and Dhcr24); receptors that allow cholesterol uptake (Ldlr and
Scarb1), regulate progesterone synthesis (Star), and inactivate estrogen
(Sult1e1); and downstream effectors of LH signal (Pgr, Cebpb, Creb3l1, Areg,
Ereg, and Adamts1). Conversely, G + E + H(trt) downregulated genes encoding
proteins involved in: DNA replication and cell cycle progression (Ccne2, Orc5l,
Rad50, and Mcm6); reproductive developmental process; and granulosa cell
expansion (Gdf9, Bmp15, Amh, Amhr2, Bmpr1b, Tgfb2, Foxl2, Pde3a, Esr2, Fshr,
Ybx2, Ccnd2, Ccnb1ip1, and Zp3); maternal effect genes required for embryo
development (Zar1, Npm2, Nlrp5, Dnmt1, H1foo, and Zfp57); amino acid degradation;
and ketogenesis (Hmgcs2, and Cpt1b). These results from the rat show that
hormones used for estrus synchronization (G(trt)) and ovarian hyper stimulation
(G + E(trt)) had minimal effects on gene expression, whereas induction of
ovulation (G + E + H(trt)) caused major changes in gene expression of rat COCs.
This study provides comprehensive information about regulated genes during late
follicle development and ovulation induction.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23239112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Hum Reprod. 2013 Mar;19(3):177-87. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gas059. Epub 2012 Nov 
29.

Steroidogenic enzyme expression in the human fetal liver and potential role in
the endocrinology of pregnancy.

O'Shaughnessy PJ(1), Monteiro A, Bhattacharya S, Fraser MJ, Fowler PA.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, Institute of Biodiversity,
Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
peter.oshaughnessy@glasgow.ac.uk

The human feto-maternal unit produces large amounts of steroid hormones,
particularly estrogens, during the second and third trimesters. The fetal adrenal
gland and the placenta are considered the principal tissues driving steroid
production but the fetal liver is likely to play an essential role in this
process. This study was designed to measure transcript expression of proteins
involved in steroid synthesis, metabolism, conjugation and signalling in the
human fetal liver and to examine sex differences and effects of maternal smoking.
Liver samples were taken from 55 normal fetuses from women undergoing second
trimester elective termination. Levels of 23 mRNA transcripts encoding steroid
synthesis/metabolic/conjugation enzymes and steroid receptors were measured by
real-time PCR. The expression of representative proteins was confirmed by western
blotting and immunohistochemistry. The human fetal livers expressed high levels
of CYP19A1, SULT2A1, SULT1E1, HSD17B2, SRD5A3 and CYP3A7. Lower levels of
SULT1A1, STS, UGT2B17, GPER, AKR1C3, UGT2B15, AR, CYP11A1, CYP21A2, HSD17B3,
HSD17B1 and SRD5A1 were also detectable. The expression of ESR, ESR2, CYP17A1 and
HSD3B transcripts was undetectable in most fetal livers, although HSD3B was shown
to be present by western blotting. Sex differences were limited to SRD5A3 (lower 
in females) and UGT2B17 (higher in females). Maternal smoking increased the
expression of CYP19A1, SULT2A1, UGT2B17, HSD17B2 and AKR1C3 and reduced the
expression of SRD5A3 in the male fetal liver. This study shows that the human
fetal liver is likely to have an extensive effect on circulating steroid levels
in the human fetus and mother. The most important of these effects will be
alterations to the species, conjugation and availability of estrogens in the
fetus. Maternal smoking is likely to reduce circulating androgen bioactivity in
male fetuses.

PMID: 23197595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Reprod Biomed Online. 2013 Jan;26(1):93-8. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2012.09.007. Epub 
2012 Sep 22.

Association of an oestrogen receptor gene polymorphism in Chinese Han women with 
endometriosis and endometriosis-related infertility.

Wang W(1), Li Y, Maitituoheti M, Yang R, Wu Z, Wang T, Ma D, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Research Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, PR China.

Endometriosis is a steroid-dependent complex disease. The oestrogen receptor
plays an important role by mediating oestrogen action and eutopic or ectopic
endometrium development. This study investigated whether single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in the genes for oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and oestrogen receptor
2 (ESR2) are associated with endometriosis and endometriosis-related infertility.
The participants included 157 infertile and 155 fertile endometriosis women as
well as 92 women with primary infertility and 265 fertile women as controls. The 
iPLEX Gold system (MassARRAY system, Sequenom) was used for genotyping of ESR1
and ESR2. Statistical analysis showed that ESR1 (rs3798573 A/G) was significantly
associated with endometriosis and endometriosis-related infertility (P=0.011,
P=0.009). No association was found with ESR1 (rs1159327 A/G, rs3020348 A/C) and
ESR2 (rs17179740 A/G) either for endometriosis or endometriosis-related
infertility. According to the revised American Fertility Society classification, 
all of the detected single-nucleotide polymorphisms had no association with
endometriosis in stage I-II or in stage III-IV. The results suggest that the ESR1
polymorphism rs3798573 A/G is associated with increased risk of endometriosis and
endometriosis-related infertility in Han women from central China. Endometriosis 
is an oestrogen-dependent complex disease, which is one of the most common causes
of infertility. Oestrogen receptors (ESR), which mediate oestrogen actions, are
considered to play an essential role in the pathogenesis of endometriosis.
Therefore, ESR may also play an important role in endometriosis-related
infertility. To investigate the association between ESR and endometriosis or
endometriosis-related infertility, detection of ESR polymorphisms have been
carried out in several populations by other researchers; however, the results
remain controversial. In a previous study of ours, through a pooling-based
genome-wide scan of endometriosis and controls, we obtained two highly ranked
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) that were individually located in introns
of the genes ESR1 and ESR2. To find more evidence of a relationship between ESR
and endometriosis or endometriosis-related infertility, the current study
selected for genotyping another two ESR1 SNP from a Japanese genome-wide
association study in endometriosis. According to the genotypes and the patients' 
histories, we found that the ESR1 polymorphism rs3798573 A/G was associated with 
risk of endometriosis and infertile endometriosis in Han women from central
China.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23177411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Biol Reprod. 2013 Jan 10;88(1):7. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.103614. Print 2013 
Jan.

Estrogen receptors alpha and beta in male and female gerbil prostates.

Rochel-Maia SS(1), Santos FC, Alonso-Magdalena P, Góes RM, Vilamaior PS, Warner
M, Gustafsson JÅ, Taboga SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo,
Brazil.

The Mongolian gerbil (Meriones unguiculatus, Gerbilinae: Muridae) is useful for
prostate studies, because both males and females spontaneously develop prostatic 
disorders with age. Estrogens regulate prostate homeostasis via two estrogen
receptors, ER alpha (ESR1) and ER beta (ESR2), but the cellular distribution and 
regulation of these receptors in the gerbil prostate has not been described. Both
receptors were localized by immunohistochemistry in the ventral prostate of
intact male and female gerbils, in males 7 and 21 days after castration, and in
females treated with testosterone for 7 and 21 days. In male and female adult
gerbils, ER alpha was detected mainly in prostatic stromal cells, whereas ER beta
was present mostly in secretory and basal cells. More ER alpha-positive stromal
cells were found in females than in males, as was a reduction toward the male
value in females treated with testosterone. Castration did not alter ER alpha
expression. Testosterone was necessary for maintenance of ER beta in the male
prostate epithelium: ER beta expression declined markedly in prostates of males
older than 1 yr, and castration of 4-mo-old males caused a reduction in ER beta
to levels seen in 1-yr-old males. Because ER beta is an antiproliferative
receptor, its loss with age may predispose the aging gerbil to proliferative
diseases of the prostate.

PMID: 23175773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2013 Mar;29(3):235-7. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2012.736552. Epub
2012 Nov 23.

A multigenic combination of estrogen related genes are associated with the
duration of fertility period in the Spanish population.

Mendoza N(1), Castro JE, Sánchez Borrego R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Granada, Granada,Spain.
nicomendoza@telefonica.net

OBJECTIVE: The duration of the fertile period (FP) can be considered a complex
parameter that depends on the interaction of multiple factors. In the present
study, the role of interaction between genetic variants within estrogen synthesis
and signaling pathways in the FP in Spanish women is studied.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located at
different candidate genes related to the estrogen signaling pathway were analyzed
in 1980 Spanish postmenopausal women.
RESULTS: Independently, none of the nine markers were significantly associated
with age at menopause. In contrast, survival analysis techniques suggest several 
epistatic interactions including these markers in relation to age at menopause,
especially between ESR2, NRIP1 and BMP15: women who showed the three markers ESR2
(AA), BMP15 (rs3897937) (TC) and NRIP1 (AA), the FP was shorter than the control 
group of women without any of these markers (32.36<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.49 versus 34.94<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.32
years; p = 0.026). The digenic BMP15 (rs3897937) (TC) and NRIP1 (AA) combination 
were also associated with a decreased duration of the FP (33.32<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.96 years, p =
0.031).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that interactions of estrogen-related alleles
may contribute to variance in FP in Spanish women.

PMID: 23173577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Curr Top Med Chem. 2012;12(19):2059-69.

Estrogen receptor 1 agonist PPT stimulates Slc2a4 gene expression and improves
insulin-induced glucose uptake in adipocytes.

Campello RS(1), Alves-Wagner AB, Lucas TF, Mori RC, Furuya DT, Porto CS, Machado 
UF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Erratum in
    Curr Top Med Chem. 2013;13(7):867.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is characterized by disruption in glycemic homeostasis, 
involving impaired insulin-induced glucose disposal. For that, reduced glucose
transporter GLUT4, encoded by Slc2a4 gene, plays a fundamental role. Conversely, 
increase in Slc2a4/GLUT4 expression improves glycemic homeostasis. Recent studies
have proposed that estradiol is able to modulate Slc2a4 expression, according to 
distinct effects upon estrogen receptors ESR1/ESR2. We hypothesize that
ESR1-agonist effect could stimulate Slc2a4 expression; thus, increasing cellular 
glucose disposal, which could be beneficial to glycemic control. Differentiated
3T3-L1 adipocytes were treated (24 hours) with selective ESR1- agonist PPT
1,3,5-tris(4-hydroxyphenyl)-4-propyl-1H-pyrazole, selective ESR1-antagonist MPP
1,3-Bis(4- hydroxyphenyl)-4-methyl-5-[4-(2-piperidinylethoxy)phenol]-1H-pyrazole 
dihydrochloride, and selective ESR2 agonist DPN
2,3-bis(4-Hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile, with/without 17ß-estradiol (E2). We
analyzed Slc2a4 mRNA (real time PCR) and GLUT4 protein (Western blotting)
expression, transcriptional activity of the Slc2a4 repressor Nuclear Factor- <U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B) (electrophoretic mobility shift assay), and cellular glucose disposal
(2-deoxi-D-[(3)H]glucose uptake, 2-DG). ESR1-agonist PPT enhanced Slc2a4/GLUT4
expression (~30%) in the absence or presence of 0.1 and 10 nmol/L E2, and
decreased the NF-<U+03BA>B binding activity (~50%). Conversely, ESR1-antagonist MPP,
together with E2, decreased Slc2a4/GLUT4 expression (20-40%) and increased NF-<U+03BA>B 
binding activity (~30%). Furthermore, treatment with ESR2- agonist DPN decreased 
Slc2a4/GLUT4 expression (20-50%). 2-DG uptake was modulated in parallel to that
observed in GLUT4 protein. The present results reveal that ESR1 activity
enhances, whereas ESR2 activity represses, Slc2a4/GLUT4 expression. These effects
are partially mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B, and allow parallel changes in adipocyte glucose 
disposal. Furthermore, the data provide evidences that ESR1-agonist PPT, as a
Slc2a4/GLUT4 enhancer, can be a promising coadjuvant drug for diabetes mellitus
therapy.

PMID: 23167795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2012 Dec;29(12):1421-5. doi: 10.1007/s10815-012-9884-x.
Epub 2012 Nov 13.

Risk of premature ovarian failure is associated to the PvuII polymorphism at
estrogen receptor gene ESR1.

Cordts EB(1), Santos AA, Peluso C, Bianco B, Barbosa CP, Christofolini DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Faculdade de Medicina do ABC,
Division of Human Reproduction and Genetics, Avenida Príncipe de Gales, 821,
Santo André, SP, Brazil 09060-650.

PURPOSE: Estrogen plays an important role in the human reproductive system and it
action is mediated mainly by two specific receptors: a (ERa) and ß (ERß). There
were described polymorphic variants in ESR1 and ESR2 genes and studies showed
controversial results regarding their association with premature ovarian failure.
We aimed to determine the prevalence of ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms in Brazilian 
patients and controls. After associate the polymorphisms with premature ovarian
failure (POF).
METHODS: Genetic association study was performed with 70 women with POF and 73
normally menopaused controls. Detection of ESR1 (PvuII/and XbaI) and ESR2 (AluI
and RsaI) gene polymorphisms were performed using TaqMan PCR. The
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) and haplotype effects were analyzed by
multivariate logistic regression and haplotype analysis and a p-value<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 was 
considered significant.
RESULTS: Individual SNP analysis revealed that PvuII polymorphism was
statistically associated with POF (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034) under a recessive model. Regarding 
XbaI, AluI and RsaI SNPs, no statistical difference was observed between POF
group and controls (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.575, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.258 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.483, respectively). Combined
genotypes of ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms did not identify a risk haplotype
associated with POF.
CONCLUSION: In Brazilian population evaluated results have demonstrated that the 
genetic variation in ESR1 gene (PvuII polymorphism) is associated to POF risk.

PMCID: PMC3528877
PMID: 23150099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 15;73(2):767-75. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2484. Epub
2012 Nov 13.

Common single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor ß promoter are
associated with colorectal cancer survival in postmenopausal women.

Passarelli MN(1), Phipps AI, Potter JD, Makar KW, Coghill AE, Wernli KJ, White E,
Chan AT, Hutter CM, Peters U, Newcomb PA.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Loss of estrogen receptor ß (ERß) expression in the gut is associated with
colorectal cancer (CRC) initiation and progression. Germline single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) in genes for the sex-steroid hormone receptors are not
strongly associated with CRC risk; however, these SNPs have not previously been
evaluated in relation to survival after diagnosis. We enrolled 729 women, ages 50
to 74, diagnosed with invasive CRC between 1997 and 2002 in 13 counties covered
by the Seattle-Puget Sound Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results cancer
registry. Participants provided germline DNA. We selected 99 tag-SNPs for the
androgen receptor (AR), ERa (ESR1), ERß (ESR2), and progesterone receptor (PGR)
genes. Mortality outcomes were ascertained from the National Death Index. During 
a median of 6.6 years of follow-up, 244 deaths occurred (161 from CRC). We
identified 20 SNPs (12 of ESR2 and 8 of PGR) for replication in 1,729 women
diagnosed with incident invasive CRC (555 deaths; 405 from CRC) from three
prospective cohort studies that participate in the Genetics and Epidemiology of
Colorectal Cancer Consortium. Three correlated SNPs in the promoter of ESR2
(rs2987983, rs3020443, and rs2978381) were statistically significant predictors
of CRC-specific and overall survival. Minor alleles of each were associated with 
improved survival [for rs2987983, CRC-specific HR, 0.77; 95% confidence interval 
(CI), 0.60-0.99 in the initial study, and HR, 0.79; CI, 0.64-0.98 in
replication]. No associations were noted for SNPs of AR, ESR1, or PGR. SNPs in
the promoter of ESR2 may be important to pathways related to the association
between ERß and tumor progression and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3588850
PMID: 23149914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Toxicology. 2013 Jan 7;303:17-24. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2012.10.019. Epub 2012 Nov
9.

Cultured human peripheral blood mononuclear cells alter their gene expression
when challenged with endocrine-disrupting chemicals.

Wens B(1), De Boever P, Verbeke M, Hollanders K, Schoeters G.

Author information: 
(1)Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO), Unit Environmental Risk
and Health, Mol, Belgium.

Endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) have the potential to interfere with the
hormonal system and may negatively influence human health. Microarray analysis
was used in this study to investigate differential gene expression in human
peripheral blood cells (PBMCs) after in vitro exposure to EDCs. PBMCs, isolated
from blood samples of four male and four female healthy individuals, were exposed
in vitro for 18h to either a dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB126, 1µM), 
a non-dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB153, 10µM), a brominated flame
retardant (BDE47, 10µM), a perfluorinated alkyl acid (PFOA, 10µM) or bisphenol
(BPA, 10µM). ANOVA analysis revealed a significant change in the expression of
862 genes as a result of EDC exposure. The gender of the donors did not affect
gene expression. Hierarchical cluster analysis created three groups and
clustered: (1) PCB126-exposed samples, (2) PCB153 and BDE47, (3) PFOA and BPA.
The number of differentially expressed genes varied per compound and ranged from 
60 to 192 when using fold change and multiplicity corrected p-value as filtering 
criteria. Exposure to PCB126 induced the AhR signaling pathway. BDE47 and PCB153 
are known to disrupt thyroid metabolism and exposure influenced the expression of
the nuclear receptors PPAR<U+03B3> and ESR2, respectively. BPA and PFOA did not induce
significant changes in the expression of known nuclear receptors. Overall, each
compound produced a unique gene expression signature affecting pathways and GO
processes linked to metabolism and inflammation. Twenty-nine genes were
significantly altered in expression under all experimental conditions. Six of
these genes (HSD11B2, MMP11, ADIPOQ, CEL, DUSP9 and TUB) could be associated with
obesity and metabolic syndrome. In conclusion, microarray analysis identified
that PBMCs altered their gene expression response in vitro when challenged with
EDCs. Our screening approach has identified a number of gene candidates that
warrant further study.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23146750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Steroids. 2013 Jan;78(1):8-14. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2012.10.005. Epub 2012 Nov
1.

Estrogen receptor ESR1 regulates the phospholipase C-inositol phosphate signaling
in the hippocampus from rats in proestrous and estrous phases.

Maruyama NO(1), Lucas TF, Porto CS, Abdalla FM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the involvement of estrogen
receptors in the activation of phospholipase C (PLC)-phosphoinositide hydrolysis 
in the hippocampus from rats in estrous and proestrous phases. 17ß-Estradiol (E2)
and ESR1-selective agonist PPT, but not ESR2-selective agonist DPN, induced a
rapid increase on total [³H]-inositol phosphate accumulation in the hippocampus
from both rats. These effects are mediated by PLC activation, since the
inhibition of this protein decreased the total [³H]-inositol phosphate
accumulation. The pretreatment with ESR1 and ESR2 antagonist ICI 182,780, but not
with GPER antagonist G-15, blocked the total [³H]-inositol phosphate accumulation
induced by E2 and PPT, confirming that ESR1 is upstream component regulating this
rapid effect. SRC family of protein tyrosine kinases inhibitor PP2 blocked the
total [³H]-inositol phosphate accumulation induced by E2 and PPT in hippocampus, 
suggesting that ESR1 undergoes translocation from the nuclei to the plasma
membrane region via SRC to activate rapid signaling pathways. Furthermore, the
magnitude of the response to E2 and PPT was higher in hippocampus from rats in
proestrous than in estrous. On the other hand, the expression of the ESR1 is
higher in hippocampus from rats in estrous than in proestrous, indicating that
the regulation of this receptor by estrous cycle does not play a role in the
magnitude of the response to E2 and PPT in hippocampus. In conclusion, our
results indicate that E2 activates SRC-mediated translocation of ESR1 to the
plasma membrane, which results in the activation of PLC-inositol phosphate
signaling pathway in rat hippocampus. Thus, these rapid estrogen actions in
hippocampus might be a key step mediating cellular events important for learning 
and memory.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Reproduction. 2012 Dec;144(6):723-35. doi: 10.1530/REP-12-0188. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Alteration in localization of steroid hormone receptors and coregulatory proteins
in follicles from cows with induced ovarian follicular cysts.

Salvetti NR(1), Alfaro NS, Velázquez MM, Amweg AN, Matiller V, Díaz PU, Ortega
HH.

Author information: 
(1)Morphological Sciences Department, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, National
University of Litoral (FCV-UNL), R.P. Kreder 2805, 3080 Esperanza, Santa Fe,
Argentina.

Cystic ovarian disease (COD) is an important cause of infertility in cattle. The 
altered follicular dynamics and cellular differentiation observed in COD may be
mediated through a disruption of the expression of steroid receptors and their
associated transcriptional cofactors. The aim of this study was to determine the 
protein expression profiles of ESR1, ESR2, PGR, AR, NCOA3, NCOR2, and PHB2 (REA) 
in ovarian follicles in an experimental model of COD induced by the
administration of ACTH. Ovaries were collected and follicles were dissected from 
heifers during the follicular phase (control) or from heifers treated with ACTH
to induce the formation of ovarian follicular cysts. Ovaries were fixed,
sectioned, and stained immunohistochemically for steroid receptors and the
associated transcription factors. The relative expression of ESR1 was similar in 
follicular cysts and in tertiary follicles from both control and cystic cows and 
was significantly higher than in secondary follicles. The expression of ESR2 in
the granulosa was higher in cystic follicles. No differences were seen for PGR.
The expression of androgen receptor was significantly increased in tertiary
follicles with lower immunostaining in cysts. The expression of NCOA3 was
observed in the granulosa and theca with a significantly increased expression in 
the theca interna of cystic follicles. The highest levels of NCOR2 expression in 
granulosa, theca interna, and theca externa were observed in cysts. In granulosa 
cells, NCOR2 levels increase progressively as follicles mature and the treatment 
had no effect. In summary, ovaries from animals with induced COD exhibited
altered steroid receptor expression compared with normal animals, as well as
changes in the expression of their regulators. It is reasonable to suggest that
in conditions characterized by altered ovulation and follicular persistence, such
as COD, changes in the intra-ovarian expression of these proteins could play a
role in their pathogenesis.

PMID: 23081895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Genetika. 2012 Aug;48(8):966-75.

[Phenotypic variation of spermatogenesis and a search for associations with
genetic polymorphism in 13 inbred mouse strains].

[Article in Russian]

Osadchuk LV, Tupikin AE, Morozov IV, Kleshchev MA, Bondar' AA, Osadchuk LV.

Adult mice of the BALB/cLac, PT, CBA/Lac, DD/He, A/He, SWR, NZB, GR, DBA/2J,
CC57Br, C57 B1/6J, A/Sn, and YT inbred strains were tested for the count,
motility, and morphology of sperms from the caudal region of the epididymis. The 
protein-coding regions of the cytochrome P450 aromatase (CYP19a1), estrogen
receptor 2 (ESR2), steroidogenic factor 1 (Nr5a1), and sex-determining (Sry) gene
were sequenced. A substantial genetic heterogeneity for the genes was observed,
as well as a phenotypic variation in spermatogenetic parameters, but the
variation was rather discordant. The specifics of the interstrain variation in
spermatogenetic parameters indicated that a physiological compensatory mechanism 
increases certain spermatogenetic parameters when other ones are low to maintain 
male fertility at a level sufficient for successful reproduction. For instance, a
high sperm production compensated for a low sperm motility in DD/He males. In the
issue of the protein-coding regions sequencing of the analyzed genes, 16 various 
mutations were observed. The decreases in proportion of motile sperms and in
their velocity were attributed to mutations (I63T and W133L) of the Sry gene in
the DD/He strain.

PMID: 23035548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Dec;97(12):4631-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2484. Epub 
2012 Sep 28.

Evidence of a functional estrogen receptor in parathyroid adenomas.

Haglund F(1), Ma R, Huss M, Sulaiman L, Lu M, Nilsson IL, Höög A, Juhlin CC,
Hartman J, Larsson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Cancer Centrum Karolinska, R8:04, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
Felix.Haglund@ki.se

CONTEXT: Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is most frequently present in
postmenopausal women. Although the involvement of estrogen has been suggested,
current literature indicates that parathyroid tumors are estrogen receptor (ER) a
negative.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate the expression of ERs and their
putative function in parathyroid tumors.
DESIGN: A panel of 37 parathyroid tumors was analyzed for expression and promoter
methylation of the ESR1 and ESR2 genes as well as expression of the ERa and
ERß1/ERß2 proteins. Transcriptome changes in primary cultures of parathyroid
adenoma cells after treatment with the selective ERß1 agonist diarylpropionitrile
(DPN) and 4-hydroxytamoxifen were identified using next-generation RNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry revealed very low expression of ERa, whereas all
informative tumors expressed ERß1 (n = 35) and ERß2 (n = 34). Decreased nuclear
staining intensity and mosaic pattern of positive and negative nuclei of ERß1
were significantly associated with larger tumor size. Tumor ESR2 levels were
significantly higher in female vs. male cases. In cultured cells, significantly
increased numbers of genes with modified expression were detected after 48 h,
compared to 24-h treatments with DPN or 4-hydroxytamoxifen, including the
parathyroid-related genes CASR, VDR, JUN, CALR, and ORAI2. Bioinformatic analysis
of transcriptome changes after DPN treatment revealed significant enrichment in
gene sets coupled to ER activation, and a highly significant similarity to tumor 
cells undergoing apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Parathyroid tumors express ERß1 and ERß2. Transcriptional changes
after ERß1 activation and correlation to clinical features point to a role of
estrogen signaling in parathyroid function and disease.

PMID: 23024189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Plant Cell Rep. 2013 Jan;32(1):45-59. doi: 10.1007/s00299-012-1339-4. Epub 2012
Sep 26.

Live imaging of DORNRÖSCHEN and DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE promoter activity reveals
dynamic changes in cell identity at the microcallus surface of Arabidopsis
embryonic suspensions.

Cole M(1), Jacobs B, Soubigou-Taconnat L, Balzergue S, Renou JP, Chandler JW,
Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Biozentrum, Universität zu Köln, Zülpicher 
Str. 47b, 50674, Köln, Germany.

KEY MESSAGE : Transgenic DRN::erGFP and DRNL::erGFP reporters access the window
from explanting Arabidopsis embryos to callus formation and provide evidence for 
the acquisition of shoot meristem cell fates at the microcalli surface. The
DORNRÖSCHEN (DRN) and DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE (DRNL) genes encode AP2-type transcription
factors, which are activated shortly after fertilisation in the zygotic
Arabidopsis embryo. We have monitored established transgenic DRN::erGFP and
DRNL::erGFP reporter lines using live imaging, for expression in embryonic
suspension cultures and our data show that transgenic fluorophore markers are
suitable to resolve dynamic changes of cellular identity at the surface of
microcalli and enable fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Although DRN::erGFP
and DRNL::erGFP are both activated in surface cells, their promoter activity
marks different cell identities based on real-time PCR experiments and whole
transcriptome microarray data. These transcriptome analyses provide no evidence
for the maintenance of embryogenic identity under callus-inducing high-auxin
tissue culture conditions but are compatible with the acquisition of shoot
meristem cell fates at the surface of suspension calli.

PMID: 23011125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e43890. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043890. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Anxiogenic effects of developmental bisphenol A exposure are associated with gene
expression changes in the juvenile rat amygdala and mitigated by soy.

Patisaul HB(1), Sullivan AW, Radford ME, Walker DM, Adewale HB, Winnik B,
Coughlin JL, Buckley B, Gore AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina, United States of America. hbpatisa@ncsu.edu

Early life exposure to Bisphenol A (BPA), a component of polycarbonate plastics
and epoxy resins, alters sociosexual behavior in numerous species including
humans. The present study focused on the ontogeny of these behavioral effects
beginning in adolescence and assessed the underlying molecular changes in the
amygdala. We also explored the mitigating potential of a soy-rich diet on these
endpoints. Wistar rats were exposed to BPA via drinking water (1 mg/L) from
gestation through puberty, and reared on a soy-based or soy-free diet. A group
exposed to ethinyl estradiol (50 µg/L) and a soy-free diet was used as a positive
estrogenic control. Animals were tested as juveniles or adults for anxiety-like
and exploratory behavior. Assessment of serum BPA and genistein (GEN), a soy
phytoestrogen, confirmed that internal dose was within a human-relevant range.
BPA induced anxiogenic behavior in juveniles and loss of sexual dimorphisms in
adult exploratory behavior, but only in the animals reared on the soy-free diet. 
Expression analysis revealed a suite of genes, including a subset known to
mediate sociosexual behavior, associated with BPA-induced juvenile anxiety.
Notably, expression of estrogen receptor beta (Esr2) and two melanocortin
receptors (Mc3r, Mc4r) were downregulated. Collectively, these results show that 
behavioral impacts of BPA can manifest during adolescence, but wane in adulthood,
and may be mitigated by diet. These data also reveal that, because ERß and
melanocortin receptors are crucial to their function, oxytocin/vasopressin
signaling pathways, which have previously been linked to human affective
disorders, may underlie these behavioral outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3434201
PMID: 22957036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Dev Biol. 2012 Nov 15;371(2):256-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.08.027. Epub 2012 
Aug 31.

Early transcriptional targets of MyoD link myogenesis and somitogenesis.

Maguire RJ(1), Isaacs HV, Pownall ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of York, Heslington, York, North Yorkshire YO10
5YW, UK.

In order to identify early transcriptional targets of MyoD prior to skeletal
muscle differentiation, we have undertaken a transcriptomic analysis on gastrula 
stage Xenopus embryos in which MyoD has been knocked-down. Our validated list of 
genes transcriptionally regulated by MyoD includes Esr1 and Esr2, which are known
targets of Notch signalling, and Tbx6, mesogenin, and FoxC1; these genes are all 
are known to be essential for normal somitogenesis but are expressed surprisingly
early in the mesoderm. In addition we found that MyoD is required for the
expression of myf5 in the early mesoderm, in contrast to the reverse relationship
of these two regulators in amniote somites. These data highlight a role for MyoD 
in the early mesoderm in regulating a set of genes that are essential for both
myogenesis and somitogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22954963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Bone Miner Metab. 2013 Jan;31(1):96-101. doi: 10.1007/s00774-012-0383-z. Epub
2012 Sep 5.

Association between estrogen receptor-ß dinucleotide repeat polymorphism and
incidence of femoral fracture.

Honma N(1), Mori S, Zhou H, Ikeda S, Mieno MN, Tanaka N, Takubo K, Arai T, Sawabe
M, Muramatsu M, Ito H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Team for Geriatric Pathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Gerontology, 35-2 Sakaecho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, 173-0015, Japan.
nhonma@tmig.or.jp

Estrogens are thought to play an important role in bone metabolism through
estrogen receptors (ER). Dinucleotide (cytosine-adenine, CA) repeat polymorphism 
in the human ER-ß gene (ESR2) has been reported to be associated with bone
mineral density. We aimed to further elucidate the importance of this
polymorphism in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis by examining its association
with the incidence of femoral fracture. Deoxyribonucleic acids extracted from the
renal cortex of 1489 consecutive Japanese autopsies (799 male, mean age 79 years,
690 female, mean age 82 years) with complete clinical/pathological data were
enrolled in the study. ESR2 CA repeat polymorphism was determined by polymerase
chain reaction using fluorescein-labeled primers. The presence or absence of
femoral fracture during each subject's lifetime was determined by thorough
examination of the clinical record. Incidence of femoral fracture in subjects
bearing at least one allele of 20 CA repeats (4/132, 3.0 %) was significantly
lower than in those without this allele (127/1357, 9.4 %, P = 0.0098). After
adjustments for age and sex, logistic regression analysis revealed that having no
allele of 20 CA repeats was an independent risk factor of femoral fracture
[adjusted odds ratio (OR) 3.875, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.392-10.788,
P = 0.0095], which was emphasized among women (adjusted OR 6.360, 95 % CI
1.520-26.618, P = 0.0133). Japanese subjects, especially women, bearing at least 
one allele of 20 CA repeats in the ESR2 may have a lower risk of femoral fracture
than those without it, suggesting this polymorphism plays a role in bone
metabolism.

PMID: 22948905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Urol. 2012 Oct;188(4 Suppl):1411-6. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.06.033. Epub 2012 
Aug 17.

Reduced expression of androgen receptor and myosin heavy chain mRNA in cremaster 
muscle of boys with nonsyndromic cryptorchidism.

Barthold JS(1), Wang Y, Reilly A, Robbins A, Figueroa TE, Banihani A, Hagerty J, 
Akins RE.

Author information: 
(1)Surgery/Urology and Nemours Biomedical Research, AI duPont Hospital for
Children, Wilmington, Delaware 19803, USA. jbarthol@nemours.org

PURPOSE: To better define the developmental mechanisms of nonsyndromic
cryptorchidism, we measured the expression of hormone receptor and muscle type
specific mRNAs in target tissues of boys with and those without nonsyndromic
cryptorchidism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Prospectively collected cremaster muscle and/or hernia sac
tissues from boys with congenital (79) or acquired (66) nonsyndromic
cryptorchidism and hernia/hydrocele (controls, 84) were analyzed for hormone
receptor (RXFP2, AR, ESR1, ESR2) and myosin heavy chain specific (MYH1, MYH2,
MYH7) mRNA expression using real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction. Log transformed mRNA, phenotype and feeding history data were
statistically analyzed using Pearson's correlation, ANOVA and 2-sample t tests.
RESULTS: AR mRNA expression was higher in cremaster muscle than in sac tissue,
and significantly lower in congenital and acquired nonsyndromic cryptorchidism
cases vs controls (p <0.01). Type 1 (slow/cardiac) MYH7 mRNA expression was also 
significantly reduced in both nonsyndromic cryptorchidism groups (p = 0.002),
while a reduction in type 2 (fast) MYH2 expression was more modest and
significant only for the congenital cryptorchidism group (p <0.05). Cremasteric
MYH7 and AR levels were strongly correlated (r(2) = 0.751, p <0.001). MYH7 and
ESR1 mRNA levels were higher and lower, respectively, in boys with nonsyndromic
cryptorchidism who were fed soy formula. Expression of other genes was not
measurable.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that boys with congenital and acquired nonsyndromic
cryptorchidism differentially express AR and slow twitch specific MYH7 mRNA in
the cremaster muscle, and that MYH7 expression is correlated with AR levels and
soy formula use. These differences in gene expression may reflect aberrant
hormonal signaling and/or innervation during development with the potential for
secondary functional effects and failed testicular descent.

Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3601375
PMID: 22906643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Gene. 2012 Oct 25;508(2):206-10. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.004. Epub 2012 Aug
11.

The ESR2 AluI 1730G>A (rs4986938) gene polymorphism is associated with fibrinogen
plasma levels in postmenopausal women.

Marini H(1), Currò M, Adamo EB, Polito F, Ferlazzo N, Bitto A, Atteritano M,
D'Anna R, Alibrandi A, Altavilla D, Squadrito F, Ientile R, Caccamo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical, Physiological and Nutritional Sciences, University 
of Messina, AOU Policlinico G. Martino, Via C. Valeria, Messina, Italy.

The incidence of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and resultant morbidity and
mortality are highly increased in postmenopausal women. Recent observations
indicate the involvement of estrogen receptor beta in the pathogenesis of CVD,
and the potential role of ESR2 gene polymorphisms as independent risk factors for
CVD. We aimed to investigate the possible association between the ESR2 AluI
1730G>A gene polymorphism (rs4986938) with different CVD risk markers, such as
body mass index (BMI), blood fibrinogen, glucose and insulin, homeostasis model
assessment of insulin resistance and urinary F2-isoprostanes, in 89
postmenopausal women. Genotyping for ESR2 1730G>A polymorphism showed the higher 
prevalence of heterozygous GA1730 genotype than either wild-type GG1730 or
homozygously mutated AA1730 genotype (50.6 vs 34.8 or 14.6%, respectively).
Statistical analysis of between-group variability revealed that mean levels of
the examined CVD risk markers, except BMI and fibrinogen, were within the normal 
range in all subjects grouped to different ESR2 1730G>A genotypes. Interestingly,
only fibrinogen levels were statistically different in AA1730 carriers compared
with other genotypes. The analysis of genotype relative risk showed a significant
elevation of plasma fibrinogen in AA1730 carriers compared with GG+GA ones. The
present data strongly indicate that genotyping for the ESR2 AluI 1730G>A gene
variant should be included in a screening panel for assessment of cardiovascular 
risk in menopausal women.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Drugs. 2012 Sep 10;72(13):1725-38. doi: 10.2165/11635960-000000000-00000.

Polymorphisms of estrogen receptors and risk of depression: therapeutic
implications.

Ryan J(1), Ancelin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1061, Montpellier, France. joanne.ryan@inserm.fr

Accumulating evidence suggests the involvement of estrogen in depression.
Estrogen can modulate neurotransmitter turnover, enhancing the levels of
serotonin and noradrenaline (norepinephrine), and it is involved in the
regulation of serotonin receptor number and function. Across the female
reproductive life, fluctuating estrogen levels and low levels have been
associated with depressed mood and there is strong support for a beneficial
effect of estrogen-containing hormone treatment in depressed peri-menopausal
women. Estrogen exerts its biological effects in large part through intracellular
activation of its principal receptors, estrogen receptor a (ESR1) and estrogen
receptor ß (ESR2). Genetic variation in the estrogen receptors may therefore
modify estrogen signalling, thus influencing a woman's susceptibility to
developing depression. This review provides a synthesis of studies that have
examined the association between estrogen receptor polymorphisms and
depression-related mood disorders across the lifetime. Studies were identified
through a search of the literature from January 1980 until March 2012 using
MEDLINE, Web of Knowledge, Cochrane Library and PsycINFO databases. The studies
conducted to date have produced inconsistent findings, which likely relates to
the large heterogeneity in terms of the populations, study design and depression 
measures used. It appears unlikely that the common ESR1 variants rs2234693 and
rs9340799 are associated with moderate depressive symptoms in women; however,
there is some evidence that indicates a significant association with more severe 
depressive symptoms, major depressive disorder and anxiety. There are too few
studies of ESR2 polymorphisms to draw any definite conclusions; however,
preliminary evidence suggests that specific variants may modify the risk of
depression associated with the use of hormone treatment in women. Few studies
have investigated associations in men, and they have focused almost exclusively
on ESR1, but all report non-significant findings. Much work is therefore still
needed in this field. If it is confirmed that specific estrogen receptor
polymorphisms are associated with the risk of depression, this could have
important preventive and therapeutic implications, with the potential to develop 
targeted estrogen receptor agonists and antagonists. Furthermore, it is possible 
that such therapies may be more effective in treating particular people with
depression based on their genetic profile, which is an exciting prospect given
that many people do not respond to current antidepressant treatments.

PMID: 22901010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2012 Nov;132(3-5):303-10. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.07.004. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Effects of progestins on local estradiol biosynthesis and action in the Z-12
endometriotic epithelial cell line.

Beranic N(1), Riner TL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Vrazov trg 2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Endometriosis is a common estrogen-dependent gynecological disease. In patients
with endometriosis estradiol can be synthesized locally in the endometriotic
lesions from inactive precursors of adrenal or ovarian origin, via the aromatase 
pathway. These increased estradiol levels stimulate proliferation of
endometriotic tissue. The progestins have been used in the therapy of
endometriosis for more than 40 years but their pharmacological action is still
not understood in detail. In the present study we therefore aimed to evaluate the
effects of three progestins most commonly used in the therapy of endometriosis;
medroxyprogesterone acetate, dydrogesterone and dienogest on expression of all
genes encoding enzymes of the aromatase pathway and estrogen receptors in the
Z-12 model epithelial cell line of peritoneal endometriosis, by qPCR and Western 
blotting. Our results show that application of medroxyprogestrone acetate,
dydrogesterone and dienogest significantly decreases HSD17B1 and CYP19A1
expression and significantly increases HSD17B2 expression. Dydrogesterone and
dienogest also significantly suppress ESR1 and ESR2 transcription, whereas
medroxyprogestrone acetate and dydrogesterone significantly reduce mRNA levels of
GPER. Our results thus suggest that in peritoneal endometriosis the beneficial
effects of these progestins can be explained by lower HSD17B1 and higher HSD17B2 
mRNA and protein levels, which lead to reduced local E2 biosynthesis. Although
progestins significantly decrease CYP19A1 mRNA levels, the protein itself was not
detectable by Western blotting. As progestins down-regulate expression of ESR1,
ESR2 and GPER, they might also prevent E2-mediated proliferation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22878119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2012 Oct 1;179(1):1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2012.06.028.
Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Seasonal variation in estrogen receptor ERa, but not ERß, androgen receptor and
aromatase, in the efferent ductules and epididymis of the big fruit-eating bat
Artibeus lituratus.

Oliveira RL(1), Nogueira JC, Mahecha GA, Oliveira CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Cx. Postal
486, CEP 31.270-901, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

The efferent ductules (ED) are a major target for estrogens, which act via the
estrogen receptors ERa (ESR1) and ERß (ESR2). ERa has been found in the ED of all
species studied so far. However, in the epididymis (EP), the expression of ERa is
controversial, as is data about the occurrence of aromatase in the epithelium
lining the excurrent ducts. Therefore, to further investigate this
estrogen-responsive system, we used a seasonal breeder, the Neotropical bat,
Artibeus lituratus, in which testicular expression of androgen (AR) and estrogen 
(ER) receptors vary with reproductive phase. The localization of aromatase, ERa, 
ERß and AR in the ED and EP of A. lituratus was investigated. The results showed 
that aromatase, AR and ERß were distributed throughout the excurrent ducts and
did not vary during the annual reproductive cycle. Conversely, ERa was detected
primarily in the ED epithelium, had marked seasonal variation and was increased
during regression, especially in the EP epithelium. The results suggest that ERa 
may be involved in preparing the male genital tract for recrudescence. Together, 
the data obtained under natural conditions emphasize that specific segments of
the excurrent ducts downstream of the testis are the primary targets for estrogen
action via ERa, which is similar to previous findings in animals lacking
functional ERa.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22841763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Biol Reprod. 2012 Sep 28;87(3):71. Print 2012 Sep.

Towards an understanding of the evolution of the chorioallantoic placenta:
steroid biosynthesis and steroid hormone signaling in the chorioallantoic
membrane of an oviparous reptile.

Cruze L(1), Kohno S, McCoy MW, Guillette LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Amniotes, mammals, reptiles, and birds form common extraembryonic membranes
during development to perform essential functions, such as protection, nutrient
transfer, gas exchange, and waste removal. Together with the maternal uterus,
extraembryonic membranes of viviparous (live-bearing) amniotes develop as an
endocrine placenta that synthesizes and responds to steroid hormones critical for
development. The ability of these membranes to synthesize and respond to steroid 
hormone signaling has traditionally been considered an innovation of placental
amniotes. However, our laboratory recently demonstrated that this ability extends
to the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) of an oviparous (egg-laying) amniote, the
domestic chicken, and we hypothesized that steroidogenic extraembryonic membranes
could be an evolutionarily conserved characteristic of all amniotes because of
similarities in basic structure, function, and shared evolutionary ancestry. In
this study, we examined steroid hormone synthesis and signaling in the CAM of
another oviparous amniote, the American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis).
We quantified mRNA expression of a steroidogenic factor involved in the
regulation of steroidogenesis (NR5A1), the key steroidogenic enzymes involved in 
the synthesis of progestins (HSD3B1), androgens (CYP17A1), and estrogens
(CYP19A1), and the receptors involved in the signaling of progestins (PR),
androgens (AR), estrogens (ESR1 and ESR2), and glucocorticoids (GR). Furthermore,
we performed protein immunolocalization for PR and ESR1. Collectively, our
findings indicate that the alligator CAM has the capability to regulate,
synthesize, and respond to steroid hormone signaling, thus, supporting our
hypothesis that the extraembryonic membranes of Amniota share a unifying
characteristic, that is, the ability to synthesize and respond to steroid
hormones.

PMID: 22811568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040162. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Significant role of estrogen and progesterone receptor sequence variants in
gallbladder cancer predisposition: a multi-analytical strategy.

Srivastava A(1), Sharma KL, Srivastava N, Misra S, Mittal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow, India.

BACKGROUND: Carcinoma of gallbladder (GBC) is an aggressive malignancy. The
higher incidence of gallbladder cancer in women has been partly attributed to
hormonal factors. Therefore the present study was designed to explore the role of
genetic variants in estrogen (ESR1, ESR2) and progesterone (PGR) receptors in
conferring risk of gallbladder cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The present case-control study recruited total of 860
subjects, including 410 GBC patients, 230 gallstone patients and 220 controls. We
examined the associations of 6 selected polymorphisms in three genes: ESR1
(rs2234693, rs9340799, rs1801132), ESR2 (rs1271572, rs1256049) and PGR
(rs1042838) with GBC risk. Genotyping for all the polymorphisms was done using
PCR-RFLP. Multifactor dimensionality reduction and classification and regression 
tree approaches were combined with logistic regression to discover high-order
gene-gene interactions in hormonal pathway.
RESULTS: On comparing the genotype frequency distribution in gallstone and GBC
patients with that of healthy subjects, the homozygous variant genotypes of
ESR1-397TT (rs2234693) polymorphism showed significant risk for developing
gallstone [odds ratio: OR = 2.9] and GBC [OR = 1.8] respectively. Detailed
haplotypes analysis suggested that ESR1 T( rs2234693)G( rs9340799)C( rs1801132)
have significant association in conferring risk for both gallstones [OR = 2.2]
and GBC [OR = 3.0]. However, the variant-containing genotypes (DI+II) of PGR
(rs1042838) showed low risk in both GBC [OR = 0.4] and gallstone patients [OR =
0.4].On performing the MDR analysis, ESR1 IVS1-397C>T, ESR1 IVS1-351A>G, and
ESR2-789 A>C yielded the highest testing accuracy of 0.634. These results were
further supported by the CART analysis which revealed that individuals with the
combined genotypes of ESR1-397 CT or TT, ESR1-351 AG or GG and ESR2 -789 AA had
the highest risk for GBC [OR = 3.9].
CONCLUSION: Using multi-analytical approaches, our study showed important role of
ESR1 IVS1-397C>T, ESR1 IVS1-351A>G, and ESR2-789 A>C variants in GBC
susceptibility and the risk appears to be mediated through gallstone dependent
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3393738
PMID: 22808109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Front Genet. 2012 Jul 11;3:129. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00129. eCollection 2012.

Compromised fertility disrupts Peg1 but not Snrpn and Peg3 imprinted methylation 
acquisition in mouse oocytes.

Denomme MM(1), White CR, Gillio-Meina C, Macdonald WA, Deroo BJ, Kidder GM, Mann 
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, London, ON, Canada.

Growth and maturation of healthy oocytes within follicles requires bidirectional 
signaling and intercellular gap junctional communication. Aberrant endocrine
signaling and loss of gap junctional communication between the oocyte and
granulosa cells leads to compromised folliculogenesis, oocyte maturation, and
oocyte competency, consequently impairing fertility. Given that oocyte-specific
DNA methylation establishment at imprinted genes occurs during this growth phase,
we determined whether compromised endocrine signaling and gap junctional
communication would disrupt de novo methylation acquisition using ERß and
connexin37 genetic models. To compare mutant oocytes to control oocytes, DNA
methylation acquisition was first examined in individual, 20-80 µm control
oocytes at three imprinted genes, Snrpn, Peg3, and Peg1. We observed that each
gene has its own size-dependent acquisition kinetics, similar to previous
studies. To determine whether compromised endocrine signaling and gap junctional 
communication disrupted de novo methylation acquisition,individual oocytes from
Esr2- and Gja4-deficient mice were also assessed for DNA methylation
establishment. We observed no aberrant or delayed acquisition of DNA methylation 
at Snrpn, Peg3, or Peg1 in oocytes from Esr2-deficient females, and no
perturbation in Snrpn or Peg3de novo methylation in oocytes from Gja4-null
females. However, Gja4 deficiency resulted in a loss or delay in methylation
acquisition at Peg1. One explanation for this difference between the three loci
analyzed is the late establishment of DNA methylation at the Peg1 gene. These
results indicate that compromised fertility though impaired intercellular
communication can lead to imprinting acquisition errors. Further studies are
required to determine the effects of subfertility/infertility originating from
impaired signaling and intercellular communication during oogenesis on imprint
maintenance during preimplantation development.

PMCID: PMC3394371
PMID: 22798963  [PubMed]


221. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40494. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040494. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

Microsatellites in the estrogen receptor (ESR1, ESR2) and androgen receptor (AR) 
genes and breast cancer risk in African American and Nigerian women.

Zheng Y(1), Huo D, Zhang J, Yoshimatsu TF, Niu Q, Olopade OI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Cancer Genetics and Global Health, Department of Medicine,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Genetic variants in hormone receptor genes may be crucial predisposing factors
for breast cancer, and microsatellites in the estrogen receptor (ESR1, ESR2) and 
androgen receptor (AR) genes have been suggested to play a role. We studied 258
African-American (AA) women with breast cancer and 259 hospital-based controls,
as well as 349 Nigerian (NG) female breast cancer patients and 296 community
controls. Three microsatellites, ESR1_TA, ESR2_CA and AR_CAG, in the ESR1, ESR2
and AR genes, respectively, were genotyped. Their repeat lengths were then
analyzed as continuous and dichotomous variables. Analyses of continuous
variables showed no association with breast cancer risk in either AA or NG at
ESR1_TA; AA cases had shorter repeats in the long allele of ESR2_CA than AA
controls (Mann-Whitney P=<U+200A>0.036; logistic regression P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.04, OR=<U+200A>0.91, 95% CI
0.83-1.00), whereas NG patients had longer repeats in the short allele than NG
controls (Mann-Whitney P=<U+200A>0.0018; logistic regression P=<U+200A>0.04, OR=<U+200A>1.06, 95% CI
1.00-1.11); and AA cases carried longer repeats in the short allele of AR_CAG
than AA controls (Mann-Whitney P=<U+200A>0.038; logistic regression P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03, OR=<U+200A>1.08, 
95% CI 1.01-1.15). When allele sizes were categorized as dichotomous variables,
we discovered that women with two long alleles of ESR2_CA had increased risk of
breast cancer (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.38, 95% CI 1.10-1.74; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006). This is the first study
to investigate these three microsatellites in hormonal receptor genes in relation
to breast cancer risk in an indigenous African population. After adjusting for
multiple-testing, our findings suggest that ESR2_CA is associated with breast
cancer risk in Nigerian women, whereas ESR1_TA and AR_CAG seem to have no
association with the disease among African American or Nigerian women.

PMCID: PMC3394707
PMID: 22792352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Feb 1;521(2):465-78. doi: 10.1002/cne.23185.

Sex-specific expression of estrogen receptors a and ß and Kiss1 in the postnatal 
rat amygdala.

Cao J(1), Patisaul HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27695, USA.

The rodent amygdaloid complex is composed of numerous subnuclei important for the
sex-specific regulation of sociosexual behavior. Although estrogen receptors
(ERs) are critical for organizing functional and cytoarchitectural sex
differences in these subnuclei, a detailed developmental profile of ER expression
in the amygdaloid complex is not available. Moreover, the kisspeptin gene (Kiss1)
was recently identified in the adult amygdala, but it remains unknown if it is
expressed during development. To fill these data gaps, rat brains (5-7/group)
were assessed on postnatal days (PNDs) 0, 2, 4, 7, and 19 for ER alpha (ERa;
Esr1), beta (ERß; Esr2), and Kiss1 expression using in situ hybridization.
Expression was quantified in the posterodorsal portion of the medial amygdala
posterodorsal (MePD), lateral (PLCo), and medial (PMCo) components of the
posterior cortical nucleus, and the amygdalohippocampal area (AHi). ERa
expression was high throughout the amygdala at birth, but sexually dimorphic only
in the AHi. ERa expression in the MePD and the PLCo showed a U-shaped expression 
pattern over time. In the PMCo, ERa expression decreased from PND 2 and remained 
low through PND 19. Sexually dimorphic expression of ERß in the MePD was observed
on PND 0, with higher levels in females, but reversed by PND 4 due to declining
levels in females. No Kiss1 signal was observed in the postnatal amygdala,
suggesting that expression arises after puberty. These data reveal that ER
expression is region-specific within the neonatal amygdala. These differences
likely contribute to sex differences in sociosexual behavior across the lifespan.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3492514
PMID: 22791648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jul 3;12:276. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-276.

Association of estrogen receptor beta variants and serum levels of estradiol with
risk of colorectal cancer: a case control study.

Wu H(1), Xu L, Chen J, Hu J, Yu S, Hu G, Huang L, Chen X, Yuan X, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

BACKGROUND: Endogenous estrogens may play a vital role in colorectal
tumorigenesis. Estrogen receptor beta is the predominant subtype which mediates
the biological effect of estrogens, while loss of expression of estrogen receptor
beta has been indicated as a common step in the development of colorectal cancer 
(CRC). Epidemiological studies have revealed several functional polymorphisms of 
estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) for cancer risk, but relevant study in CRC is
limited, particularly in men. This study aimed to investigate the association of 
circulating estradiol and variations of ESR2 with CRC risk in men.
METHODS: We initiated a case-control study consisting of 390 patients with CRC
and 445 healthy controls in men only. We genotyped ESR2 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) rs1256049 and rs4986938 and measured serum estradiol
concentration using chemilluminescence immunoassay. Multivariable logistic
regression model was performed to evaluate the associations between these
variables and CRC risk.
RESULTS: ESR2 rs1256049 CT/TT genotypes were associated with reduced risk of CRC 
(odds ratio [OR], 0.7, 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.5-1.0), while rs4986938
CT/TT genotypes were associated with increased risk of CRC (OR, 1.5, 95% CI,
1.0-2.1). In addition, the CRC risk increased with the number of risk genotypes
of these two SNPs in a dose-response manner (Ptrend, 0.003). Specifically,
subjects carrying risk genotypes of both SNPs had the highest risk of CRC (OR,
2.0, 95% CI, 1.3-3.3.). Moreover, serum estradiol concentration alone was
associated with risk of CRC in men (OR, 1.2, 95% CI, 1.0-1.3). However,
individuals presenting both rs4986938 CT/TT genotypes and high level of serum
estradiol had a high risk of CRC (OR, 2.3, 95% CI, 1.4-3.9), compared with those 
presenting CC genotype and low level of serum estradiol. The similar joint
results were not observed for SNP rs1256049.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that endogenous estrogen and genetic
variations in ESR2 may individually, or more likely jointly, affect CRC risk in
male Han Chinese population, while larger studies are needed to validate our
findings.

PMCID: PMC3472165
PMID: 22759347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2012;176:59-62.

Estrogen receptor 2 expression in back muscles of girls with idiopathic scoliosis
- relation to radiological parameters.

Rusin B(1), Kotwicki T, Glodek A, Andrusiewicz M, Urbaniak P, Kotwicka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Orthopedics and Traumatology, University of Medical
Sciences Poznan, Poland.

Deep paravertebral muscles and female sex hormones are potential elements
participating in idiopathic scoliosis development. Estrogen acts through estrogen
receptors: ESR1 and ESR2. There are no studies describing ESR2 expression in back
muscles in girls with idiopathic scoliosis. The aim of this study was to evaluate
ESR2 expression levels in back muscles on both sides of the spinal curve and
correlation between the expression level and scoliosis parameters. Asymmetrical
ESR2 expression in deep paravertebral muscles was found: 11 girls had higher
expression level on the convex side and 5 girls had higher expression level on
the concave side of the curvature. Patients with ESR2 (convex/concave) ratio = 1 
presented positive correlation between ESR2 ratio and Cobb angle.

PMID: 22744458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 15;132(4):951-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27688. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Estrogen receptor-ß gene polymorphism and colorectal cancer risk: effect modified
by body mass index and isoflavone intake.

Honma N(1), Yamamoto K, Ohnaka K, Morita M, Toyomura K, Kono S, Muramatsu M, Arai
T, Ueki T, Tanaka M, Kakeji Y, Maehara Y, Okamura T, Ikejiri K, Futami K, Maekawa
T, Yasunami Y, Takenaka K, Ichimiya H, Terasaka R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Team for Geriatric Pathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan. nhonma@tmig.or.jp

Estrogen receptor (ER)-ß signaling has generally been implicated in protection
against colorectal cancer. The ER-ß gene cytosine-adenine (ESR2 CA) repeat
polymorphism was reported to be associated with colorectal cancer, although
showing contradicting results probably caused by ethnicity or age distribution of
the subjects. We investigated the association between this polymorphism and the
colorectal cancer risk in a community-based case-control study in Japan (685
cases/778 controls), including only subjects younger than 75. The effect
modifications of the body mass index (BMI) and isoflavone intake were also
examined. ESR2 CA repeat polymorphism was determined by polymerase chain reaction
using fluorescein-labeled primers. CA repeat alleles were classified into short
(S) allele (<22 repeats) and long (L) allele (= 22 repeats). Subjects were
divided into three genotype groups (SS/SL/LL). The risk of colon cancer, but not 
of rectal cancer, was increased with an increasing number of L alleles among
postmenopausal women; age-adjusted odds ratio (OR) for SL and LL genotypes
compared with the SS genotype were 1.78 and 2.91, respectively (trend p = 0.002).
Increased risks of colon cancer associated with the L allele were more evident
among postmenopausal women with low BMI (<25 kg m(-2)) or with high isoflavone
intake. Such associations were not observed among men or premenopausal women.
Having longer ESR2 CA repeat increases colon cancer risk among postmenopausal
women younger than 75, possibly with modification of BMI and isoflavone intake.
Aging and estrogenic condition may be important in the colon cancer pathogenesis 
associated with ESR2 CA repeat polymorphism.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22729816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2012;3(2):134-43. Epub 2012 May 15.

Female reproductive status and circulating blood leukocyte expression of selected
metabolic or signaling genes involved in sex steroid metabolism.

Osuch JR(1), Hsu WW, Todem D, Landgraf J, Mikucki D, Haan PS, Karmaus W.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, College of
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI,USA.
janet.osuch@hc.msu.edu

OBJECTIVE: To examine the blood leukocyte expression of 22 sex steroid
metabolic/signaling genes according to female reproductive status.
METHODS: Michigan Fisheaters' Cohort participants underwent blood collection
during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle or randomly in non-menstruating
participants. Gene expression (GE) was measured using Taqman hydrolysis probes
and quantitative RT-PCR. Repeatability of four genes was determined in a
subgroup.
RESULTS: Five premenstrual, 57 premenopausal (20 users of systemic hormonal
contraception), and 43 postmenopausal females participated. After Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons of median GE between groups, three findings
remained significant: greater GE of AhR in postmenopausal women than in
premenopausal non-users of systemic hormonal contraception; and greater GE of
ESR2 and HSD17B7 in premenstrual girls compared to postmenopausal women. Modest
intra-class correlations were identified for CYP 19, ESR1, and ESR2 GE measured
both in 2007 and 2010, but no intra-class correlation over the same time period
was found for CYP17.
CONCLUSIONS: There was little differential variation of blood leukocyte sex
steroid ge between premenopausal women in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle
and postmenopausal women for most genes analyzed, but it will be necessary to
make statistical adjustments in future epidemiologic studies in two
circumstances: 1) when comparing AhR GE in premenopausal women non-users of
systemic hormone contraception with postmenopausal women and 2) when comparing
ESR2 and HSD17B7 GE in studies that include premenstrual girls. Developmental
differences may explain the differential GE found in ESR2 and HSD17B7 in
premenstrual girls compared with postmenopausal women.

PMCID: PMC3376919
PMID: 22724050  [PubMed]


227. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38700. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038700. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Genetic polymorphisms influence the ovarian response to rFSH stimulation in
patients undergoing in vitro fertilization programs with ICSI.

Boudjenah R(1), Molina-Gomes D, Torre A, Bergere M, Bailly M, Boitrelle F, Taieb 
S, Wainer R, Benahmed M, de Mazancourt P, Selva J, Vialard F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Cytogenetics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 
Poissy Saint Germain Medical Centre, Poissy, France. boudjenahradia@yahoo.fr

INTRODUCTION: Obtaining an adequate number of high-quality oocytes is a major
challenge in controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH). To date, a range of
hormonal and clinical parameters have been used to optimize COH but none have
significant predictive value. This variability could be due to the genetic
predispositions of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Here, we assessed the 
individual and combined impacts of thirteen SNPs that reportedly influence the
outcome of in vitro fertilisation (IVF) on the ovarian response to rFSH
stimulation for patients undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection program
(ICSI).
RESULTS: Univariate analysis revealed that only FSHR, ESR2 and p53 SNPs
influenced the number of mature oocytes. The association was statistically
significant for FSHR (p=0.0047) and ESR2 (0.0017) in the overall study population
and for FSHR (p=0.0009) and p53 (p=0.0048) in subgroup that was more homogeneous 
in terms of clinical variables. After Bonferroni correction and a multivariate
analysis, only the differences for FSHR and ESR2 polymorphisms were still
statistically significant. In a multilocus analysis, only the FSHR and AMH SNP
combination significantly influenced oocyte numbers in both population (p<0.01).
DISCUSSION: We confirmed the impact of FSHR and ESR2 polymorphisms on the IVF
outcome. Furthermore, we showed for the first time that a p53 polymorphism (which
is already known to impact embryo implantation) could influence the ovarian
response. However, given that this result lost its statistical significance after
multivariate analysis, more data are needed to draw firm conclusions. Only the
FSHR and AMH polymorphism combination appears to influence mature oocyte numbers 
but this finding also needs to be confirmed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A 13 gene polymorphisms: FSHR(Asn680Ser), p53(Arg72Pro),
AMH(Ile49Ser), ESR2(+1730G>A), ESR1(-397T>C), BMP15(-9C>G), MTHFR1(677C>T),
MTHFR2(1298A>C), HLA-G(-725C>G), VEGF(+405G>C), TNFa(-308A>G), AMHR(-482 A>G),
PAI-1 (4 G/5 G), multiplex PCR assay was designed to genotype women undergoing
ICSI program. We analyzed the overall study population (n=427) and a subgroup
with homogeneous characteristics (n=112).

PMCID: PMC3372493
PMID: 22701696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Horm Behav. 2012 Jul;62(2):128-35. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.05.012. Epub 2012
Jun 8.

Experience-facilitated improvements in pup retrieval; evidence for an epigenetic 
effect.

Stolzenberg DS(1), Stevens JS, Rissman EF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia School of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, 1340 Jefferson Park Avenue, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.
danielle.stolzenberg@gmail.com

The quality and quantity of maternal care received during infancy are highly
predictive of successful infant development. It has been well established,
primarily in rats, that the combination of hormonal and infant stimuli at birth
modifies neural circuits that regulate maternal responsiveness. During subsequent
interactions, infant stimuli are more likely to elicit rapid maternal
responsiveness. Some species, such as humans, can display maternal care in the
absence of the endocrine events of pregnancy and birth. Similarly, virgin
C57BL/6J female mice, display maternal care toward infants, and experience with
infants elicits long-lasting increases in maternal care. We hypothesized that
these experience-induced changes in behavior may be mediated by chromatin
modifications, which in turn change expression of genes that promote maternal
care. One site of action is the medial preoptic area (MPOA). To test our
hypothesis we treated virgin female mice with sodium butyrate, a histone
deacetylase inhibitor. This treatment potentiated maternal responsiveness as well
as the expression of several genes: estrogen receptor ß (Esr2), oxytocin (Oxt),
and cyclicAMP response element binding protein (CREB) binding protein (Crebbp; a 
histone acetyltransferase) in the MPOA. These data suggest that experience
induces high levels of maternal care via epigenetic modifications.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3474355
PMID: 22687346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2012 Dec;27(12):1587-95. doi: 10.1007/s00384-012-1505-8.
Epub 2012 May 30.

Genetic variation in insulin pathway genes and distal colorectal adenoma risk.

Levine AJ(1), Ihenacho U, Lee W, Figueiredo JC, Vandenberg DJ, Edlund CK, Davis
BD, Stern MC, Haile RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Genetic Epidemiology, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, NRT 1450 Biggy Street Room 1509A,
Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. ajoanlev@usc.edu

BACKGROUND: Insulin, glucose, and other insulin-related proteins that mediate
insulin signaling are associated with colorectal neoplasia risk, but associations
with common genetic variation in insulin axis genes are less clear. In this
study, we used a comprehensive tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
approach to define genetic variation in six insulin axis genes (IGF1, IGF2,
IGFBP1, IGFBP3, IRS1, and IRS2) and three genes associated with estrogen
signaling (ESR1, ESR2, and PGR).
METHODS: We assessed associations between SNPs and distal colorectal adenoma
(CRA) risk in a case-control study of 1,351 subjects. Cases were individuals with
one or more adenomas diagnosed during sigmoidoscopy, and controls were
individuals with no adenomas at the sigmoidoscopy exam. We used unconditional
logistic regression assuming an additive model to assess SNP-specific risks
adjusting for multiple comparisons with P (act).
RESULTS: Distal adenoma risk was significantly increased for one SNP in IGF2 [per
minor allele OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.41; 95 % confidence interval (CI)<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.16, 1.67; P
(act)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005] and decreased for an ESR2 SNP (per minor allele OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.78; 95 %
CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.66, 0.91; P (act)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.041). There was no statistically significant
heterogeneity of these associations by race, sex, BMI, physical activity, or, in 
women, hormone replacement therapy use. Risk estimates did not differ in the
colon versus rectum or for smaller (<1 cm) versus larger (>1 cm) adenomas.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that selected genetic variability in IGF2 and
ESR2 may be modifiers of CRA risk.

PMID: 22645077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul;57(7):449-52. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.53. Epub 2012 May 24.

Haplotype analysis of ESR2 in Japanese patients with spermatogenic failure.

Ogata T(1), Fukami M, Yoshida R, Nagata E, Fujisawa Y, Yoshida A, Yoshimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, 
Japan. tomogata@hama-med.ac.jp

The prevalence of spermatogenic failure (SF) has gradually increased during the
past few decades at least in several countries. Although multiple factors would
be involved in this phenomenon, one important factor would be excessive estrogen 
effects via estrogen receptors (ERs). Thus, we performed haplotype analysis of
ESR2 encoding ERß in 125 Japanese SF patients and 119 age-matched control males, 
using single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 1-9 that are widely distributed on
the ~120-kb genomic sequence of ESR2. Consequently, a linkage disequilibrium (LD)
block was detected in an ~60-kb region encompassing SNPs 2-7 in both groups, and 
four major estimated haplotypes were identified within the LD block. Furthermore,
the most prevalent 'TGTAGA' haplotype was found to be significantly associated
with SF, with the P-value obtained by the Cochran-Armitage trend test (0.0029)
being lower than that obtained by a 100<U+2009>000-times permutation test (0.0038) to
cope with the problem of multiple comparisons. The results, in conjunction with
our previous data indicating lack of a susceptibility factor on ESR1 encoding
ERa, imply that the specific 'TGTAGA' haplotype of ESR2 raises the susceptibility
to the development of SF.

PMID: 22622360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Reproduction. 2012 Jul;144(1):111-22. doi: 10.1530/REP-12-0098. Epub 2012 May 17.

Absence of seasonal changes in FSHR gene expression in the cat cumulus-oocyte
complex in vivo and in vitro.

Hobbs RJ(1), Howard J, Wildt DE, Comizzoli P.

Author information: 
(1)Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, Center for Species Survival,
National Zoological Park, PO Box 37012, MRC 5502, Washington, District of
Columbia 20013, USA. hobbsr@si.edu

Domestic cat oocytes are seasonally sensitive to FSH. Compared with those
collected during the breeding season, oocytes from the nonbreeding (NB) season
require more FSH during in vitro maturation to achieve comparable developmental
competence. This study tested the hypothesis that this seasonal variation was due
to altered expression of FSH receptors (FSHR) and/or FSH-induced genes. Relative 
expression levels of FSHR mRNA and FSH-enhanced gene estrogen receptor ß (ESR2)
were measured by qPCR in whole ovaries and immature cumulus-oocyte complexes
(COCs) isolated from cat ovaries during the natural breeding vs NB seasons.
Expression levels of FSH-induced genes prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2
(PTGS2), early growth response protein-1 (EGR1), and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) were examined in mature COCs from both seasons that were a)
recovered in vivo or b) matured in vitro with conventional (1 µg/ml) or high (10 
µg/ml) FSH concentrations. Overall, FSHR mRNA levels were lower in whole ovaries 
during the NB compared with breeding season but were similar in immature COCs,
whereas ESR2 levels did not differ in either group between intervals. We observed
changes in PTGS2, EGR1, and EGFR mRNA expression patterns across maturation in
COCs within but not between the two seasons. The lack of seasonal differentiation
in FSH-related genes was not consistent with the decreased developmental capacity
of oocytes fertilized during the NB season. These findings reveal that the
seasonal decrease in cat oocyte sensitivity to FSH occurs both in vivo and in
vitro. Furthermore, this decline is unrelated to changes in expression of FSHR
mRNA or mRNA of FSH-induced genes in COCs from antral follicles.

PMID: 22596062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. APMIS. 2012 Jun;120(6):451-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2011.02850.x. Epub 2011
Dec 9.

Oestrogen receptor ß in NSCLC - prevalence, proliferative influence, prognostic
impact and smoking.

Karlsson C(1), Helenius G, Fernandes O, Karlsson MG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Sweden.

In non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) there are gender differences. The female
gender is associated with more adenocarcinomas (ADCA), among both smokers and
non-smokers compared to men. Women with NSCLC have a better prognosis compared to
men, regardless of other factors. A possible role for oestrogen receptor (ER)
signalling has been proposed. The role for ERß in NSCLC is still not clear,
especially concerning the impact of smoking. In a material of NSCLC (n = 262),
ERß and cyclins A1 and A2 were studied by immunohistochemistry on formalin-fixed 
paraffin embedded tissue. In 137 of those cases, frozen material was available,
on which expression analysis of ESR2 (ERß) and cyclin A1 were performed. Data
were correlated to histology, gender, smoking habits, stage and clinical outcome.
ERß was expressed in 86% of the cases. ERß was most frequently expressed in Stage
I ADCAs, especially in male subjects. A correlation between ERß expression and
cyclins was observed in ADCA, also with a male predominance. ERß transcripts had 
a positive prognostic impact in ADCA. ERß transcripts were increased in NSCLC
among smokers compared to non-smokers. In conclusion, our data support a role for
ERß in lung ADCAs, proposing a role for ERß in lungcarcinogenesis, especially
among smokers.

© 2011 The Authors. APMIS © 2011 APMIS.

PMID: 22583357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Pharmacol Rep. 2012;64(1):185-90.

Effect of ESR1 and ESR2 gene polymorphisms on rheumatoid arthritis treatment with
methotrexate.

Pawlik A(1), Dziedziejko V, Kurzawski M, Safranow K, Kotrych D, Bohatyrewicz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacokinetics and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring, Pomeranian
Medical University, Powstanców Wlkp. 72, PL 70-111 Szczecin, Poland.
pawand@poczta.onet.pl

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex autoimmune disease with clinical
prevalence in women. Moreover, women have poorer response to treatment than men. 
Possible reasons for gender differences in response to treatment could be
explained on the basis of sex hormones and their receptors. The optimal strategy 
in treatment of RA is to use effective disease modifying antirheumatic drugs
(DMARDs) such as methotrexate (MTX). The aim of the present study was to examine 
the association between polymorphisms in the ESR1 and ESR2 genes and the response
to treatment of RA patients with methotrexate. The study was carried out on 156
women diagnosed with active rheumatoid arthritis, treated with MTX. Good
responders were defined as patients who were receiving MTX and had a DAS28 of =
2.4 after 6 months of therapy (patients with remission of disease symptoms).
Poor-responders were defined as patients who were receiving MTX and had a DAS28
of > 2.4. There were no statistically significant associations of ESR1 and ESR2
gene polymorphisms with response to treatment. The results of the present study
suggest that the polymorphisms rs9340799:A>G and rs2234693:T>C in ESR1 gene and
rs4986938:G>A and 1256049:G>A in ESR2 gene are not associated with response to RA
treatment with MTX.

PMID: 22580535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Proteomics. 2012 Jul 19;75(14):4555-69. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.04.032. Epub 
2012 May 2.

Identification and quantification of concentration-dependent biomarkers in
MCF-7/BOS cells exposed to 17ß-estradiol by 2-D DIGE and label-free proteomics.

Collodoro M(1), Lemaire P, Eppe G, Bertrand V, Dobson R, Mazzucchelli G, Widart
J, De Pauw E, De Pauw-Gillet MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Histology-Cytology, GIGA-R and CART, University of Liège, Allée 
de la Chimie 3, Sart-Tilman, B 4000 Liège, Belgium.

This paper reports the identification of biomarkers resulting from the exposure
of MCF-7/BOS cells to 17ß-estradiol (E(2)). The biomarkers were identified using 
2 independent and complementary techniques, 2-D DIGE/MALDI-TOF peptide mass
fingerprint, and 2-D UPLC-ESI MS/MS. They were identified from the cytosolic
fractions of cells treated for 24h with mitogenic concentrations of 1, 30 and 500
pM of 17ß-estradiol. Five biomarkers were up-regulated proteins, namely HSP 74,
EF2, FKBP4, EF1 and GDIB and one was a down-regulated protein, namely K2C8. Three
of these proteins, EF2, FKBP4 and K2C8 are implicated in a network centered on
the estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 as well as on AKT1. After the discovery
phase, three biomarkers were selected to test the presence of estrogens using
selected reaction monitoring (SRM). They were monitored using SRM after
incubation of MCF-7/BOS in the presence of E(2) for confirmation or selected
xenoestrogens. Daidzein, coumestrol and enterolactone induced an up-regulation of
EF2 and FKPB4 proteins, while tamoxifen and resveratrol induced a
down-regulation. The exposure of all phytoestrogens induced the down-regulation
of K2C8. These markers form a preliminary molecular signature that can be used
when testing the estrogenic activity of xenobiotics, either pure or in mixtures.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22580036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Prostate. 2013 Jan;73(1):1-10. doi: 10.1002/pros.22534. Epub 2012 May 1.

Association of variants in estrogen-related pathway genes with prostate cancer
risk.

Holt SK(1), Kwon EM, Fu R, Kolb S, Feng Z, Ostrander EA, Stanford JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. skholt@fhcrc.org

BACKGROUND: Through mediation of estrogen receptors, estradiol has been shown to 
have both carcinogenic and anti-carcinogenic effects on the prostate. We
performed a population-based case-control study to investigate variants in
estrogen-related genes ESR1, ESR2, CYP19A1, CYP1A1, and CYP1B1 and the potential 
association with risk of prostate cancer (PCa).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We evaluated PCa risk conferred by 73 single nucleotide
polymorphisms in 1,304 incident PCa cases and 1,266 age-matched controls.
Analysis included stratification by clinical features and assessment of
environmental modifiers.
RESULTS: There was evidence of altered risk of developing PCa for variants in
ESR1, CYP1A1, and CYP1B1, however, only CYP1B1 rs1056836 retained significance
after adjustment for multiple comparisons. An association with risk for more
aggressive PCa was observed for variants in ESR1, ESR2, and CYP19A1, but none was
significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons. There was no effect
modification by obesity.
CONCLUSIONS: Germline genetic variation of these estrogen pathway genes may
contribute to risk of PCa. Additional studies to validate these results and
examine the functional consequence of validated variants are warranted.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3544476
PMID: 22549291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34828. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034828. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Potential role of aromatase over estrogen receptor gene polymorphisms in migraine
susceptibility: a case control study from North India.

Ghosh J(1), Joshi G, Pradhan S, Mittal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, India.

BACKGROUND: The present study was undertaken to find out the role of estrogen
pathway related gene polymorphisms in susceptibility to migraine in Northern
Indian population. Aromatase, CYP19A1 (rs10046 and rs4646); estrogen receptors,
ESR1 (rs2234693, rs1801132, rs2228480 and rs9340799) and ESR2 (rs1271572 and
rs1256049) polymorphisms were selected for the present study.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The patients were recruited in two cohorts -
primary (207) and replicative (127) along with 200 healthy controls and genotyped
for various polymorphisms. Logistic regression analysis was applied for
statistical analyses. The results were validated in the replicative cohort and
pooled by meta analysis using Fisher's and Mantel-Haenszel test. Furthermore,
Benjamini - Hochberg false discovery rate test was used to correct for multiple
comparisons. CYP19A1 rs10046 and CYP19A1 rs4646 polymorphisms were found to
confer risk and protective effect, respectively. Out of four ESR1 polymorphisms, 
only rs2234693 variant allele was significantly associated in migraine with aura.
No significant associations were observed for ESR2 polymorphisms. Significant
haplotypes were identified for CYP19A1 and ESR1 polymorphisms. Gene- gene
interactions of genotypes as well as haplotypes were observed for CYP19A1- ESR1
showing both risk and protective combinations.
CONCLUSION: We strongly suggest CYP19A1 polymorphisms to be the major
contributing factors in migraine susceptibility instead of genetic variants of
estrogen receptors.

PMCID: PMC3325278
PMID: 22511967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Exp Dermatol. 2012 May;21(5):390-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2012.01469.x.

Selected variants of the steroid-5-alpha-reductase isoforms SRD5A1 and SRD5A2 and
the sex steroid hormone receptors ESR1, ESR2 and PGR: no association with female 
pattern hair loss identified.

Redler S, Tazi-Ahnini R, Drichel D, Birch MP, Brockschmidt FF, Dobson K, Giehl
KA, Refke M, Kluck N, Kruse R, Lutz G, Wolff H, Böhm M, Becker T, Nöthen MM, Betz
RC, Messenger A.

Female pattern hair loss (FPHL) is a common disorder with a complex mode of
inheritance. Although understanding of its etiopathogenesis is incomplete, an
interaction between genetic and hormonal factors is assumed to be important. The 
involvement of an androgen-dependent pathway and sex steroid hormones is the most
likely hypothesis. We therefore selected a total of 21 variants from the
steroid-5-alpha-reductase isoforms SRD5A1 and SRD5A2, the sex steroid hormone
receptors ESR1, ESR2 (oestrogen receptor) and PGR (progesterone receptor) and
genotyped these in a case-control sample of 198 patients (145 UK; 53 German
patients) and 329 controls (179 UK; 150 German). None of these variants showed
any significant association, either in the overall UK and German samples or in
the subgroup analyses. In summary, the present results, while based on a limited 
selection of gene variants, do not point to the involvement of SRD5A1, SRD5A2,
ESR1, ESR2 or PGR in FPHL.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22509838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Front Pharmacol. 2012 Mar 30;3:54. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2012.00054. eCollection
2012.

Whole genome amplification of DNA for genotyping pharmacogenetics candidate
genes.

Philips S(1), Rae JM, Oesterreich S, Hayes DF, Stearns V, Henry NL, Storniolo AM,
Flockhart DA, Skaar TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Indiana University 
School of Medicine Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Whole genome amplification (WGA) technologies can be used to amplify genomic DNA 
when only small amounts of DNA are available. The Multiple Displacement
Amplification Phi polymerase based amplification has been shown to accurately
amplify DNA for a variety of genotyping assays; however, it has not been tested
for genotyping many of the clinically relevant genes important for
pharmacogenetic studies, such as the cytochrome P450 genes, that are typically
difficult to genotype due to multiple pseudogenes, copy number variations, and
high similarity to other related genes. We evaluated whole genome amplified
samples for Taqman() genotyping of SNPs in a variety of pharmacogenetic genes.
In 24 DNA samples from the Coriell human diversity panel, the call rates, and
concordance between amplified (~200-fold amplification) and unamplified samples
was 100% for two SNPs in CYP2D6 and one in ESR1. In samples from a breast cancer 
clinical trial (Trial 1), we compared the genotyping results in samples before
and after WGA for three SNPs in CYP2D6, one SNP in CYP2C19, one SNP in CYP19A1,
two SNPs in ESR1, and two SNPs in ESR2. The concordance rates were all >97%.
Finally, we compared the allele frequencies of 143 SNPs determined in Trial 1
(whole genome amplified DNA) to the allele frequencies determined in unamplified 
DNA samples from a separate trial (Trial 2) that enrolled a similar population.
The call rates and allele frequencies between the two trials were 98 and 99.7%,
respectively. We conclude that the whole genome amplified DNA is suitable for
Taqman() genotyping for a wide variety of pharmacogenetically relevant SNPs.

PMCID: PMC3315790
PMID: 22479249  [PubMed]


239. Rheumatol Int. 2013 Mar;33(3):575-82. doi: 10.1007/s00296-012-2386-4. Epub 2012
Mar 31.

Hormonal parameters and sex hormone receptor gene polymorphisms in men with
autoimmune diseases.

Doukas C(1), Saltiki K, Mantzou A, Cimponeriu A, Terzidis K, Sarika L, Mavrikakis
M, Sfikakis P, Alevizaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Therapeutics, Athens University School of Medicine,
Athens, Greece.

Autoimmune diseases (ADs) are more common in women than in men. Sex hormones may 
play a role. Sex hormone receptors (SHR) are expressed in cells of the immune
system. We investigated the possible role of hormonal parameters and of common
polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1), beta (ESR2), and androgen
receptor (AR) genes in the appearance of AD in men. 277 men were studied; 125
with =1 AD: Hashimoto's autoimmune thyroiditis (n = 65), Graves' disease (n =
12), SLE (n = 10), and RA (n = 38). 152 were controls. Hormonal and biochemical
parameters were measured after discontinuation for =1 month of any corticosteroid
therapy. ESR1 PvuII, ESR2 AluI, and the AR (CAG)n repeats polymorphisms were
analyzed. AD patients had higher estradiol levels (31.32 ± 12.10, controls 20.37 
± 7.91 pg/ml, p < 0.001). In multivariate analysis, significant predictors for AD
were estrogen and BMI. The allele frequency of ESR1 PvuII and ESR2 AluI did not
differ between patients and controls (AD: 47.8 %, 37.6 %; controls 49.8 %, 39.9
%). The distribution of (CAG)n did not differ between groups. In AD group,
shorter (CAG)n alleles were associated with younger age of AD onset (short: 38.52
± 14.8, long: 47.14 ± 17.34 years, p = 0.048). Carriers of ESR1 PvuII presented
less frequently =2 AD (carriers 6.5 %, non-carriers 25.1 %, p = 0.019); carriers 
of AluI had lower SHBG levels and higher <U+0392><U+039C><U+0399> compared to non-carriers (p < 0.04).
Higher estradiol may play a role in AD in men. Distribution of SHR gene
polymorphisms is similar between patients and controls. Shorter AR (CAG)n repeats
may predispose for younger AD onset. Coexistence of =2 AD is less frequent in
carriers of ESR1 PvuII. ESR2 AluI may adversely affect obesity parameters.

PMID: 22466402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2012 Sep;25(9):1727-9. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2012.663021. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Association of polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor ß (ESR2) with unexplained
recurrent spontaneous abortion (URSA) in Chinese population.

Hu J(1), Wang J, Xiang H, Li Z, Wang B, Cao Y, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Reproductive Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui
Medical University, AnHui, China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the association of 1082G > A(RsaI) (rs1256049) and
1730A > G(AluI) (rs4986938) single nucleotide polymorphisms(SNPs), respectively -
located on estrogen receptor ß (ESR2) gene with recurrent spontaneous abortion
(RSA) in Chinese population.
METHODS: The study group consisted of 196 patients with RSA and 182 fertile women
as control. Two functional polymorphisms 1082G > A (a silent mutation in exon 5) 
and 1730A > G (3' nontranslated region of the exon 8) of ESR2 were studied by
association analysis.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between ESR2 gene polymorphisms
and RSA (<U+03C7>(2)<U+2009>=1.793, P=0.408; <U+03C7>(2)<U+2009>=.432, P=0.489, respectively).
CONCLUSION: The present data indicate that the studied SNPs on ESR2 gene may not 
be associated with RSA in Chinese population.

PMID: 22463697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34112. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034112. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Hormone treatment, estrogen receptor polymorphisms and mortality: a prospective
cohort study.

Ryan J(1), Canonico M, Carcaillon L, Carrière I, Scali J, Dartigues JF, Dufouil
C, Ritchie K, Scarabin PY, Ancelin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1061, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France.
joanne.ryan@inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: The association between hormone treatment (HT) and mortality remains 
controversial. This study aimed to determine whether the risk of mortality
associated with HT use varies depending on the specific characteristics of
treatment and genetic variability in terms of the estrogen receptor.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A prospective, population-based study of 5135
women aged 65 years and older who were recruited from three cities in France and 
followed over six years. Detailed information related to HT use was obtained and 
five estrogen receptor polymorphisms were genotyped. The total follow-up was
25,436 person-years and during this time 352 women died. Cancer (36.4%) and
cardiovascular disease (19.3%) were the major causes of death. Cox proportional
hazards models adjusted for age, education, centre, living situation,
comorbidity, depression, physical and mental incapacities, indicated no
significant association between HT and mortality, regardless of the type or
duration of treatment, or the age at initiation. However, the association between
HT and all-cause or cancer-related mortality varied across women, with
significant interactions identified with three estrogen receptor polymorphisms
(p-values<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004 to 0.03) in adjusted analyses. Women carrying the C allele of
ESR1 rs2234693 had a decreased risk of all-cause mortality with HT (HR: 0.42, 95%
CI: 0.18-0.97), while in stark contrast, those homozygous for the T allele had a 
significantly increased risk of cancer-related mortality (HR: 3.18, 95% CI:
1.23-8.20). The findings were similar for ESR1 rs9340799 and ESR2 rs1271572.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The risk of mortality was not associated with HT
duration, type or age at initiation. It was however not equal across all women,
with some women appearing genetically more vulnerable to the effects of HT in
terms of their estrogen receptor genotype. These findings, if confirmed in
another independent study, may help explain the differential susceptibility of
women to the beneficial or adverse effects of HT.

PMCID: PMC3311587
PMID: 22457817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Hum Reprod. 2012 May;27(5):1525-35. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des075. Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Gene variations in sex hormone pathways and the risk of testicular germ cell
tumour: a case-parent triad study in a Norwegian-Swedish population.

Kristiansen W(1), Andreassen KE, Karlsson R, Aschim EL, Bremnes RM, Dahl O, Fosså
SD, Klepp O, Langberg CW, Solberg A, Tretli S, Adami HO, Wiklund F, Grotmol T,
Haugen TB.

Author information: 
(1)Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied Sciences, St. Olavs plass,
NO-0130 Oslo, Norway. wenche.kristiansen@hioa.no

BACKGROUND: Testicular germ cell tumour (TGCT) is the most common cancer in young
men, and an imbalance between the estrogen and androgen levels in utero is
hypothesized to influence TGCT risk. Thus, polymorphisms in genes involved in the
action of sex hormones may contribute to variability in an individual's
susceptibility to TGCT.
METHODS: We conducted a Norwegian-Swedish case-parent study. A total of 105
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 20 sex hormone pathway genes were
genotyped using Sequenom MassArray iPLEX Gold, in 831 complete triads and 474
dyads. To increase the statistical power, the analysis was expanded to include
712 case singletons and 3922 Swedish controls, thus including triads, dyads and
the case-control samples in a single test for association. Analysis for allelic
associations was performed with the UNPHASED program, using a likelihood-based
association test for nuclear families with missing data, and odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. False discovery rate (FDR)
was used to adjust for multiple testing.
RESULTS: Five genetic variants across the ESR2 gene [encoding estrogen receptor
beta (ERß)] were statistically significantly associated with the risk of TGCT. In
the case-parent analysis, the markers rs12434245 and rs10137185 were associated
with a reduced risk of TGCT (OR = 0.66 and 0.72, respectively; both FDRs <5%),
whereas rs2978381 and rs12435857 were associated with an increased risk of TGCT
(OR = 1.21 and 1.19, respectively; both FDRs <5%). In the combined
case-parent/case-control analysis, rs12435857 and rs10146204 were associated with
an increased risk of TGCT (OR = 1.15 and 1.13, respectively; both FDRs <5%),
whereas rs10137185 was associated with a reduced risk of TGCT (OR = 0.79, FDR
<5%). In addition, we found that three genetic variants in CYP19A1 (encoding
aromatase) were statistically significantly associated with the risk of TGCT in
the case-parent analysis. The T alleles of the rs2414099, rs8025374 and rs3751592
SNPs were associated with an increased risk of TGCT (OR = 1.30, 1.30 and 1.21,
respectively; all FDRs <5%). We found no statistically significant differences in
allelic effect estimates between parental inherited genetic variation in the sex 
hormone pathways and TGCT risk in the offspring, and no evidence of heterogeneity
between seminomas and non-seminomas, or between the Norwegian and the Swedish
population, in any of the SNPs examined.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide support for ERß and aromatase being implicated 
in the aetiology of TGCT. Exploring the functional role of the TGCT
risk-associated SNPs will further elucidate the biological mechanisms involved.

PMID: 22402210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Apr;26(4):630-42. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1263. Epub 2012 Mar
1.

TEX11 modulates germ cell proliferation by competing with estrogen receptor ß for
the binding to HPIP.

Yu YH(1), Siao FP, Hsu LC, Yen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

Klinefelter syndrome (KS), characterized by the presence of more than one
X-chromosome in men, is a major genetic cause of male infertility. Germ cell
degeneration in KS patients is thought to be the consequences of overexpression
of some genes on the X-chromosome. However, the identity of these genes and the
underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Testis-expressed 11 (TEX11) is an
X-chromosome-encoded germ-cell-specific protein that is expressed most abundantly
in spermatogonia and early spermatocytes in the testes. In our search for
TEX11-interacting partners using the yeast two-hybrid system, we identified
hematopoietic pre-B cell leukemia transcription factor-interacting protein
(HPIP), which anchors estrogen receptors (ER) to the cytoskeleton and modulates
their functions. We found that mouse spermatogonial stem cells expressed Tex11,
Hpip, and Esr2 but not Esr1. In cultured cells, TEX11 competed with ERß for
binding to HPIP. Upon treatment with 17ß-estradiol or an ERß agonist
diarylpropionitrile, TEX11 promoted the nuclear translocation of ERß and enhanced
its transcriptional activities. On the other hand, TEX11 suppressed the
nongenomic activities of ERß in the cytoplasm, as indicated by reduced
phosphorylation of AKT and ERK signaling molecules. Overexpression of TEX11 in
mouse germ-cell-derived GC-1 and GC-2 cells suppressed the cell proliferation and
the expression of cFos, Ccnd1, and Ccnb1 that were stimulated by 17ß-estradiol or
diarylpropionitrile and elevated the expression level of the proapoptotic Bax
gene. The negative effect of TEX11 on cell proliferation suggests that increased 
expression of TEX11 in the germ cells may partially contribute to the
spermatogenic defect observed in KS patients.

PMID: 22383461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Jun;29(6):1127-36. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.929. Epub 2012 Feb 
28.

Estrogen receptor ß transcript variants associate with oncogene expression in
endometrial cancer.

Häring J(1), Skrzypczak M, Stegerer A, Lattrich C, Weber F, Görse R, Ortmann O,
Treeck O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.

The human ESR2 gene codes for estrogen receptor ß1 and for multiple splice
variants, which are suggested to exert distinct functions in the cellular
estrogen response. Given that the function of ERß in endometrial cancer remains
unclear, we examined the expression of ERß1, ERß2 and various further ERß
transcript variants and their association with selected cancer-related genes in
74 human endometrium samples and endometrial cancer specimens by means of
RT-qPCR. Additionally, we knocked down ERß expression in HEC-1A endometrial
adenocarcinoma cells by means of siRNA transfection. Expression of four ERß
transcript variants was significantly elevated in cancer tissue or in G3 tumors
compared to postmenopausal endometrium. Expression of ERß1, ERß2, ERß5 and five
further variants was associated with the oncogenes MYBL2 or HER2 in endometrial
cancer. In addition, siRNA-triggered knockdown of ERß expression led to a
significant decline of MYBL2 mRNA and protein levels in endometrial cancer cells.
Our observation of increased ERß transcript levels in cancer tissue and
particularly their correlation with the expression of oncogenes, as well as the
results of our knockdown studies, suggest a role of ERß in endometrial
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 22378275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Hum Reprod Update. 2012 May-Jun;18(3):260-83. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dms002. Epub
2012 Feb 26.

Aetiology of hypospadias: a systematic review of genes and environment.

van der Zanden LF(1), van Rooij IA, Feitz WF, Franke B, Knoers NV, Roeleveld N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and HTA, Radboud University Nijmegen
Medical Centre, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. l.vanderzanden@ebh.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external 
genitalia. Most cases have an unknown aetiology, which is probably a mix of
monogenic and multifactorial forms, implicating both genes and environmental
factors. This review summarizes current knowledge about the aetiology of
hypospadias.
METHODS: Pubmed was used to identify studies on hypospadias aetiology published
between January 1995 and February 2011. Reference lists of the selected
manuscripts were also searched to identify additional studies, including those
published before 1995.
RESULTS: The search provided 922 articles and 169 articles were selected for this
review. Studies screening groups of patients with hypospadias for single gene
defects found mutations in WT1, SF1, BMP4, BMP7, HOXA4, HOXB6, FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD3B2, SRD5A2, ATF3, MAMLD1, MID1 and BNC2. However, most investigators are
convinced that single mutations do not cause the majority of isolated hypospadias
cases. Indeed, associations were found with polymorphisms in FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD17B3, SRD5A2, ESR1, ESR2, ATF3, MAMLD1, DGKK, MID1, CYP1A1, GSTM1 and GSTT1.
In addition, gene expression studies indentified CTGF, CYR61 and EGF as candidate
genes. Environmental factors consistently implicated in hypospadias are low
birthweight, maternal hypertension and pre-eclampsia, suggesting that placental
insufficiency may play an important role in hypospadias aetiology. Exogenous
endocrine-disrupting chemicals have the potential to induce hypospadias but it is
unclear whether human exposure is high enough to exert this effect. Other
environmental factors have also been associated with hypospadias but, for most,
the results are inconsistent.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a number of contributors to the aetiology of hypospadias
have been identified, the majority of risk factors remain unknown.

PMID: 22371315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Reproduction. 2012 Apr;143(4):549-58. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0214. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Estrogen receptor (ESR) 2 partially offsets the absence of ESR1 in gonadotropes
of pituitary-specific Esr1 knockout female mice.

Sánchez-Criado JE(1), Trudgen K, Millán Y, Blanco A, Monterde J, Garrido-Gracia
JC, Gordon A, Aguilar R, de Las Mulas JM, Ko C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of Córdoba,
14004 Córdoba, Spain. fi1sacrj@uco.es

Estrogen receptor 1 and 2 (ESR1 and 2) mediate estrogen (E) action on gonadotrope
function. While much is known about the effects of ESR1 on the gonadotrope, there
is still some controversy regarding the effects of ESR2. To investigate the role 
of ESR2 in the gonadotrope, 45-day-old female mice of two different genotypes
were used: wild type (WT) and pituitary (gonadotropes and thyrotropes)-specific
Esr1 knockout (KO). All mice were ovariectomized (OVX) and 15 days later injected
over 3 days with 2.5 µg 17ß-estradiol (E(2)), 0.2 mg of the selective ESR1 or 2
agonists, propylpyrazole triol and diarylpropionitrile, respectively, or 0.1 ml
oil. The day after treatment, anterior pituitary glands were dissected out for
evaluation of gonadotrope ultrastructural morphology and pituitary
immunohistochemical expression of progesterone receptor (Pgr (Pr)). Blood was
collected and serum LH levels were assessed. Activation of ESR1 in WT mice
resulted in the following: i) uterine ballooning and vaginal cornification, ii)
negative feedback on LH secretion, iii) increased number of homogeneous
(functional) gonadotropes, and iv) pituitary Pgr expression (35.9±2.0% of
pituitary cells). Activation of ESR1 in KO mice induced normal uterine, vaginal, 
and LH secretion responses, but failed to increase the number of functional
gonadotropes, and induced significantly lower Pgr expression (21.0±3.0% of
pituitary cells) than in WT mice. Whilst activation of ESR2 had no significant
effects in WT mice, it doubled the number of functional gonadotropes exhibited by
KO mice injected with oil. It is concluded that E(2) exerted its action in KO
mouse gonadotropes via ESR2.

PMID: 22367588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Exp Physiol. 2012 May;97(5):651-62. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2011.063131. Epub
2012 Feb 15.

Electrical and manual acupuncture stimulation affect oestrous cyclicity and
neuroendocrine function in an 5a-dihydrotestosterone-induced rat polycystic ovary
syndrome model.

Feng Y(1), Johansson J, Shao R, Mannerås-Holm L, Billig H, Stener-Victorin E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Physiology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden.

Both low-frequency electro-acupuncture (EA) and manual acupuncture improve
menstrual frequency and decrease circulating androgens in women with polycystic
ovary syndrome (PCOS). We sought to determine whether low-frequency EA is more
effective than manual stimulation in regulating disturbed oestrous cyclicity in
rats with PCOS induced by 5a-dihydrotestosterone. To identify the central
mechanisms of the effects of stimulation, we assessed hypothalamic mRNA
expression of molecules that regulate reproductive and neuroendocrine function.
From age 70 days, rats received 2 Hz EA or manual stimulation with the needles
five times per week for 4-5 weeks; untreated rats served as control animals.
Specific hypothalamic nuclei were obtained by laser microdissection, and mRNA
expression was measured with TaqMan low-density arrays. Untreated rats were
acyclic. During the last 2 weeks of treatment, seven of eight (88%) rats in the
EA group had epithelial keratinocytes, demonstrating oestrous cycle change (P =
0.034 versus control rats). In the manual group, five of eight (62%) rats had
oestrous cycle changes (n.s. versus control animals). The mRNA expression of the 
opioid receptors Oprk1 and Oprm1 in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus was lower in
the EA group than in untreated control rats. The mRNA expression of the steroid
hormone receptors Esr2, Pgr and Kiss1r was lower in the manual group than in the 
control animals. In rats with 5a-dihydrotestosterone-induced PCOS, low-frequency 
EA restored disturbed oestrous cyclicity but did not differ from the manual
stimulation group, although electrical stimulation lowered serum testosterone in 
responders, those with restored oestrus cyclicity, and differed from both control
animals and the manual stimulation group. Thus, EA cannot in all aspects be
considered superior to manual stimulation. The effects of low-frequency EA may be
mediated by central opioid receptors, while manual stimulation may involve
regulation of steroid hormone/peptide receptors.

PMID: 22337865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Climacteric. 2012 Dec;15(6):587-93. doi: 10.3109/13697137.2012.656160. Epub 2012 
Feb 15.

Estrogen-related genes and postmenopausal osteoporosis risk.

Mendoza N(1), Quereda F, Presa J, Salamanca A, Sánchez-Borrego R, Vázquez F,
Martínez Astorquiza T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Granada, Spain.

BACKGROUND: To date, more than 150 candidate genes related to osteoporosis have
been described, but osteoporosis has increasingly been considered a polygenic
disease modulated by environmental factors. It is thought that osteoporosis
predisposition, pathology, and treatment response depend on the interaction
between different genes or between genes and environmental factors.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the relationship between the
presence of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the estrogen metabolic
pathway and the development of osteoporosis and to determine whether this
relationship is monogenic or whether interactions between genes exist.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A multicentric study with 1980 postmenopausal Spanish
women in five Spanish communities was conducted. The women completed a specific
questionnaire that inquired about risk factors for osteoporosis. Data on
participants' bone mineral density were obtained with dual-energy X-ray
densitometers, and genetic data were obtained from frozen peripheral blood.
RESULTS: The digenic protection combinations indicated involvement of the
wild-type genotype (WT) of the 3'UTR marker for the CYP19A1 gene, the IVS4 marker
of the same gene, and the BMP15 and FSHR genes. Among patients who carried two or
more of the genotypes considered 'risky', the triple combination among markers of
the ESR2 and NRIP1 genes with any of the two mutations of the analyzed markers of
the BMP15 gene gave a mean T-score value of -2.32±0.91 (p = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Variants of the new candidate genes (NRIP and BMP15) can predispose
patients to osteoporosis.

PMID: 22335445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Spermatogenesis. 2011 Oct;1(4):318-324. Epub 2011 Oct 1.

17ß-estradiol signaling and regulation of Sertoli cell function.

Lucas TF(1), Pimenta MT, Pisolato R, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology; Department of Pharmacology; Escola
Paulista de Medicina; Universidade Federal de São Paulo; São Paulo, Brazil.

In this review, we will present an overview of estrogen actions in the testis
from immature and adult animals, with special emphasis on signaling mechanisms
involved in the 17ß-estradiol regulation of Sertoli cell function in immature
rats. 17ß-estradiol activates Sertoli cell proliferation in immature rats by a
mechanism that involves the translocation of the estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2
to the plasma membrane, phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor and
activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase 3/1. Activation of the G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) also induces phosphorylation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase 3/1 via epidermal growth factor receptor
transactivation, which in turn increases expression of the antiapoptotic protein 
BCL2 and decreases the expression of proapoptotic protein BAX, indicating an
antiapoptotic role of E2-GPER in immature rat Sertoli cells. In conclusion, ESRs 
and GPER can mediate rapid 17ß-estradiol signaling in Sertoli cells, and modulate
transcriptional events important for Sertoli cell function and maintenance of
normal testis development and homeostasis. Our findings are important to clarify 
the role of estrogen in a critical period of testicular development and to direct
further studies, which may contribute to better understand the causes of male
infertility.

PMCID: PMC3271643
PMID: 22332115  [PubMed]


250. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2012 Aug;28(8):644-8. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2011.650767. Epub
2012 Feb 10.

Are polymorphisms in oestrogen receptors genes associated with lipid levels in
response to hormone therapy?

Smiderle L(1), Mattevi VS, Giovenardi M, Wender MC, Hutz MH, Almeida S.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre  UFCSPA, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in the oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and oestrogen
receptor 2 (ESR2) genes are associated with intermediate or endpoint markers of
cardiovascular disease and with the efficacy of postmenopausal hormone therapy
(HT). Contradictory findings have been described in the past and the role of
these genetics variants remains unclear.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was carried out with 266 postmenopausal women,
of whom 115 received oral HT (HT+) and 151 did not receive any HT (HT-). We
analysed three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ESR1 (rs1801132,
rs7757956 and rs2813544) and two in ESR2 (rs3020450 and rs7154455) and derived
haplotypes with three additional polymorphisms that had been previously
investigated by our group (ESR1 rs2234693 and ESR2 rs1256049 and rs4986938).
RESULTS: The ESR1 rs2813544 polymorphism was associated with low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) in HT+ postmenopausal women (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.044;
pC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.388), while one ESR2 gene haplotype was associated with total cholesterol 
(T-chol) (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.015; pC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.090) and LDL-C in HT+ postmenopausal women
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.021; pC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.126).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that, in HT+ postmenopausal women, the rs2813544
polymorphism may influence LDL-C levels and, as previously described, ESR2
rs1256049 is associated with T-chol and LDL-C. No previous study has investigated
the association of this SNP set with lipoprotein levels in women while taking
into account the hormonal status of the patients.

PMID: 22324545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32(5):332-41. doi: 10.1159/000335541. Epub 2012 
Feb 3.

Progression from amnesic mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease: ESR1
and ESR2 polymorphisms and APOE gene.

Elcoroaristizabal Martín X(1), Fernández Martínez M, Galdos Alcelay L, Molano
Salazar A, Bereincua Gandarias R, Inglés Borda S, Gómez Busto F, Uterga Valiente 
JM, Indakoetxea Juanbeltz B, Gómez Beldarraín MA, de Pancorbo MM.

Author information: 
(1)BIOMICS Research Group, Department of Zoology and Cellular Biology A, Centro
de Investigación y Estudios Avanzados Lucio Lascaray (CIEA), University of the
Basque Country UPV/EHU, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Many genes have been studied to determine how they might be involved 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Estrogens have a protective effect in the central
nervous system. The mechanisms of action of estrogens are mediated by two
estrogen receptors (ERs), ERa and ERß. Thus, these genes could also play a role
in the progression of amnesic mild cognitive impairment (MCIa) to AD. The aim of 
this study was to examine the role of ER single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
as a risk factor for MCIa, as well as the interaction with apolipoprotein E
(APOE) e4 in the progression to AD.
METHODS: 79 MCIa patients and 138 healthy controls were analyzed. SNPs were
genotyped via restriction fragment length polymorphisms and real-time PCR, RT-PCR
or RT-PCR (TaqMan) assays.
RESULTS: There is a lack of association between MCIa patients who converted to AD
and ER SNPs. APOE e4 allele is an independent risk factor of MCIa (OR=1.86; 95%
CI=1.02-3.38, p=0.042) with a high prevalence in converted subjects. APOE e4 is
able to predict the progression from MCIa patients to AD (OR=2.55; 95%
CI=1.20-5.42, p=0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of the APOE e4 allele, and not the alleles of ER SNPs, 
is a risk factor for MCIa. Furthermore, APOE genotype seems to predict the
conversion from MCIa to AD.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22311091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Neurol Sci. 2012 May 15;316(1-2):126-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.01.007. Epub
2012 Feb 2.

Associations of ESR2 AluI (G/A) polymorphism with ischemic stroke in Caucasians.

Markoula S(1), Milionis H, Lazaros L, Spengos K, Vassilopoulou S,
Chatzistefanidis D, Kargiotis O, Georgiou I, Kyritsis AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ioannina, School of Medicine, Greece.
smarkoula@grads.uoi.gr

Raising interest towards genes implicates the effect of estrogen receptor-alpha
(ESR1) gene on cerebrovascular disease, but data are lacking regarding the effect
of estrogen receptor-beta (ESR2) gene. We assessed the hypothesis that AluI (G/A)
polymorphism of the ESR2 gene (rs 4986938) is associated with ischemic stroke in 
a Caucasian population. Four hundred twenty four consecutive stroke patients and 
430 age and gender-matched controls were enrolled in three stroke centers in
Greece over one-year period. Patients and controls were compared in regard to the
prevalence of the aforementioned polymorphism. No association was found between
variations in the ESR2 gene and risk of stroke or stroke subtype in men and
women. Of note, a gender-specific association of G allele with the onset of
stroke at a younger age in male patients was found (63.68 ± 12.687 years in G
allele (GG+AG) carriers vs. 68.95 ± 10.757 years in non-carriers (AA), p=0.008). 
Further population independent studies are needed to establish the role of ESR2
gene polymorphisms in relation to ischemic stroke in both genders. Such studies
could lead to ERß agonists being validated in individuals with certain genotypes 
and/or alleles towards the development of efficient strategies to preventing
ischemic stroke in both men and women.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22305517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Maturitas. 2012 Apr;71(4):376-84. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.12.020. Epub 2012
Jan 31.

Impact of testosterone on the expression of organic anion transporting
polypeptides (OATP-1A2, OATP-2B1, OATP-3A1) in malignant and non-malignant human 
breast cells in vitro.

Stute P(1), Reichenbach A, Szuwart T, Kiesel L, Götte M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, University 
Women's Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. petra.stute@insel.ch

OBJECTIVES: Postmenopausal hormone therapy (HT) increases local estrogen
formation in breast tissue. The enzymatic substrates depend on transmembrane
anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs) to reach intracellular enzymes. The aim
of this study was to investigate the effect of testosterone (T) on the expression
of OATP-1A2, OATP-2B1, and OATP-3A1 in malignant (MCF-7, BT-474) and
non-malignant (HBL-100) breast cells in vitro.
STUDY DESIGN: Cells were incubated in RPMI 1640 medium containing 5%
steroid-depleted fetal calf serum for 3d, and subsequently incubated in the
absence or presence of T, anastrozole (A), and T+A (10(-6)M) for 24h at 37°C.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: OATP expression was determined by immunocytochemical
staining. Expression intensity was graded as low, moderate, or strong. Hormone
receptor (AR, PR, ESR1, ESR2) expression was investigated by qPCR and Western
blotting. Rank variance analysis was performed for statistical analysis (p=0.05).
RESULTS: OATP-1A2, OATP-2B1, and OATP-3A1 expression was present in all untreated
breast cell lines examined, with OATP-1A2 and OATP-3A1 being the predominant
ones. There was a trend for a higher baseline expression in untreated HBL-100 and
BT-474 in comparison to MCF-7 cells, which was significant for OATP-2B1. T
treatment led to decreased OATP-1A2, -2B1, and -3A1 expression in BT-474 and
HBL-100 cells, respectively. In contrast, in MCF-7 cells, OATP-2B1 expression was
significantly increased. T-induced upregulation of AR and PR protein expression
in BT-474 and MCF-7 cells was reduced by A treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: T may constitute a signal for differential regulation of mammary
OATP expression. In non-malignant breast cells T seems to have a beneficial
effect by reducing the availability of substrates for the intracellular formation
of potent estrogens.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22300683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Endocrinology. 2012 Mar;153(3):1444-52. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1962. Epub 2012 Jan 
17.

Activation of southern white rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum simum) estrogen
receptors by phytoestrogens: potential role in the reproductive failure of
captive-born females?

Tubbs C(1), Hartig P, Cardon M, Varga N, Milnes M.

Author information: 
(1)San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research, 15600 San Pasqual Valley
Road, Escondido, California 92027, USA. ctubbs@sandiegozoo.org

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2012 Apr;153(4):1568-71.

The captive southern white rhinoceros (SWR; Ceratotherium simum simum) population
serves as an important genetic reservoir critical to the conservation of this
vulnerable species. Unfortunately, captive populations are declining due to the
poor reproductive success of captive-born females. Captive female SWR exhibit
reproductive problems suggested to result from continual ovarian follicular
activity and prolonged exposure to endogenous estrogen. However, we investigated 
the potential role of exogenous dietary phytoestrogens in the reproductive
failure of SWR by cloning and characterizing in vitro phytoestrogen binding and
activation of recombinant SWR estrogen receptors (ESR). We compared those
characteristics with recombinant greater one-horned rhinoceros (GOHR; Rhinoceros 
unicornis) ESR, a species that receives similar captive diets yet reproduces
relatively well. Our results indicate that phytoestrogens bind rhino ESR in a
manner similar to other vertebrate species, but there are no differences found in
phytoestrogen binding affinity of SWR ESR compared with GOHR ESR. However,
species-specific differences in ESR activation by phytoestrogens were detected.
The phytoestrogen coumestrol stimulated greater maximal activation of SWR ESR1
than GOHR ESR1. SWR ESR2 were also more sensitive to phytoestrogens and were
activated to a greater extent by both coumestrol and daidzein. The concentrations
in which significant differences in ESR activation occurred (10(-7) to 10(-5) m) 
are consistent with circulating concentrations measured in other vertebrate
species. Taken together, these findings suggest that phytoestrogens potentially
pose a risk to the reproductive health of captive SWR. However, additional
studies are needed to further clarify the physiological role of dietary
phytoestrogens in the reduced fertility of this species.

PMCID: PMC3281539
PMID: 22253418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Apr 4;351(2):279-85. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.12.018.
Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Association of polymorphisms in genes encoding hormone receptors ESR1, ESR2 and
LHCGR with the risk and clinical features of testicular germ cell cancer.

Brokken LJ(1), Lundberg-Giwercman Y, Rajpert De-Meyts E, Eberhard J, Ståhl O,
Cohn-Cedermark G, Daugaard G, Arver S, Giwercman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Molecular Reproductive Medicine, Lund
University, Sweden. leon.brokken@med.lu.se

Testicular germ cell cancer (TGCC) is the most common malignancy in young men.
Genetic variants known to be associated with risk of TGCC only partially account 
for the observed familial risks. We aimed to identify additional polymorphisms
associated with risk as well as histological and clinical features of TGCC in 367
patients and 214 controls. Polymorphisms in ESR2 (rs1256063; OR=0.53, 95% CI:
0.35-0.79) and LHCGR (rs4597581; OR=0.68, 95% CI: 0.51-0.89, and rs4953617;
OR=1.88, 95% CI: 1.21-2.94) associated with risk of TGCC. Polymorphisms in ESR1
(rs9397080; OR=1.85, 95% CI: 1.18-2.91) and LHCGR (rs7371084; OR=2.37, 95% CI:
1.26-4.49) associated with risk of seminoma and metastasis, respectively. SNPs in
ESR1 (rs9397080) and LHCGR (rs7371084) were predictors of higher LH levels and
higher androgen sensitivity index in healthy subjects. The results suggest that
polymorphisms in ESR1, ESR2 and LHCGR contribute to the risk of developing TGCC, 
histological subtype, and risk to metastasis.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr 12;86(4):108. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.096891. Print
2012 Apr.

17Beta-estradiol signaling and regulation of proliferation and apoptosis of rat
Sertoli cells.

Royer C(1), Lucas TF, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, INFAR, Vila Clementino, 
São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the intracellular signaling
events downstream of the classical estrogen receptors (ESRs) and G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) involved in regulation of
proliferation and apoptosis of rat Sertoli cells, in which we have previously
described ESR1, ESR2, and GPER. ESRs play a role in Sertoli cell proliferation,
and GPER, but not ESRs, plays a role modulating gene expression involved with
apoptosis. The present study shows that 17beta-estradiol (E2) and the
GPER-selective agonist G-1 rapidly activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PIK3)/serine threonine protein kinase (AKT) and cyclic AMP response
element-binding (CREB) phosphorylation. E2 and the ESR1-selective agonist
4,4',4<U+2033>-(4-propyl-(1H)-pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT) increase the
expression of cyclin D1 (CCND1), whereas the ESR2-selective agonist
2,3-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile (DPN) and G-1 do not change the expression
of this protein, suggesting that ESR1 is the upstream receptor regulating Sertoli
cell proliferation. E2- or PPT-ESR1, through activation of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR)/mitogen-activated protein kinase 3/1 (MAPK3/1) and PIK3
pathways, induces upregulation of CCND1. KG-501, the compound that disrupts the
phospho-CREB/CREB binding protein (CBP) complex, does not change E2- or
PPT-ESR1-mediated CCND1 expression, suggesting that phospho-CREB/cyclic AMP
response element/CBP is not involved in the expression of this protein. E2- or
G-1-GPER, through activation of EGFR/MAPK3/1 and PIK3 pathways, may be involved
in the upregulation of antiapoptotic proteins BCL2 and BCL2L2. E2- or
G-1-GPER/EGFR/MAPK3/1/phospho-CREB decreases BAX expression. Taken together,
these results show a differential effect of E2-GPER on the CREB-mediated
transcription of proapoptotic and antiapoptotic genes of the same BCL2 gene
family. ESR1 and GPER can mediate the rapid E2 actions in the Sertoli cells,
which in turn can modulate nuclear transcriptional events important for Sertoli
cell function and maintenance of normal testis development and homeostasis. Our
findings are important to clarify the role of estrogen in a critical period of
testicular development, and to direct further studies, which may contribute to
better understanding of the causes of male infertility.

PMID: 22219213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Reprod Domest Anim. 2012 Oct;47(5):782-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2011.01968.x.
Epub 2011 Dec 30.

Investigation on association and expression of ESR2 as a candidate gene for boar 
sperm quality and fertility.

Gunawan A(1), Cinar MU, Uddin MJ, Kaewmala K, Tesfaye D, Phatsara C, Tholen E,
Looft C, Schellander K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

ESR2 is involved in oestrogen-related apoptosis in cell cycle spermatogenesis but
their effects have not yet confirmed in pig. Therefore, this study was aimed to
investigate the association of ESR2 polymorphism with sperm quality and boar
fertility traits and to analyse the ESR2 mRNA and protein expressions in boar
reproductive tissues. DNA samples from 203 Pietrain (PI) and 100 Pietrain ×
Hampshire (PIHA) pigs with records of sperm quality [sperm concentration (SCON), 
motility (MOT), semen volume (VOL), plasma droplet rate (PDR) and abnormal
spermatozoa rate (ASR)] and fertility [non-return rate (NRR) and number of piglet
born alive (NBA)] traits were available. A SNP in coding region of ESR2
g.35547A>G in exon 5 was associated with MOT and PDR in the PI and with SCON,
VOL, MOT and PDR in PIHA population. For mRNA and protein expression study, a
total of six boars were divided into two groups with group I (G-I) and group II
(G-II) where G-I characterized for relatively a better sperm quality according to
the mean of two groups. mRNA expression was higher in brain and testis than that 
in all parts of epididymis. Both qRT-PCR and western blot analysis revealed that 
the ESR2 gene expression and protein expression were significantly higher in
testis collected from G-II compared with that of G-I boars. Moreover, ESR2
protein localization in germ cell, Leydig and Sertoli cells, epithelial cells and
spermatozoa was remarkable, which indicated the important role of ESR2 in
spermatogenesis process. These results might shed new light on the roles of ESR2 
in spermatogenesis as candidate for boar fertility, but still the lack of
association across populations should be considered.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 22212297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Obstet Gynecol Int. 2011;2011:719059. doi: 10.1155/2011/719059. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Endometriosis gene expression heterogeneity and biosignature: a phylogenetic
analysis.

Abu-Asab M(1), Zhang M, Amini D, Abu-Asab N, Amri H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Section of Immunopathology, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Endometriosis is a multifactorial disease with poorly understood etiology, and
reflecting an evolutionary nature where genetic alterations accumulate throughout
pathogenesis. Our objective was to characterize the heterogeneous pathological
process using parsimony phylogenetics. Gene expression microarray data of ovarian
endometriosis obtained from NCBI database were polarized and coded into derived
(abnormal) and ancestral (normal) states. Such alterations are referred to as
synapomorphies in a phylogenetic sense (or biomarkers). Subsequent gene linkage
was modeled by Genomatix BiblioSphere Pathway software. A list of clonally shared
derived (abnormal) expressions revealed the pattern of heterogeneity among
specimens. In addition, it has identified disruptions within the major regulatory
pathways including those involved in cell proliferation, steroidogenesis,
angiogenesis, cytoskeletal organization and integrity, and tumorigenesis, as well
as cell adhesion and migration. Furthermore, the analysis supported the potential
central involvement of ESR2 in the initiation of endometriosis. The pathogenesis 
mapping showed that eutopic and ectopic lesions have different molecular
biosignatures.

PMCID: PMC3238413
PMID: 22203846  [PubMed]


259. Anticancer Res. 2011 Dec;31(12):4369-86.

Estrogen pathway polymorphisms and mammographic density.

Dumas I(1), Diorio C.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Unit, FRSQ Research Center of the Quebec University
Affiliated Hospital Center, Quebec City, QC, Canada.

Elevated mammographic density (MD) is strongly associated with breast cancer risk
and the estrogen pathway has been proposed as a potential mechanism for this
association. It has been repeatedly observed that several established
estrogen-related factors associated with breast cancer risk, such as parity and
hormone replacement therapy, are also associated with MD. However, the
association of circulating estrogen levels (known to be strongly positively
associated with breast cancer risk) with MD has so far been inconsistent. Since
MD is highly heritable, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved 
in the estrogen pathway and their relation with MD could provide information that
would help understand the link between MD and breast cancer risk. This review of 
18 studies describes the relation of SNPs located in genes of the estrogen
pathway (genes coding for hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases (HSD3B1, HSD17B1),
cytochrome P450 (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP17A1, CYP19A1 and CYP1B1),
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), uridine diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase
(UGT1A1), sulfotransferases (SULT1A1, SULT1E1) and for estrogen receptors alpha
and beta (ESR1, ESR2)) with MD. Most of the SNPs evaluated showed no association 
with MD when analyses were performed on overall study population. However, when
this relation was assessed within strata based on estrogen-related factors, a few
SNPs (HSD17B1 (rs2010750, rs598126 and rs676387), COMT (rs4680), UGT1A1
(rs8175347) and ESR1 (rs9340799)) seemed to be related to MD in the same
direction of their associations with breast cancer risk. Since such data are very
limited, additional research including stratified analyses by factors related to 
estrogen are needed to validate these findings.

PMID: 22199302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32(4):241-9. doi: 10.1159/000334522. Epub 2011
Dec 8.

Estrogen receptor-Beta variants are associated with increased risk of Alzheimer's
disease in women with down syndrome.

Zhao Q(1), Lee JH, Pang D, Temkin A, Park N, Janicki SC, Zigman WB, Silverman W, 
Tycko B, Schupf N.

Author information: 
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University Medical Center, G.H. Sergievsky Center, New York, N.Y., USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Genetic variants that affect estrogen activity may influence the
risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We examined the relation of polymorphisms in
the gene for the estrogen receptor-beta (ESR2) to the risk of AD in women with
Down syndrome.
METHODS: Two hundred and forty-nine women with Down syndrome, 31-70 years of age 
and nondemented at baseline, were followed at 14- to 18-month intervals for 4
years. Women were genotyped for 13 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 
ESR2 gene, and their association with AD incidence was examined.
RESULTS: Among postmenopausal women, we found a 2-fold increase in the risk of AD
for women carrying 1 or 2 copies of the minor allele at 3 SNPs in introns seven
(rs17766755) and six (rs4365213 and rs12435857) and 1 SNP in intron eight
(rs4986938) of ESR2.
CONCLUSION: These findings support a role for estrogen and its major brain
receptors in modulating susceptibility to AD in women.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3250648
PMID: 22156442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Jan 11;506(2):312-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.11.032. Epub 
2011 Dec 1.

Gender differences in the IL6 -174G>C and ESR2 1730G>A polymorphisms and the risk
of Parkinson's disease.

San Luciano M(1), Ozelius L, Lipton RB, Raymond D, Bressman SB, Saunders-Pullman 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Medical Center, 10 Union Square East
Suite 5K, New York, NY 10003, United States. Marta.SanLuciano@downstate.edu

The -174G>C (rs1800795) single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the promoter of
the interleukin-6 (IL6) gene and the 1730G>A (rs4986938) SNP in the estrogen
receptor beta (ESR2) may influence the risk of Parkinson's disease (PD). We
investigated these SNPs in 380 unrelated US Caucasian PD cases and 522 controls, 
including 452 individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) origin (260 PD, 192 controls).
The G allele of the -174G>C SNP was more common in AJ PD cases (p=0.033) as well 
as in Non-Jewish (NJ) men with PD (p=0.022). The GG genotype increased the risk
of PD by over two fold in NJ men (OR=2.11, 95%CI: 1.14-3.89, p=0.017), and
approached significance in the total AJ group with PD (OR=1.42, 95%CI: 0.97-2.06,
p=0.067). The A allele of the ESR2 1730G>A SNP was associated with a decreased
risk for PD in AJ women, and in this group, having the AA genotype decreased the 
risk of PD by half (OR=0.45, 95%CI: 0.22-0.92, p=0.029). Our data supports a role
for the IL6 -174G>C G allele in AJ individuals overall. In NJ Caucasians, this
role appears to be gender mediated. In both groups, the effect is independent
from ESR2 1730G>A. A separate association for the ESR2 1730G>A SNP was found
exclusively in women of AJ descent. Other polymorphisms in tight linkage
disequilibrium with the SNP differentially influencing expression, ethnic
differences in allele distribution, and gender differences in genetic load
related to PD, may underlie our findings. Larger studies in diverse populations, 
including analysis of surrounding regions are recommended.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3249002
PMID: 22155094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Sci Total Environ. 2012 Jan 1;414:81-9. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.10.044.
Epub 2011 Nov 25.

Common classification schemes for PCB congeners and the gene expression of CYP17,
CYP19, ESR1 and ESR2.

Warner J(1), Osuch JR, Karmaus W, Landgraf JR, Taffe B, O'Keefe M, Mikucki D,
Haan P.

Author information: 
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, United States.

BACKGROUND: Reliable techniques to measure polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)
congeners make the clearer definition of their effects on human health possible. 
Given that PCBs are classified as endocrine disrupters, we sought to explore the 
expression of some key genes involved in sex steroid metabolism.
OBJECTIVES: To examine common classification schemes of PCB congeners and
determine whether exposure to groups classified by mechanism of action alter the 
gene expression (GE) of CYP17, CYP19, and ESR1 and ESR2.
METHODS: GE and exposure to various classifications of lipid-adjusted PCB
congeners were examined in 139 daughters of the Michigan Fisheaters' Cohort.
Using mixed models analyses and adjusting for age, menopausal status, and current
use of oral contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy, GE data were
regressed on exposure to PCB congener groupings based on mechanism of action.
RESULTS: Three novel findings are elucidated: first, that up-regulation of CYP19 
expression is associated with exposure to PCB groupings containing dioxin-like,
potentially anti-estrogenic, immunotoxic congeners, including PCB IUPAC #74,
#105, #118, #138, #156, #157, #158, #167, and #170 from this cohort. Second, that
exposure to similar congeners (PCB IUPAC #105, #156, #157, #158, and #167 in this
cohort) but using a classification based solely on hormonal mechanisms of action 
is associated with increased expression of ESR2. Third, that increased expression
of CYP17 is of borderline significance when associated with exposure to PCB IUPAC
#118, #138, and #156.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings are both counter-intuitive and intriguing. Rather
than exhibiting anti-estrogenic effects alone, they suggest that these congeners 
up-regulate the major enzyme involved in estrogen synthesis and tend to confirm
previous findings of links between AhR and ER signaling pathways. Replication of 
these findings, expansion of the number of genes examined, exploration of
mixtures of environmental chemicals, and subsequent study of health outcomes in a
larger cohort are future priorities.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22119029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar 19;86(3):68. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.095844. Print 2012
Mar.

Protein restriction to pregnant rats increases the plasma levels of angiotensin
II and expression of angiotensin II receptors in uterine arteries.

Gao H(1), Yallampalli U, Yallampalli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, The University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas 77555-1062, USA.

Whether gestational protein restriction affects the renin-angiotensin system
(RAS) in uterine artery remains unknown. In this study, we hypothesized that
gestational protein restriction alters the expression of RAS components in
uterine artery. In study one, time-scheduled pregnant Sprague Dawley rats were
fed a normal or low-protein (LP) diet from Day 3 of pregnancy until they were
killed at Days 19 and 22. The uterine arteries were collected and used for gene
expression of Ace, Ace2, Agtr1a, Agtr1b, Agtr2, Esr1, and Esr2 by quantitative
real-time PCR and/or Western blotting. LP increased plasma levels of angiotensin 
II in pregnant rats. In the uterine artery, the expressions of Agtr1a, Agtr1b,
and Esr1 were increased by LP at Days 19 and 22 of pregnancy, whereas the
abundance of AGTR1 and AGTR2 was increased by LP at Day 19 of pregnancy. The
expression of Ace2 was not detectable in rat uterine artery. In study two, virgin
female rats were ovariectomized and implanted with either 17beta-estradiol (E2), 
progesterone (P4), both E2 and P4, or placebo pellets until they were killed 7
days later. In rat uterine artery, E2 and P4 reduced the expression of Agtr1a,
and E2 increased the expression of Agtr1b and Agtr2, but neither E2 nor P4
regulated the expression of Ace. These results indicate that gestational protein 
restriction induces an increase in Agtr1 expression in uterine artery, and thus
may exacerbate the vasoconstriction to elevated angiotensin II present in
maternal circulation, and that female sex hormones also play a role in this
process.

PMCID: PMC3316266
PMID: 22088913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Fam Cancer. 2012 Mar;11(1):19-26. doi: 10.1007/s10689-011-9489-z.

Mutation and association analyses of the candidate genes ESR1, ESR2, MAX, PCNA,
and KAT2A in patients with unexplained MSH2-deficient tumors.

Rahner N(1), Brockschmidt FF, Steinke V, Kahl P, Becker T, Vasen HF, Wijnen JT,
Tops CJ, Holinski-Feder E, Ligtenberg MJ, Spruijt L, Görgens H, Stemmler S, Kloor
M, Dietmaier W; Dutch Cancer Genetics Group, Schumacher J, Nöthen MM, Propping P.

Collaborators: Wagner A, Sijmons R, Aalfs C, Kluijt I, Hoogerbrugge N, Gomez
Garcia E, Menko F, Letteboer T, Hes F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, BMZ, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse
25, 53127, Bonn, Germany. nils.rahner@uni-duesseldorf.de

Lynch syndrome (Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer/HNPCC) is a cancer
susceptibility syndrome which is caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch
repair (MMR) genes, in particular MLH1 and MSH2. A pathogenic germline mutation
in the respective MMR gene is suggested by the finding of a loss of a mismatch
repair protein in tumor tissue on immunohistochemical staining combined with an
early age of onset and/or the familial occurrence of colorectal cancer.
Pathogenic germline mutations are identifiable in around 60% of patients
suspected of Lynch syndrome, depending on the familial occurrence. The aim of the
present study was to identify novel susceptibility genes for Lynch syndrome. 64
Healthy controls and 64 Lynch syndrome patients with no pathogenic MSH2 mutation 
but a loss of MSH2 expression in their tumor tissue were screened for rare and
disease causing germline mutations in the functional candidate genes ESR1, ESR2, 
MAX, PCNA, and KAT2A. Thirty variants were identified, and these were then
genotyped in an independent sample of 36 mutation negative Lynch syndrome
patients and 234 controls. Since a trend towards association was observed for
KAT2A, an additional set of 21 tagging SNPs was analyzed at this locus in a final
case-control sample of 142 mutation negative Lynch syndrome patients and 298
controls. The mutation analysis failed to reveal any rare disease-causing
mutations. No association was found at the single-marker or haplotypic level for 
any common disease-modifying variant. The present results suggest that neither
rare nor common genetic variants in ESR1, ESR2, MAX, PCNA, or KAT2A contribute to
the development of Lynch syndrome.

PMID: 22086303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Endocrinol. 2012 Feb;212(2):227-38. doi: 10.1530/JOE-11-0358. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Estrogen receptor (ER) expression and function in the pregnant human myometrium: 
estradiol via ERa activates ERK1/2 signaling in term myometrium.

Welsh T(1), Johnson M, Yi L, Tan H, Rahman R, Merlino A, Zakar T, Mesiano S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Case Western Reserve University, 11100
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Estrogens are thought to promote labor by increasing the expression of
pro-contraction genes in myometrial cells. The specific estrogen receptors ((ERs:
ERa and ERß (also known as ESR1 and ESR2)) and G protein-coupled receptor 30
(GPR30; also known as G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1)) and signaling
pathways that mediate these actions are not clearly understood. In this study, we
identified the ERs expressed in the pregnant human myometrium and determined a
key extranuclear signaling pathway through which estradiol (E(2)) modulates
expression of the gene encoding the oxytocin receptor (OXTR), a major
pro-contraction protein. Using quantitative RT-PCR, we found that ERa and GPR30
mRNAs were expressed in the human pregnant myometrium while ERß mRNA was
virtually undetectable. While mRNA encoding ERa was the predominant ER transcript
in the pregnant myometrium, ERa protein was largely undetectable in myometrial
tissue by immunoblotting. Pharmacological inhibition of 26S proteasome activity
increased ERa protein abundance to detectable levels in term myometrial explants,
however, indicating rapid turnover of ERa protein by proteasomal processing in
the pregnant myometrium. E(2) stimulated rapid extranuclear signaling in
myometrial explants, as evidenced by increased extracellularly regulated kinase
(ERK1/2) phosphorylation within 10<U+200A>min. This effect was inhibited by
pre-treatment with an ER antagonist, ICI 182<U+200A>780, indicating the involvement of
ERa. Inhibition of ERK signaling abrogated the ability of E(2) to stimulate OXTR 
gene expression in myometrial explants. We conclude that estrogenic actions in
the human myometrium during pregnancy, including the stimulation of
contraction-associated gene expression, can be mediated by extranuclear signaling
through ERa via activation of the ERK/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

PMID: 22068927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Reproduction. 2012 Feb;143(2):211-9. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0171. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Comparison of 7a-methyl-19-nortestosterone effectiveness alone or combined with
progestins on androgen receptor mediated-transactivation.

García-Becerra R(1), Ordaz-Rosado D, Noé G, Chávez B, Cooney AJ, Larrea F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y
Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.
fernando.larreag@quetzal.innsz.mx

7a-methyl-19-nortestosterone (MENT) is an androgen with potent gonadotropin
inhibitory activity and prostate-sparing effects. These attributes give MENT
advantages over testosterone as a male contraceptive, but, as in the case of
testosterone, a partial dose-dependent suppression of spermatogenesis has been
observed. Combination of testosterone or MENT with synthetic progestins improves 
the rate of azoospermia; however, it is unknown whether these combinations affect
hormone androgenicity or exert synergistic effects via progestational or
androgenic interaction. Herein, using transactivation assays, we examined the
ability of MENT alone or combined with several 19-nor-derived synthetic
progestins to activate androgen receptor (AR)-dependent gene transcription. In
addition, the capability of 7a-methyl-estradiol (7a-methyl-E(2)), an aromatized
metabolite of MENT, to transactivate gene transcription via estrogen receptor a
(ERa; ESR1) or ERß (ESR2) was also investigated. As expected, MENT induced gene
transactivation through either the progesterone receptor (PGR) or the AR. MENT
was as efficient as progesterone in activating PGR-mediated reporter gene
expression, but it was ten times more potent than testosterone and
dihydrotestoterone in activating of AR-driven gene expression. The addition of
increasing concentrations of other 19-nortestosterone derivatives (norethisterone
or levonorgestrel) did not affect, in a significant manner, the ability of MENT
to activate AR-dependent reporter gene transcription. The same results were
obtained with different cell lines. 7a-Methyl-E(2) resulted in potent estrogen
activity via both ER subtypes with efficiency similar to natural E(2). These
results suggest that the addition of 19-nortestosterone-derived progestins, as a 
hormonal adjuvant in male fertility strategies for effective spermatogenic
suppression, does not display any detrimental effect that would interfere with
MENT androgenic transcriptional activity.

PMID: 22065861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Clin Chim Acta. 2012 Jan 18;413(1-2):81-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.10.028. Epub
2011 Oct 26.

ESR1 in myocardial infarction.

Puzianowska-Kuznicka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Warsaw, 
Poland. mpuzianowska@wum.edu.pl

Women live longer than men; this can be attributed in part to the function of
estrogens. In premenopausal women 17ß-estradiol (E2) is produced mainly by the
ovaries. Extra-ovarian sources of this hormone comprise adipose tissue, breast
tissue, bone, leukocytes, heart, testes, prostate, adrenal tissues, and some
brain structures. E2 exerts the majority of its biological functions by
interacting with the nuclear receptors ERa and ERß, encoded by the ESR1 and ESR2 
genes, respectively. The genomic mechanism of ER action is the regulation of the 
activity of target genes. In addition, E2 induces rapid cellular effects in
transcription-independent, non-genomic mechanisms, acting via receptors localized
in the plasma membrane, in the cytoplasm, and in the mitochondria. Notably, ERa
commonly serves as an extra-nuclear receptor of E2. In wild type animal models of
cardiac ischemia ERa activation reduces infarct size, apoptosis of
cardiomyocytes, inflammation, and oxidative stress, induces vasodilatation and
increases neovascularization. The cardioprotective role of ERa in human is not
fully elucidated. An individual with disruptive ESR1 mutation had dysfunctional
epithelium and suffered from early cardiovascular disease. An association of the 
common ESR1 -397T>C and -351A>G polymorphisms and of other polymorphisms with
cardiovascular disease and with myocardial infarction is still not firmly
established.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22061094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Br J Dermatol. 2012 May;166(5):1131-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10702.x.
Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Association analysis of oestrogen receptor beta gene (ESR2) polymorphisms with
female pattern hair loss.

Yip L, Zaloumis S, Irwin D, Severi G, Hopper J, Giles G, Harrap S, Sinclair R,
Ellis J.

PMID: 22014031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. AIDS. 2012 Jan 2;26(1):19-26. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e32834db3ac.

Genetic polymorphisms in estrogen receptors and sexual dimorphism in fat
redistribution in HIV-infected patients on HAART.

Gasparotto AS(1), Sprinz E, Lazzaretti RK, Kuhmmer R, Silveira JM, Basso RP,
Pinheiro CA, Silveira MF, Ribeiro JP, Mattevi VS.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate genetic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
estrogen receptor-a (ERa) (ESR1, rs2234693, rs1801132, rs7757956 and rs2813544)
and ERß (ESR2, rs3020450, rs7154455 and rs4986938) genes and relate them to the
adverse effects lipodystrophy, dyslipidemia and metabolic syndrome as well as to 
differences in their prevalence between sexes in HIV-infected individuals on
HAART.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
METHODS: Blood samples and anthropometric measurements were collected from 614
patients at reference services in the cities of Porto Alegre, Pelotas and Rio
Grande in Brazil. The SNPs were genotyped by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The lipodystrophy subtype frequencies in patients of different sexes
showed statistically significant differences; the atrophic pattern was more
prevalent in men, and the hypertrophic pattern was more prevalent in women.
Furthermore, metabolic syndrome prevalence was higher in women than in men. The
ESR1 rs2813544 G-allele was associated with higher measurements of several
anthropometric variables in women: BMI, total subcutaneous fat and subcutaneous
fat of limbs. Additionally, patients who were AA homozygous for ESR2 rs3020450
presented an increased risk for developing lipoatrophy (prevalence ratio 1.37,
95% confidence interval 1.09-1.73, P = 0.007).
CONCLUSION: Significant differences in lipodystrophy and metabolic syndrome
prevalence were detected between sexes. Moreover, the ESR1 gene (rs2813544)
presented significant sex-specific associations with anthropometric variables,
and the ESR2 gene (rs3020450) was associated with an increased risk of developing
lipoatrophy. Our results suggest that these genes are in part responsible for the
sexual dimorphism in fat tissue redistribution and patterns of lipodystrophy.

PMID: 22011627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Int Orthop. 2012 Mar;36(3):671-7. doi: 10.1007/s00264-011-1374-8. Epub 2011 Oct
16.

Genomic polymorphisms of G-protein estrogen receptor 1 are associated with
severity of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.

Peng Y(1), Liang G, Pei Y, Ye W, Liang A, Su P.

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, #107 West Yan Jiang
Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China.

PURPOSE: Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is reported to be associated with 
the two traditional estrogen receptor genes, ESR1 and ESR2. Yet, the novel
estrogen receptor G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) has not been
studied. To investigate the association of GPER gene polymorphisms with the onset
and deterioration of AIS, we performed a case-control study.
METHODS: Clinical information was recorded, blood samples were taken and genomic 
DNA was extracted. After resequencing the gene in 45 cases and 45 controls who
were randomly selected, 16 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
selected. Then the association study was extended by an additional 344 patients
and 293 controls with direct sequencing and a TaqMan-based genotyping assay. The 
chi-square test and logistic regression were used to analyse the genotypic and
allelic association. One-way analysis of variance was used to compare the mean
maximum Cobb angles and ages with different genotypes in the case-only data set.
RESULTS: No association was observed between the polymorphisms of the GPER gene
and susceptibility to AIS. However, heterozygotes in three SNPs of the gene
(rs3808351, rs10269151 and rs426655s3) were related significantly with the curve 
severity in AIS patients (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004, 0.048 and 0.028, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that GPER gene polymorphisms are associated 
with the severity of curvature in AIS; deficits of GPER may contribute to the
deterioration of spine deformity.

PMCID: PMC3291774
PMID: 22002330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Horm Cancer. 2012 Apr;3(1-2):37-43. doi: 10.1007/s12672-011-0086-2.

Functional characterization of a genetic polymorphism in the promoter of the ESR2
gene.

Philips S(1), Richter A, Oesterreich S, Rae JM, Flockhart DA, Perumal NB, Skaar
TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 46202, USA.

The ESR2 gene encodes the estrogen receptor beta protein. Several studies have
shown that genetic variants in the ESR2 gene are associated with a variety of
clinical phenotypes. However, very little is known about the functional
significance of ESR2 genetic variants. We used a bioinformatics approach to
identify regions of the ESR2 promoter that is evolutionarily conserved across the
genomes of several species. We resequenced 1.6 kb of the ESR2 gene which included
0.8 kb of the promoter, 0.3 kb of exon ON, and 0.5 kb of the following intron. We
identified five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR2 promoter and
one SNP in the intron. Phase analysis indicated that the SNPs likely exist in 11 
different haplotypes. Three of the SNPs (rs8008187, rs3829768, rs35036378) were
predicted to alter transcription factor binding sites in the ESR2 promoter. All
three were detected only in African American subjects. The rs35036378 SNP was in 
the TATA box and was highly conserved across species. ESR2 promoter reporter
assays in LNCaP and SKBR3 cell lines showed that the variant construct containing
the rs35036378 SNP allele had approximately 50% less activity relative to the
wild-type construct. We conclude that the rs35036378 SNP appears to cause a
reduced promoter activity of the ESR2 gene.

PMCID: PMC3402208
PMID: 21979797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Plant Physiol. 2011 Dec;157(4):2069-80. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.182253. Epub 2011 Oct
5.

Expression of Arabidopsis SHORT INTERNODES/STYLISH family genes in auxin
biosynthesis zones of aerial organs is dependent on a GCC box-like regulatory
element.

Eklund DM(1), Cierlik I, Ståldal V, Claes AR, Vestman D, Chandler J, Sundberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Uppsala BioCenter, Department of Plant Biology and Forest Genetics, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, SE-75007 Uppsala, Sweden.

Auxin/indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) biosynthesis in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis
thaliana) plays a major role in growth responses to developmental and genetic
signals as well as to environmental stimuli. Knowledge of its regulation,
however, remains rudimentary, and few proteins acting as transcriptional
modulators of auxin biosynthesis have been identified. We have previously shown
that alteration in the expression level of the SHORT INTERNODES/STYLISH (SHI/STY)
family member STY1 affects IAA biosynthesis rates and IAA levels and that STY1
acts as a transcriptional activator of genes encoding auxin biosynthesis enzymes.
Here, we have analyzed the upstream regulation of SHI/STY family members to gain 
further insight into transcriptional regulation of auxin biosynthesis. We
attempted to modulate the normal expression pattern of STY1 by mutating a
putative regulatory element, a GCC box, located in the proximal promoter region
and conserved in most SHI/STY genes in Arabidopsis. Mutations in the GCC box
abolish expression in aerial organs of the adult plant. We also show that
induction of the transcriptional activator DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE (DRNL) activates the 
transcription of STY1 and other SHI/STY family members and that this activation
is dependent on a functional GCC box. Additionally, STY1 expression in the strong
drnl-2 mutant or the drn drnl-1 puchi-1 triple mutant, carrying knockdown
mutations in both DRNL and its close paralogue DRN as well as one of their
closest homologs, PUCHI, was significantly reduced, suggesting that DRNL
regulates STY1 during normal plant development and that several other genes might
have redundant functions.

PMCID: PMC3327175
PMID: 21976484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Fertil Steril. 2011 Dec;96(6):1401-1406.e3. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.09.004. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

Genetic variation in the sex hormone metabolic pathway and endometriosis risk: an
evaluation of candidate genes.

Trabert B(1), Schwartz SM, Peters U, De Roos AJ, Chen C, Scholes D, Holt VL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. britton.trabert@nih.gov

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relationship between common genetic variation in genes
involved in the biosynthesis and signaling of estrogen and progesterone and
endometriosis risk.
DESIGN: Genetic polymorphism analysis.
SETTING: Population-based case-control study conducted in Group Health
Cooperative enrollees in western Washington.
PATIENT(S): Women with newly diagnosed, surgically confirmed endometriosis
between 1996 and 2001 (n = 256) and age- and reference year-matched female
control subjects without a history of endometriosis (n = 567).
INTERVENTIONS(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): We evaluated the relationship between common genetic
variation and endometriosis risk, using gene-based tests and single-variant
analysis of genetic polymorphisms in ESR1, ESR2, PGR, CYP17A1, CYP19A1, HSD17B1, 
HSD17B2, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, COMT, and GSTM1.
RESULT(S): The most consistent gene-based association with endometriosis risk was
for CYP19A1. We did not find evidence for consistent significant associations
between previously reported candidate SNPs in sex hormone-related genes and
endometriosis risk.
CONCLUSION(S): In summary, we report increased endometriosis risk with CYP19A1
gene-based tests; replication of the association between endometriosis and this
gene or gene region is necessary in a larger study population.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3228888
PMID: 21958689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Histopathology. 2011 Aug;59(2):216-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03914.x.

Oestrogen receptor-ß CA repeat polymorphism is associated with incidence of
colorectal cancer among females.

Honma N(1), Arai T, Takubo K, Younes M, Tanaka N, Mieno MN, Tamura K, Ikeda S,
Sawabe M, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Team for Geriatric Pathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Gerontology, Japan. nhonma@tmig.or.jp

AIMS: Increasing evidence suggests an association between oestrogens and
colorectal cancer. Oestrogen receptor beta, ER-ß, putatively plays a
pathobiological role in colorectal cancer as colorectal epithelial cells
frequently express ER-ß. The aim was to elucidate the association of the
dinucleotide (CA) repeat polymorphism of the ER-ß gene (ESR2) with colorectal
cancer.
METHODS AND RESULTS:  Deoxyribonucleic acids extracted from the renal cortex of
1488 Japanese autopsies with complete clinical/pathological data were studied. CA
repeat polymorphism was determined by polymerase chain reaction using
fluorescein-labelled primers. Patients were divided into three genotype groups
according to the number of CA repeats of each allele (S < 22, L = 22); SS (with
two S alleles), SL (with one each S and L allele) and LL (with two L alleles).
The presence/absence of colorectal cancers was determined by examining the
clinical records and autopsy material. The incidence of colorectal cancer was
significantly different according to the ESR2 CA repeat genotype only among
females (SS, 37/202 = 18.3%; SL, 19/332 = 5.7%; LL, 5/155 = 3.2%, P < 0.0001).
Immunohistochemically, cancers in females with the SS genotype, but not the SL
genotype, frequently expressed the C-terminus portion of ER-ß1 (wild-type ER-ß).
CONCLUSIONS: A role for ESR2 CA repeat polymorphism in the pathogenesis of
colorectal cancer among females is suggested.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 21884200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jul 25;358(2):146-54. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.08.022.
Epub 2011 Aug 22.

Estrogen biosynthesis and signaling in endometriosis.

Huhtinen K(1), Ståhle M, Perheentupa A, Poutanen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, 20014
Turku, Finland. kaisa.huhtinen@utu.fi

Endometriosis is an estrogen-dependent gynecological disease where
endometrium-like tissue grows outside uterine cavity. Endometriotic cell
proliferation is stimulated by estrogens acting predominantly via their nuclear
receptors. Estrogen receptors (ESR1, ESR2) are ligand activated transcription
factors whose activation is dependent on the cell-specific dynamic expression of 
the receptors, on the interacting proteins and on the ligand availability. The
different types of endometriotic lesions, peritoneal, deep, and ovarian
endometriosis, may respond to estrogens differentially due to differences in the 
expression of the receptors and interacting proteins, and due to potential
differences in the ligand availability regulated by the local estrogen synthesis.
This review summarizes the current knowledge of estrogen synthesizing enzymes and
estrogen receptors in different types of endometriosis lesions. Further studies
are still needed to define the possible differences in steroid metabolism in
different types of endometriotic lesions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21875644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Int J Cancer. 2012 Jul 1;131(1):95-105. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26364. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Meta-analysis of gene expression profiles associated with histological
classification and survival in 829 ovarian cancer samples.

Fekete T(1), Rásó E, Pete I, Tegze B, Liko I, Munkácsy G, Sipos N, Rigó J Jr,
Györffy B.

Author information: 
(1)Semmelweis University, 1st Department of Gynecology, Budapest.
tibfek@gmail.com

Transcriptomic analysis of global gene expression in ovarian carcinoma can
identify dysregulated genes capable to serve as molecular markers for histology
subtypes and survival. The aim of our study was to validate previous candidate
signatures in an independent setting and to identify single genes capable to
serve as biomarkers for ovarian cancer progression. As several datasets are
available in the GEO today, we were able to perform a true meta-analysis. First, 
829 samples (11 datasets) were downloaded, and the predictive power of 16
previously published gene sets was assessed. Of these, eight were capable to
discriminate histology subtypes, and none was capable to predict survival. To
overcome the differences in previous studies, we used the 829 samples to identify
new predictors. Then, we collected 64 ovarian cancer samples (median relapse-free
survival 24.5 months) and performed TaqMan Real Time Polimerase Chain Reaction
(RT-PCR) analysis for the best 40 genes associated with histology subtypes and
survival. Over 90% of subtype-associated genes were confirmed. Overall survival
was effectively predicted by hormone receptors (PGR and ESR2) and by TSPAN8.
Relapse-free survival was predicted by MAPT and SNCG. In summary, we successfully
validated several gene sets in a meta-analysis in large datasets of ovarian
samples. Additionally, several individual genes identified were validated in a
clinical cohort.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21858809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Oct;96(10):E1558-67. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-1084.
Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Estrogen receptor-ß and fetoplacental endothelial prostanoid biosynthesis: a link
to clinically demonstrated fetal growth restriction.

Su EJ(1), Ernst L, Abdallah N, Chatterton R, Xin H, Monsivais D, Coon J, Bulun
SE.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 250 East Superior Street,
Suite 05-2175, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. e-su@northwestern.edu

CONTEXT: Fetal growth restriction (FGR) due to placental dysfunction impacts
short- and long-term neonatal outcomes. Abnormal umbilical artery Doppler
velocimetry indicating elevated fetoplacental vascular resistance has been
associated with fetal morbidity and mortality. Estrogen receptors are regulators 
of vasomotor tone, and fetoplacental endothelium expresses estrogen receptor-ß
(ESR2) as its sole estrogen receptor.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to elucidate the mechanism whereby ESR2 regulates
placental villous endothelial cell prostanoid biosynthesis.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: We conducted immunohistochemical analysis of human
placental specimens and studies of primary fetoplacental endothelial cells
isolated from subjects with uncomplicated pregnancies.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We evaluated in vivo levels of ESR2 and cyclooxygenase-2
(PTGS2) in villous endothelial cells from fetuses with or without FGR and/or
abnormal umbilical artery Doppler indices and in vitro effects of ESR2 on
prostanoid biosynthetic gene expression.
RESULTS: ESR2 and PTGS2 expression were significantly higher within subjects with
FGR with abnormal umbilical artery Doppler indices in comparison with controls (P
< 0.01). ESR2 knockdown led to decreased cyclooxygenase-1 (PTGS1), PTGS2,
prostaglandin F synthase (AKR1C3), and increased prostacyclin synthase (PTGIS),
with opposing results found after ESR2 overexpression (P < 0.05). ESR2 mediates
prostaglandin H2 substrate availability and, in the setting of differential
regulation of AKR1C3 and PTGIS, altered the balance between vasodilatory and
vasoconstricting prostanoid production.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher ESR2 expression in the placental vasculature of FGR subjects 
with abnormal blood flow is associated with an endothelial cell phenotype that
preferentially produces vasoconstrictive prostanoids. Endothelial ESR2 appears to
be a master regulator of prostanoid biosynthesis and contributes to
high-resistance fetoplacental blood flow, thereby increasing morbidity and
mortality associated with FGR.

PMCID: PMC3200254
PMID: 21832119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Environ Health Perspect. 2011 Dec;119(12):1788-93. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1103809. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

Bisphenol A exposure is associated with in vivo estrogenic gene expression in
adults.

Melzer D(1), Harries L, Cipelli R, Henley W, Money C, McCormack P, Young A,
Guralnik J, Ferrucci L, Bandinelli S, Corsi AM, Galloway T.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Public Health, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Environ Health Perspect. 2011 Dec;119(12):A524.

BACKGROUND: Bisphenol A (BPA) is a synthetic estrogen commonly used in
polycarbonate plastic and resin-lined food and beverage containers. Exposure of
animal and cell models to doses of BPA below the recommended tolerable daily
intake (TDI) of 50 µg/kg/day have been shown to alter specific
estrogen-responsive gene expression, but this has not previously been shown in
humans.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated associations between BPA exposure and in vivo
estrogenic gene expression in humans.
METHODS: We studied 96 adult men from the InCHIANTI population study and examined
in vivo expression of six estrogen receptor, estrogen-related receptor, and
androgen receptor genes in peripheral blood leukocytes.
RESULTS: The geometric mean urinary BPA concentration was 3.65 ng/mL [95%
confidence interval (CI): 3.13, 4.28], giving an estimated mean excretion of 5.84
µg/day (95% CI: 5.00, 6.85), significantly below the current TDI. In age-adjusted
models, there were positive associations between higher BPA concentrations and
higher ESR2 [estrogen receptor 2 (ER beta)] expression (unstandardized linear
regression coefficient = 0.1804; 95% CI: 0.0388, 0.3221; p = 0.013) and ESRRA
(estrogen related receptor alpha) expression (coefficient = 0.1718; 95% CI:
0.0213, 0.3223; p = 0.026): These associations were little changed after
adjusting for potential confounders, including obesity, serum lipid
concentrations, and white cell subtype percentages. Upper-tertile BPA excretors
(urinary BPA > 4.6 ng/mL) had 65% higher mean ESR2 expression than did
lower-tertile BPA excretors (0-2.4 ng/mL).
CONCLUSIONS: Because activation of nuclear-receptor-mediated pathways by BPA is
consistently found in laboratory studies, such activation in humans provides
evidence that BPA is likely to function as a xenoestrogen in this sample of
adults.

PMCID: PMC3261992
PMID: 21831745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2012 Mar;28(3):190-4. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2011.593661. Epub
2011 Aug 9.

Genetic polymorphisms associated with steroids metabolism and insulin action in
polycystic ovary syndrome.

Ramos Cirilo PD(1), Rosa FE, Moreira Ferraz MF, Rainho CA, Pontes A, Rogatto SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biosciences, UNESP - São Paulo State
University, Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an endocrinopathy associated with
infertility, diabetes and cardiovascular events. This study aimed to correlate
polymorphisms of genes involved in the biosynthesis and metabolism of steroids
and insulin action (CYP17A1, CYP19A1, AR, ESR1, ESR2, INSR, IGF2 and PAI1) with
clinical and biochemical parameters of PCOS. DNA was extracted from peripheral
blood samples obtained from 117 PCOS and 105 healthy women. The PAI1
insertion/deletion (-675 ins/delG) polymorphism (rs1799768) was genotyped by
PCR-SSCP. CYP19A1 [TTTA](n), AR [CAG](n), ESR1 [TA](n), and ESR2 [CA](n) genes
were evaluated by PCR-based GeneScan analysis, while CYP17A1 5'UTR (rs743572),
INSR 1058 CT (rs1799817), and IGF2 3'UTR GA (rs680) polymorphisms were evaluated 
by PCR-RFLP. The results showed a prevalence of PAI1 4G5G+4G4G genotypes in PCOS 
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025). Younger PCOS women showed a predominance of CT+TT, GA+AA and
4G5G+4G4G genotypes of INSR, IGF2, and PAI1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0499, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0300, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0350, 
respectively). AR shorter alleles (= 20 repeats) were significantly associated
with higher serum levels of total testosterone (TT, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0086). In conclusion,
PAI1 polymorphism seems to be associated with the risk of PCOS development.
Younger PCOS women had specific genotypes of INSR, IGF2 and PAI1 genes. AR
shorter alleles can be associated with higher serum levels of TT in PCOS
patients.

PMID: 21824047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Hum Reprod. 2011 Oct;26(10):2902-11. doi: 10.1093/humrep/der222. Epub 2011 Jul
28.

Genetic polymorphisms of the glucocorticoid receptor may affect the phenotype of 
women with anovulatory polycystic ovary syndrome.

Valkenburg O(1), Uitterlinden AG, Themmen AP, de Jong FH, Hofman A, Fauser BC,
Laven JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Room HS508, Erasmus MC, PO Box 2040, 3000
CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. o.valkenburg@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is characterized by ovarian
dysfunction. The association with obesity and insulin resistance is well
established. Steroid hormones play a central role in the regulation of both
ovarian function and body composition. This study aims to assess the influence of
known functional polymorphisms in genes that are responsible for the production, 
metabolism and signal transduction of steroid hormones on the susceptibility to
and phenotype of PCOS.
METHODS: We included 518 Caucasian women with anovulatory PCOS (2003 Rotterdam
criteria) and 2996 population-based controls. Functional polymorphic variants
were selected in genes that affect the production of estradiol and cortisol
[aromatase (CYP19), 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (HSD11B1) and
hexose-6-phosphate dehydogenase (H6PD)] and in genes for signal transduction
proteins [estrogen receptor (ESR1 and ESR2) and glucocorticoid receptor (GCR)].
RESULTS: Genotype-frequencies were similar in PCOS cases and population-based
controls. We observed possible associations between GCR genotype and LH levels
that suggest an inhibitory influence of GCR, i.e., lower LH levels in association
with GCR alleles that are known to increase receptor sensitivity (rs6195 and
rs41423247) and higher LH levels in GCR variants that may inhibit receptor
sensitivity (rs6190 and rs6198).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study did not identify risk alleles for PCOS, although
the study was limited by an absence of endocrine data for the population-based
controls. However, GCR variants may influence gonadotrophin levels in women with 
anovulatory PCOS. We hypothesize that glucocorticoids can affect the function of 
the hypothalomo-pituitary-gonadal axis in humans.

PMID: 21803757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Scand J Rheumatol. 2011;40(5):329-33. doi: 10.3109/03009742.2011.563752. Epub
2011 Jul 18.

Oestrogen receptor polymorphisms in female patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Dziedziejko V(1), Kurzawski M, Safranow K, Drozdzik M, Chlubek D, Pawlik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Chemistry, Pomeranian Medical
University, Szczecin, Poland.

OBJECTIVES: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex autoimmune disease with a
strong genetic contribution in its pathogenesis. There is compelling evidence
that autoimmunity is under genetic control and that oestrogens and their
receptors (ESRs) can play a role in the high prevalence of RA in females.
METHODS: A total of 318 female patients with RA and 250 controls were examined.
Common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR1 (rs9340799:A>G,
rs2234693:T>C) and ESR2 (rs4986938:G>A, rs1256049:G>A) genes encoding oestrogen
receptors, previously associated with altered receptor expression, were selected 
for the purpose of this study.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the distributions of studied
genotypes and alleles between RA patients and a control group. The age at disease
diagnosis was lower in carriers of the ESR1 rs9340799 A allele compared with GG
homozygotes as well as in patients with ESR1 rs2234693 TT and CT genotypes
compared with CC homozygotes. There was no significant association of the
genotypes with rheumatoid factor (RF), erosive disease, extra-articular
manifestations, or anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the study suggest that polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene
may be associated with the age of onset of RA.

PMID: 21762042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Plant Signal Behav. 2011 Aug;6(8):1244-6. doi: 10.4161/psb.6.8.16456. Epub 2011
Aug 1.

The role of Dornröschen-like in early floral organogenesis.

Chandler JW(1), Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, Cologne University, Cologne, Germany.

Positional signals that specify founder cells and determine where lateral organs 
initiate and how these signals are perceived by cells that transition to the
periphery of the meristem is a challenging problem. We recently showed that
expression of the AP2 ERF transcription factor Dornröschen-like (DRNL) marks all 
floral organ founder cells and pre-patterns lateral stamen and petal, or medial
stamen founder cells by two regions of expression that we propose represent
morphogenetic fields, that subsequently resolve into discrete foci. The
spatio-temporal expression pattern of DRNL allows speculation concerning
evolutionary aspects of plant developmental biology and the control of the floral
plant body. It further paves the way to use DRNL as a tool to address fundamental
questions of cell type specification.

PMCID: PMC3260735
PMID: 21758017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Nov;127(3-5):413-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.05.008. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

The ESR2 AluI gene polymorphism is associated with bone mineral density in
postmenopausal women.

Currò M(1), Marini H, Alibrandi A, Ferlazzo N, Condello S, Polito F, Adamo EB,
Atteritano M, D'Anna R, Altavilla D, Bitto A, Squadrito F, Ientile R, Caccamo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical, Physiological and Nutritional Sciences, University 
of Messina, Via C Valeria, Policlinico G Martino, 98124 Messina, Italy.

Multiple factors may contribute to the pathogenesis of postmenopausal
osteoporosis including environmental, life-style and genetic factors. Common
variants in ESR2 gene encoding for ER-beta, highly expressed in bone tissue, have
recently been proposed as candidates for affecting bone phenotype at the
population level, particularly in postmenopausal women. In this study, we
examined the genetic background at ESR2 AluI (rs4986938, 1730G>A) locus in 89
osteopenic, postmenopausal women (age range 49-56 years) together with BMD at
lumbar spine and femoral neck sites as well as variations in plasma levels of
bone metabolism and turnover markers. Genotyping for ESR2 G1730A polymorphism
showed that the frequency of A mutated allele accounted for 0.4 in our cohort of 
postmenopausal women; moreover, the GA1730 heterozygous individuals were the most
represented (50.6%) compared with GG (37.8%) and AA homozygous ones (14.6%). A
regression analysis showed that lumbar spine BMD values were significantly
associated with both ESR2 AA1730 genotype (p=0.044) and time since the onset of
menopause (p=0.031), while no significant association was detected between
biochemical markers and genetic background. Interestingly, 85% of patients with
AA1730 genotype presented the smallest lumbar spine BMD values. These findings
first indicate a worsening effect of ESR2 AluI polymorphism on lumbar spine BMD
reduction in postmenopause, suggesting that the detection of this ESR2 variant
should be recommended in postmenopausal women, particularly in populations with a
high prevalence of ESR2 AA1730 homozygous genotype.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21689747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20703. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020703. Epub 2011 Jun 6.

Estrogen receptor beta rs1271572 polymorphism and invasive ovarian carcinoma
risk: pooled analysis within the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium.

Lurie G(1), Wilkens LR, Thompson PJ, Shvetsov YB, Matsuno RK, Carney ME, Palmieri
RT, Wu AH, Pike MC, Pearce CL, Menon U, Gentry-Maharaj A, Gayther SA, Ramus SJ,
Whittemore AS, McGuire V, Sieh W, Pharoah PD, Song H, Gronwald J, Jakubowska A,
Cybulski C, Lubinski J, Schildkraut JM, Berchuck A, Krüger Kjær S, Høgdall E,
Fasching PA, Beckmann MW, Ekici AB, Hein A, Chenevix-Trench G, Webb PM, Beesley
J; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group; Australian Cancer Study Group, Goodman 
MT; Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium.

Collaborators: Bowtell D, Chenevix-Trench G, deFazio A, Gertig D, Green A, Webb
PM, Green A, Parsons P, Hayward N, Webb PM, Whiteman D, Chenevix-Trench G,
Johnatty SE, Beesley J, Chen X, Webb PM, Pike MC, Wu AH, Pearce CL, Edlund CK,
Van den Berg DJ, Gayther SA, Ramus SR, Fasching PA, Garcia-Closas M, Yang HP,
Chanock S, Wentzensen N, Brinton LA, Anton-Culver H, Ziogas A, Brewster W, Goode 
EL, Fridley BL, Vierkant RA, Cunningham JM, Berchuck A, Schildkraut JM, Iversen
ES Jr, Moorman PG, Palmieri RT, Goodman MT, Carney ME, Thompson PJ, Wilkens LR,
Lurie G, Cramer DW, Gates MA, De Vivo I, Hankinson SE, Tworoger SS, Terry KL,
Doherty JA, Cushing-Haugen KL, Chen C, Rossing MA, Cook LS, Moysich K, DiCioccio 
R, Grasela MT, Ness RB, Whittemore AS, McGuire V, Sieh W, Lancaster JM, Risch HA,
Hogdall C, Hogdall E, Kruger Kjaer S, Butzow R, Gentry-Maharaj A, Menon U,
Pharoah PD, Perkins B, Shah M, Song H, Kelemen LE, Gronwald J, Lubinski J,
Lissowska J, Chang-Claude J, Wang-Gohrke S.

The association of ovarian carcinoma risk with the polymorphism rs1271572 in the 
estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) gene was examined in 4946 women with primary
invasive ovarian carcinoma and 6582 controls in a pooled analysis of ten
case-control studies within the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium (OCAC). All
participants were non-Hispanic white women. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs) were estimated using unconditional logistic regression adjusted
for site and age. Women with the TT genotype were at increased risk of ovarian
carcinoma compared to carriers of the G allele (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.10; 95%; CI: 1.01-1.21;
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.04); the OR was 1.09 (CI: 0.99-1.20; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.07) after excluding data from
the center (Hawaii) that nominated this SNP for OCAC genotyping A stronger
association of rs1271572 TT versus GT/GG with risk was observed among women aged 
=50 years versus older women (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.35; CI: 1.12-1.62; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002; p for
interaction<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02) that remained statistically significant after excluding
Hawaii data (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.34; CI: 1.11-1.61; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.009). No heterogeneity of the
association was observed by study, menopausal status, gravidity, parity, use of
contraceptive or menopausal hormones, tumor histological type, or stage at
diagnosis. This pooled analysis suggests that rs1271572 might influence the risk 
of ovarian cancer, in particular among younger women.

PMCID: PMC3108970
PMID: 21673961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;26(3):431-9. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110362.

Study of estrogen receptor-a and receptor-ß gene polymorphisms on Alzheimer's
disease.

Goumidi L(1), Dahlman-Wright K, Tapia-Paez I, Matsson H, Pasquier F, Amouyel P,
Kere J, Lambert JC, Meirhaeghe A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille; Univ Lille Nord de France; UDSL,
Lille, France.

Estrogen treatment can modulate the risk for developing dementia in women.
Therefore, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the estrogen receptor genes 
may constitute genetic susceptibility factors to Alzheimer's disease (AD). Thus, 
we investigated the impact of the genetic variability of the estrogen receptor a 
1 (ESR1) and estrogen receptor a 2 (ESR2) genes on late onset AD risk. We
analyzed 39 SNPs in ESR1 and 5 SNPs in ESR2 in a French case-control study of
sporadic AD (1007 cases/647 controls). Individuals carrying the minor allele of
rs7450824 had a lower risk of AD than homozygous subjects for the major allele
(age, gender, and APOE e4 allele adjusted odds ratio = 0.71 [0.57-0.89], p =
0.003). However, this association did not resist Bonferroni correction for
multiple testing (p-threshold < 0.001). Consistently, no significant association 
could be detected when considering age of onset. We also tested for possible
interactions between the ESR SNPs and APOE status (e4 allele) or gender but no
significant interaction could be observed. Even after stratifying the sample on
APOE status or gender, no significant association with AD risk could be detected.
Finally, we searched for potential gene-gene interactions between ESR1 and ESR2
SNPs but no significant interaction could be detected. Our results reinforce the 
notion that SNPs in the ESR1 or ESR2 genes do not seem to play a major role in
the genetic susceptibility of AD.

PMID: 21673408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Reproduction. 2011 Sep;142(3):439-46. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0131. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Roosters affected by epididymal lithiasis present local alteration in vitamin D3,
testosterone and estradiol levels as well as estrogen receptor 2 (beta)
expression.

Oliveira AG(1), Dornas RA, Praes LC, Hess RA, Mahecha GA, Oliveira CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Avenida
Antônio Carlos 6627, Caixa Postal 486, CEP 31.270-901 Belo Horizonte, Minas
Gerais, Brazil. cleida@icb.ufmg.br

Epididymal lithiasis is a reproductive dysfunction of roosters that is associated
with loss of fertility and is characterized by the formation of calcium stones in
the lumen of the efferent ductules of the epididymal region. The efferent
ductules of birds are responsible for the reabsorption of the fluid coming from
the testis as well as luminal calcium. It has been hypothesized that the
epididymal stone formation may be related to the impairment of local fluid or
calcium homeostasis, which depends on hormones such as estradiol (E(2)).
Therefore, this study aimed to investigate possible alterations in the expression
of ERa (ESR1) and ERß (ESR2) in the epididymal region of roosters affected by
epididymal lithiasis. The study was performed by immunohistochemistry and western
blotting assays. In addition, the concentrations of E(2), vitamin D3, and
testosterone, which are also key hormones in maintenance of calcium homeostasis, 
were determined in the plasma and epididymal region, by ELISA. It was observed
that ESR2 expression is increased in all segments of the epididymal region of
affected roosters, whereas ESR1 levels are not altered. Moreover, the hormone
concentration profiles were changed, as in the epididymal region of roosters with
lithiasis the E(2) levels were increased and vitamin D3 as well as testosterone
concentrations were significantly decreased. These results suggest that a
hormonal imbalance may be involved with the origin and progression of the
epididymal lithiasis, possibly by affecting the local fluid or calcium
homeostasis.

PMID: 21670126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2012 Mar;13(3):426-34.

ESR1, ESR2 and FSH receptor gene polymorphisms in combination: a useful genetic
tool for the prediction of poor responders.

Anagnostou E(1), Mavrogianni D, Theofanakis Ch, Drakakis P, Bletsa R, Demirol A, 
Gurgan T, Antsaklis A, Loutradis D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Reproduction, IVF Unit, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece.
elli.anagnostou@gmail.com

PURPOSE: Previous studies in humans concluded that a multigenic model including
specific FSHR, ESR1 and ESR2 genotype patterns may partially explain the poor
response to FSH. The aim of our study is to analyse three different loci
-polymorphisms in ESR1 Pvu II, ESR2 Rsa I and Ser680Asn FSH receptor gene- in a
Greek population and their involvement in stimulation outcome and pregnancy
rates.
METHODS: Each locus was studied alone, and in combination with the others. We
performed both restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and real-time
polymerase chain reaction. A total of 109 normally ovulating female patients
underwent IVF or ICSI.
RESULTS: Studying each locus alone, no significant results were drawn for ESR1
and ESR2 genes. Concerning the FSHR polymorphism, the women carrying the AA
variant presented higher total amount of gonadotrophins used (P=0,048) and tended
to have higher number of stimulation days (P=0,057). Considering the ESR1 and
FSHR gene polymorphisms in combination, the TC/SA combination presents the
highest number of pregnancies in poor responders group (3/4 pregnancies carried
this genotype), in good responders group (4/12 pregnancies carried this genotype)
and in the total population (10/26 pregnancies carried this genotype). Except the
CC/AA combination, all other genotype combinations presented incidence of
pregnancy, with TC/SA having the highest incidence. The CC/AA genotype presents
the worst profile of ovulation induction, confirming a poor responder profile:
the total amount of gonadotrophins used was highest in CC/AA group (P < 0,05).
The peak E2, the number of follicles and of retrieved oocytes and the pregnancy
rate were significantly lower (P < 0,05). This genotype combination seems to be
over-presented in the poor responders group in a statistically significant way
(P=0,038). Women with CC/AA combination have 1,5-2,4 times more risk to be poor
responders in comparison with women that do not carry that combination.
CONCLUSION: This study supports the hypothesis that a multigenic model, including
the well studied ESR1 and FSHR genes is involved in the controlled ovarian
stimulation outcome indicating that the CC/AA genotype presents the worst
ovulation induction profile, while the TC/SA genotype presents the higher number 
of pregnancies in our population.

PMID: 21658000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2012 Mar;13(3):417-25.

Genetic profile of SNP(s) and ovulation induction.

Loutradis D(1), Theofanakis Ch, Anagnostou E, Mavrogianni D, Partsinevelos GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Reproduction, IVF Unit, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece.
loutradi@otenet.gr

Obtaining an adequate number of good quality oocytes while minimizing adverse
drug reactions (ADRs) and cycle cancellation rates is considered the gold
standard in controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) for fertility treatment.
Patients who undergo IVF/ICSI cycles tend to present with different responses to 
exogenous gonadotrophin administration. Research has shown that the secret
probably lies in the various single nucleotide polymorhisms (SNPs) in their
receptor genes. The decryption of human genome provided specialists with
additional information in assessing and even predicting ovarian response to COH. 
In this context, the study of Pharmacogenomics, Pharmacogenetics and SNPs
unravels as a promising field in optimizing fertility treatment. Several SNPs in 
FSH and estrogen receptor genes have been detected so far, but only three of
them, one in FSH receptor and two in estrogen receptor genes have been associated
with ovarian response to COH. It seems that the Asn/Ser variant of the FSH
receptor functions more efficiently, while the Ser/Ser and Asn/Asn variants have 
a tendency to resist to FSH stimulation. With regards to estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1), the Pvull and the Xbal polymorphisms seem to be associated with
differences in the response to ovarian stimulation, while the Rsal polymorphism
in estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2) is currently under investigation. There exists
evidence supporting the hypothesis that a set of genes, all related to the FSH
hormone mechanism of action, may participate along with other factors to the
control of ovarian response to FSH, thus a cautious interpretation of
polymorphism detection results is considered mandatory. However, identifying
potential genetic markers that could predict ovarian response and implementing
them in routine screening tests for every woman entering an IVF/ICSI cycle, would
be able to tailor fertility treatment to each patients needs thus maximizing the 
success rate and eliminating potential side-effects of fertility drugs.

PMID: 21657995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. BMC Med Genet. 2011 May 31;12:78. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-78.

Estrogen and progesterone-related gene variants and colorectal cancer risk in
women.

Lin JH(1), Manson JE, Kraft P, Cochrane BB, Gunter MJ, Chlebowski RT, Zhang SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. jhlin@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Observational studies and randomized trials have suggested that
estrogens and/or progesterone may lower the risk for colorectal cancer. Inherited
variation in the sex-hormone genes may be one mechanism by which sex hormones
affect colorectal cancer, although data are limited.
METHOD: We conducted a comprehensive evaluation of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes encoding 3 hormone receptors (ESR1, ESR2, PGR) and 
5 hormone synthesizers (CYP19A1 and CYP17A1, HSD17B1, HSD17B2, HSD17B4) among 427
women with incident colorectal cancer and 871 matched controls who were
Caucasians of European ancestry from 93676 postmenopausal women enrolled in the
Women's Health Initiative Observational cohort. A total of 242 haplotype-tagging 
and functional SNPs in the 8 genes were included for analysis. Unconditional
logistic regression with adjustment for age and hysterectomy status was used to
estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: We observed a weak association between the CYP17A1 rs17724534 SNP and
colorectal cancer risk (OR per risk allele (A) = 1.39, 95% CI = 1.09-1.78,
corrected p-value = 0.07). In addition, a suggestive interaction between
rs17724534 and rs10883782 in 2 discrete LD blocks of CYP17A1 was observed in
relation to colorectal cancer (empirical p value = 0.04). Moreover, one haplotype
block of CYP19A1 was associated with colorectal cancer (corrected global p value 
= 0.02), which likely reflected the association with the tagging SNP, rs1902584, 
in the block.
CONCLUSION: Our findings offer some support for a suggestive association of
CYP17A1 and CYP19A1 variants with colorectal cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3125237
PMID: 21627810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Plant Sci. 2011 Jul;181(1):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2011.03.007. Epub 2011 
Mar 22.

Arabidopsis ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION (ESR)1 and ESR2 regulate in vitro
shoot regeneration and their expressions are differentially regulated.

Matsuo N(1), Makino M, Banno H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate school of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chubu University, Kasugai,
Aichi 487-8501, Japan.

The Arabidopsis ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION (ESR)1 and ESR2 genes are thought 
to play critical roles in in vitro shoot regeneration. In this study, we
investigated the functions and expression patterns of ESR1 and ESR2 during shoot 
regeneration by using their mutants and promoter-reporter systems. Shoot
regeneration efficiencies of esr1 esr2 double mutants from hypocotyl explants
decreased drastically; although the effects on shoot regeneration of the esr1
single mutation were much less marked than those of the esr2 single mutation,
especially from root explants, their effects were additive. We found that ESR1
was initially expressed 1 day after transfer onto shoot-inducing medium (SIM),
compared with 4 days for ESR2 expression. These results suggest that the
functions of ESR1 and ESR2 in shoot regeneration are not redundant, even though
they encode similar transcription factors and the ESR2 gene substituted with an
ESR1 coding region complements the esr2 mutation. We also found that ESR1
expression was localized to a small number of cells in the lateral root meristem 
(LRM)-like structures, and the ESR1-expressing cells appeared to proliferate to
form shoot apical meristem (SAM)-like structures. Thus, ESR1 may be involved in
the change of LRM to SAM in tissue culture.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21600396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2011 Nov;36(10):1582-6. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2011.04.011. Epub 2011 May 12.

Estrogen receptor gene variants are associated with anxiety disorders in older
women.

Ryan J(1), Scali J, Carrière I, Scarabin PY, Ritchie K, Ancelin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1061, Nervous System Pathologies: Epidemiological and Clinical
Research, Hôpital La Colombière, Montpellier, France. joanne.ryan@inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: Estrogen is thought to play a key role in anxiety, but it remains
unknown whether genetic variants in the estrogen receptors (ERs) can influence
the risk of anxiety. This study investigated whether ESR1 and ESR2 gene variants 
were associated with specific anxiety disorders in postmenopausal women and
evaluated the potential modifying effect of hormone treatment (HT) on these
associations.
METHODS: One thousand and ninety-two community-dwelling women aged 65 years and
older were recruited as part of the ESPRIT Study in Montpellier, France. Anxiety 
was assessed using the Mini-International Neuropsychiatry Interview (MINI),
according to DSM-IV criteria. Two ESR1 and three ESR2 polymorphisms were
genotyped.
RESULTS: The most common anxiety disorders were phobia (14.2%) and generalised
anxiety disorder (GAD, 8%). The A allele of ESR2 rs1256049 was associated with an
increased risk of GAD [OR: 2.06, 95% CI: 1.09-3.87], while both ESR1
polymorphisms were specifically associated with phobia. The C allele of ESR1
rs2234693 decreased the risk of phobia by 42% [95% CI: 0.41-0.83], and this
remained significant even after Bonferroni correction. The G allele of ESR1
rs9340799 was associated with a 31% decreased phobia risk [95% CI: 0.49-0.96].
There was also evidence of a significant gene-environment interaction, where only
women who were currently using HT had a reduced risk of phobia with these ESR1
gene variants.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms earlier findings of an association between ESR1 
and global anxiety in older women, however these associations varied depending on
the anxiety syndrome and the use of HT. The results also suggest that the ESR2
may contribute to the genetic vulnerability to GAD, but these findings require
further confirmation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21570196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Plant Mol Biol. 2011 May;76(1-2):171-85. doi: 10.1007/s11103-011-9779-8. Epub
2011 Apr 30.

DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE expression marks Arabidopsis floral organ founder cells and
precedes auxin response maxima.

Chandler JW(1), Jacobs B, Cole M, Comelli P, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, Cologne Biocenter, Cologne University,
Zülpicher Strasse 47b, Cologne, Germany.

Live imaging during floral development revealed that expression of the
DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE (DRNL) gene encoding an AP2-like transcription factor, marks all
organ founder cells. Transcription precedes the perception of auxin response
maxima as measured by the DR5 reporter and is unaffected in early organogenesis, 
by mutation of four canonical auxin response elements (AuxREs) in the DRNL
promoter. DRNL expression identifies discrete modes of organ initiation in the
four floral whorls, from individual or pairs of organ anlagen in the outer whorl 
of sepals to two morphogenetic fields pre-patterning petals and lateral stamens, 
or a ring-shaped field giving rise to the medial stamens before carpel primordia 
are specified. DRNL function only overlaps in the central stem cell zone with
that of its paralogue, DORNRÖSCHEN (DRN). drnl mutants are affected in floral
organ outgrowth, which functionally interplays with boundary specification as
organ fusions are sensitized by loss of CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON (CUC) gene activity,
and synergistic interactions exist with mutants in local auxin biosynthesis and
polar transport. DRNL apparently monitors and contributes to cellular decisions
in the SAM and thus provides a novel molecular access to the interplay of founder
cell specification, organ anlage and organogenesis in the SAM peripheral zone.

PMID: 21547450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Res Vet Sci. 2012 Jun;92(3):478-85. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2011.04.009. Epub 2011
May 4.

Steroid receptor mRNA expression in the ovarian follicles of cows with cystic
ovarian disease.

Alfaro NS(1), Salvetti NR, Velazquez MM, Stangaferro ML, Rey F, Ortega HH.

Author information: 
(1)Morphological Sciences Department, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, National
University of Litoral (FCV-UNL), Esperanza, Santa Fe, Argentina.

Steroid receptors have been demonstrated to be important intra-ovarian regulators
of follicular development and ovulatory processes. The aim of the present study
was to determine the expression of steroid receptor mRNA in ovarian follicular
structures from cows with cystic ovarian disease (COD) compared with ovarian
structures from regularly cycling cows using reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). The cystic follicles showed a higher estrogen receptor a
(ESR1) mRNA expression in the theca and granulosa and a lower estrogen receptor ß
(ESR2) expression. The cystic follicles also showed a strong expression of
androgen receptor mRNA in the granulosa. No changes were observed in total
progesterone receptor mRNA, but a very significant increase in the B isoform was 
found in the granulosa of the cystic follicles. The findings of the current study
provide evidence that an altered steroid signaling system may be present in
bovine follicular cysts, and we suggest that in conditions characterized by
altered ovulation, such as COD, changes in the expression of ovarian steroid
receptors could play a fundamental role in the pathogeny of this disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21536311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. BMC Genomics. 2011 Apr 28;12:209. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-209.

The testosterone-dependent and independent transcriptional networks in the
hypothalamus of Gpr54 and Kiss1 knockout male mice are not fully equivalent.

Prentice LM(1), d'Anglemont de Tassigny X, McKinney S, Ruiz de Algara T, Yap D,
Turashvili G, Poon S, Sutcliffe M, Allard P, Burleigh A, Fee J, Huntsman DG,
Colledge WH, Aparicio SA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology and Breast Cancer Program, British Columbia Cancer Research
Centre, 675 West 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Humans and mice with loss of function mutations in GPR54 (KISS1R) or 
kisspeptin do not progress through puberty, caused by a failure to release GnRH. 
The transcriptional networks regulated by these proteins in the hypothalamus have
yet to be explored by genome-wide methods.
RESULTS: We show here, using 1 million exon mouse arrays (Exon 1.0 Affymetrix)
and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) validation to analyse
microdissected hypothalamic tissue from Gpr54 and Kiss1 knockout mice, the extent
of transcriptional regulation in the hypothalamus. The sensitivity to detect
important transcript differences in microdissected RNA was confirmed by the
observation of counter-regulation of Kiss1 expression in Gpr54 knockouts and
confirmed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Since Gpr54 and Kiss1 knockout animals
are effectively pre-pubertal with low testosterone (T) levels, we also determined
which of the validated transcripts were T-responsive and which varied according
to genotype alone. We observed four types of transcriptional regulation (i)
genotype only dependent regulation, (ii) T only dependent regulation, (iii)
genotype and T-dependent regulation with interaction between these variables,
(iv) genotype and T-dependent regulation with no interaction between these
variables. The results implicate for the first time several transcription factors
(e.g. Npas4, Esr2), proteases (Klk1b22), and the orphan 10-transmembrane
transporter TMEM144 in the biology of GPR54/kisspeptin function in the
hypothalamus. We show for the neuronal activity regulated transcription factor
NPAS4, that distinct protein over-expression is seen in the hypothalamus and
hippocampus in Gpr54 knockout mice. This links for the first time the
hypothalamic-gonadal axis with this important regulator of inhibitory synapse
formation. Similarly we confirm TMEM144 up-regulation in the hypothalamus by RNA 
in situ hybridization and western blot.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, global transcriptional profiling shows that loss of 
GPR54 and kisspeptin are not fully equivalent in the mouse hypothalamus.

PMCID: PMC3111392
PMID: 21527035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Orthop Res. 2011 Jun;29(6):834-7. doi: 10.1002/jor.21322. Epub 2010 Dec 23.

Replication study of the association between adolescent idiopathic scoliosis and 
two estrogen receptor genes.

Takahashi Y(1), Matsumoto M, Karasugi T, Watanabe K, Chiba K, Kawakami N, Tsuji
T, Uno K, Suzuki T, Ito M, Sudo H, Minami S, Kotani T, Kono K, Yanagida H,
Taneichi H, Takahashi A, Toyama Y, Ikegawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is a common disorder with a strong genetic 
predisposition. Associations between AIS and common single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in estrogen receptor genes have been reported. rs9340799 in 
the gene for estrogen receptor a (ESR1) is reported to be associated with curve
severity in Japanese and with AIS predisposition and curve severity in Chinese.
In addition, rs1256120 in the gene for estrogen receptor ß (ESR2) is reported to 
be associated with AIS predisposition and curve severity in Chinese. However, the
sample sizes of these previous studies were small, and the associations of these 
SNPs have not been replicated. To examine the association between AIS and
estrogen receptor genes, we investigated the association of rs9340799 and
rs1256120 with AIS predisposition and curve severity using a large Japanese
population, consisting of 798 AIS patients and 637 sex-matched controls. We found
no association of either SNP with AIS predisposition or curve severity in the
Japanese population. Considering the statistical power of the present study and
the limitations of the previous reports, we conclude that the associations of
rs9340799 and rs1256120 with AIS predisposition and curve severity are negative.

Copyright © 2010 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 21520258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2011 Jun 8;18(3):371-84. doi: 10.1530/ERC-11-0057. Print
2011 Jun.

Modification of menopausal hormone therapy-associated colorectal cancer risk by
polymorphisms in sex steroid signaling, metabolism and transport related genes.

Rudolph A(1), Sainz J, Hein R, Hoffmeister M, Frank B, Försti A, Brenner H,
Hemminki K, Chang-Claude J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer
Feld 581, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The mechanisms underlying the association of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT)
with reduced colorectal cancer (CRC) risk are unknown and the identification of
genetic modifiers may yield further insight. We explored the effect modification 
of MHT-associated CRC risk in postmenopausal women by 47 polymorphisms with known
or putative functional relevance in 16 candidate genes related to hormone
metabolism (COMT, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP3A4, CYP17A1, GSTP,
and HSD17B1), transport (ABCB1), and signaling (ESR1, ESR2, SHBG, PGR, and
NR1I2). A total of 685 CRC patients and 684 healthy controls from a German
population-based case-control study (DACHS) were genotyped. Multiplicative
statistical interaction between polymorphisms and ever MHT use as well as
duration of use was assessed using multivariate logistic regression. CRC risk
associated with ever MHT use as well as with duration was significantly modified 
by rs1202168 in the transporter gene ABCB1 (P interaction=0.04). The
MHT-associated risk reduction was not significant in homozygous non-carriers
(odds ratio (OR) ever use=0.84, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.53-1.34; OR per 5 
year duration=0.94, 95% CI 0.83-1.08), while homozygous carriers of the minor T
allele had a 57% lower risk with ever use of MHT (95% CI 0.21-0.88) and a 22%
lower risk per 5 years of MHT use (95% CI 0.62-0.97). Significant effect
modification was also observed for the ESR1_rs910416 polymorphism (P
interaction=0.03 for ever use and 0.07 for duration of use), whereby the
decreased risk was attenuated in homozygous carriers of the minor C allele (OR
ever use=0.87, 95% CI 0.48-1.60, OR per 5 year duration=0.99, 95% CI 0.83-1.18). 
Results of this exploratory study provide first evidence that polymorphisms in
genes related to estrogen transport and signaling may modify MHT-associated CRC
risk but warrant replication in an independent population.

PMID: 21490239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mov Disord. 2011 Jun;26(7):1234-42. doi: 10.1002/mds.23604. Epub 2011 Apr 5.

Variants in estrogen-related genes and risk of Parkinson's disease.

Chung SJ(1), Armasu SM, Biernacka JM, Lesnick TG, Rider DN, Cunningham JM,
Maraganore DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Incidence rates of Parkinson's disease are higher in men than in women at all
ages, and these differences may be a result of the neuroprotective effects of
estrogen on the nigrostriatal pathway. We investigated the association of common 
variants in 4 estrogen-related genes with Parkinson's disease. Tagging
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the CYP19A1, ESR1, ESR2, and PRDM2 genes were 
selected from the International Haplotype Map and genotyped in 1103 Parkinson's
disease cases from the upper Midwest of the United States and in 1103
individually matched controls (654 unaffected siblings, and 449 unrelated
controls from the same region). Of 137 informative single-nucleotide
polymorphisms, 2 PRDM2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms were significantly
associated with an increased risk of Parkinson's disease at the
Bonferroni-corrected significance level of 0.0004 (rs2744690: OR, 1.54;
SE(logOR), .109; 99.96% CI, 1.05-2.26; uncorrected P = .0001; rs2744687: OR,
1.53; SE(logOR), .113; 99.96% CI, 1.03-2.29, uncorrected P = .0002); the
association was significant in the women-only stratum but not in the men-only
stratum. An additional 6 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in PRDM2, 2 in ESR1, 1
in ESR2, and 1 in CYP19A1 had significant P values in the overall sample before
Bonferroni correction. None of the single-nucleotide polymorphisms were
significantly associated with age at onset of Parkinson's disease after
Bonferroni correction. Our results confirm the association of PRDM2 variants with
Parkinson's disease susceptibility, especially in women.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

PMCID: PMC4723424
PMID: 21469201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Androl. 2011 Nov-Dec;32(6):600-13. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.110.012872. Epub 2011
Mar 25.

Estrogen and its receptors in efferent ductules and epididymis.

Hess RA(1), Fernandes SA, Gomes GR, Oliveira CA, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, 2001 S Lincoln Ave., Urbana, IL 61802, USA.
rexhess@illinois.edu

Estrogens play key roles in the development and maintenance of male reproductive 
function and fertility. In this review, we briefly describe the localization and 
function of estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 (also known as ERa and ERß,
respectively) and the expression of G protein-coupled estrogen receptor-1 (GPER, 
formerly known as GPR30) in efferent ductules and epididymis. The efferent
ductules present the highest levels of ESR1 and ESR2 in the male reproductive
system, and represent a major target of estrogen action. In efferent ductules,
ESR1 has a crucial role in the regulation of fluid reabsorption, and in the
epididymis the receptor helps to maintain fluid osmolality and pH. ESR1
expression in the epididymal epithelium shows considerable variation among
species, but differences in laboratory techniques may also contribute to this
variation. Here we report that Esr1 mRNA and protein are higher in corpus than in
other regions of the rat epididymis. The mRNA level for Gper was also higher in
corpus. Although ESR1 is expressed constitutively in efferent ductules and
down-regulated by estrogen, in the epididymis, both testosterone (T) and
estradiol (E2) may regulate its expression. T and E2 are, respectively, higher
and lower in the corpus than in the initial segment/caput and cauda regions. It
is important to determine the expression of GPER, ESR1, androgen receptor, and
their respective cofactors in specific cell types of this tissue, as well as the 
intracellular signaling pathways involved in efferent ductules and epididymis.
These studies will help to explain the consequences of exposures to environmental
endocrine disruptors and provide potential targets for the development of a male 
contraceptive.

PMID: 21441425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Jun;96(6):1754-62. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-2618. Epub 
2011 Mar 23.

Development of steroid signaling pathways during primordial follicle formation in
the human fetal ovary.

Fowler PA(1), Anderson RA, Saunders PT, Kinnell H, Mason JI, Evans DB,
Bhattacharya S, Flannigan S, Franks S, Monteiro A, O'Shaughnessy PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Reproductive Endocrinology and Medicine, Division of Applied
Medicine, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill,
Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, United Kingdom. p.a.fowler@abdn.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Ovarian primordial follicle formation is critical for subsequent human
female fertility. It is likely that steroid, and especially estrogen, signaling
is required for this process, but details of the pathways involved are currently 
lacking.
OBJECTIVE: The aim was to identify and characterize key members of the
steroid-signaling pathway expressed in the second trimester human fetal ovary.
DESIGN: We conducted an observational study of the female fetus, quantifying and 
localizing steroid-signaling pathway members.
SETTING: The study was conducted at the Universities of Aberdeen, Edinburgh, and 
Glasgow.
PATIENTS/PARTICIPANTS: Ovaries were collected from 43 morphologically normal
human female fetuses from women undergoing elective termination of second
trimester pregnancies.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We measured mRNA transcript levels and immunolocalized key
steroidogenic enzymes and steroid receptors, including those encoded by ESR2, AR,
and CYP19A1.
RESULTS: Levels of mRNA encoding the steroidogenic apparatus and steroid
receptors increased across the second trimester. CYP19A1 transcript increased
4.7-fold during this period with intense immunostaining for CYP19A detected in
pregranulosa cells around primordial follicles and somatic cells around oocyte
nests. ESR2 was localized primarily to germ cells, but androgen receptor was
exclusively expressed in somatic cells. CYP17A1 and HSD3B2 were also localized to
oocytes, whereas CYP11A1 was detected in oocytes and some pregranulosa cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The human fetal ovary expresses the machinery to produce and detect 
multiple steroid signaling pathways, including estrogenic signaling, with the
oocyte acting as a key component. This study provides a step-change in our
understanding of local dynamics of steroid hormone signaling during the key
period of human primordial follicle formation.

PMID: 21430025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Jul;125(3-5):231-42. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.03.010. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Novel estrogen-related genes and potential biomarkers of ovarian endometriosis
identified by differential expression analysis.

Vouk K(1), Smuc T, Guggenberger C, Ribic-Pucelj M, Sinkovec J, Husen B, Thole H, 
Houba P, Thaete C, Adamski J, Riner TL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Vrazov trg, 2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

In the search for novel biomarkers of endometriosis, we selected 152 genes from
the GeneLogic database based on results of genome-wide expression analysis of
ovarian endometriosis, plus 20 genes related to estrogen metabolism and action.
We then performed low-density array analysis of these 172 genes on 11 ovarian
endometriosis samples and 9 control endometrium samples. Principal component
analysis of the gene expression levels showed clear separation between the
endometriosis and control groups. We identified 78 genes as differentially
expressed. Based on Ingenuity pathway analysis, these differentially expressed
genes were arranged into groups according to biological function. These analyses 
revealed that 32 differentially expressed genes are estrogen related, 23 of which
have not been reported previously in connection with endometriosis. Functional
annotation showed that 25 and 22 genes are associated with the biological terms
"secreted" and "extracellular region", respectively. Differential expression of 4
out of 5 genes related to estrogen metabolism and action (ESR1, ESR2, PGR and
BGN) was also confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Our study thus reveals
differential expression of several genes that have not previously been associated
with endometriosis and that encode potential novel biomarkers and drug targets.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21397694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2011 Mar 9;18(2):265-76. doi: 10.1530/ERC-10-0264. Print
2011 Apr.

Association of genetic polymorphisms in ESR2, HSD17B1, ABCB1, and SHBG genes with
colorectal cancer risk.

Sainz J(1), Rudolph A, Hein R, Hoffmeister M, Buch S, von Schönfels W, Hampe J,
Schafmayer C, Völzke H, Frank B, Brenner H, Försti A, Hemminki K, Chang-Claude J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The incidence rates and relative risks for colorectal cancer (CRC) are higher in 
men than in women. Sex steroids may play a role in this gender-associated
difference in CRC risk. This study was conducted to explore the relationship of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in steroid hormone signaling (ESR1, ESR2, 
PGR, NR1I2, and SHBG), phase I- and II-metabolizing enzyme (COMT, HSD17B1,
CYP1A1, CYP17A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, CYP2C9, CYP3A4, CYP2C19, and GSTP1), and hormone
transporter (ABCB1) genes with the risk of CRC in German women and men,
separately. From the population-based DACHS study (South Germany), 47 putatively 
functional SNPs were genotyped in 1798 CRC cases (746 women and 1052 men) and
1810 controls (732 women and 1078 men). Significant allele dose-response
associations were observed with ESR2_rs1255998, ESR2_rs928554, HSD17B1_rs605059, 
and ABCB1_rs2229109 in women (P trend=0.004, 0.05, 0.03, and 0.05 respectively)
and with ABCB1_rs1045642, ABCB1_rs9282564, and SHBG_rs6259 in men (P trend=0.01, 
0.03, and 0.02 respectively). The ESR2_rs1255998_G allele showed the most
significant association with risk for CRC in women, with a per-allele odds ratio 
(OR) of 0.68 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.52-0.88). This finding was
replicated in an independent study from North Germany including 1076 female CRC
cases and 1151 controls (OR=0.84, 95% CI 0.71-1.04), yielding a per-allele OR of 
0.80 (95% CI 0.69-0.93, P trend=0.003) in the pooled sample. These findings
implicate a role of ESR2 in the risk for developing CRC in women and suggest that
HSD17B1, ABCB1, and SHBG genes may contribute to sex steroid-mediated effects on 
CRC development.

PMID: 21317201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Morphol. 2011 Jun;272(6):698-703. doi: 10.1002/jmor.10936. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Sex steroid and thyroid hormone receptor expressions in the thyroid of the
American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) during different life stages.

Bermudez DS(1), Skotko JP, Ohta Y, Boggs AS, Iguchi T, Guillette LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, 220 Bartram Hall, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32611, USA. dieldrich@gmail.com

The expression of estrogen receptors, ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß), and androgen
receptors (AR) in the thyroid gland has been reported in few vertebrate species
other than a few mammals. This study reports the presence of sex steroid hormone 
receptors and thyroid receptors (ERa, ERß, AR, TRa, and TRß) in the thyroid gland
of the American alligator at several life stages. It provides a
semiquantification and distribution of ERa in the thyroid follicle cells using an
immunohistochemical approach as well as reports quantitative differences in mRNA 
expression of ERa, ERß, TRa, TRß, and AR in the same tissue using quantitative
real time-PCR (Q-PCR) with primers designed specifically for alligators. The
thyroid tissue of the American alligator expresses ERa, ERß, and AR at all of the
life stages examined here although no statistically significant differences were 
observed between male and female in thyroid mRNA expression for any of the genes 
analyzed. No sexual dimorphism was observed in ERa immunostaining. No statistical
analysis across life stages were performed due to confounding factor of season.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21308728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. BMC Genet. 2011 Feb 9;12:24. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-12-24.

Association and haplotype analysis of candidate genes in five genomic regions
linked to sow maternal infanticide in a white Duroc × Erhualian resource
population.

Chen C(1), Yang Z, Li Y, Wei N, Li P, Guo Y, Ren J, Ding N, Huang L.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry
of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, PR
China.

BACKGROUND: Maternal infanticide is an extreme and failed maternal behavior,
which is defined as an active attack on piglets using the jaws, resulting in
serious or fatal bite wounds. It brings big economic loss to the pig industry and
severe problems to piglets' welfare. But little is known about the genetic
background of this behavior. Quantitative trait loci (QTL) for maternal
infanticide were identified in a White Duroc × Erhualian intercross by a
non-parametric linkage analysis (NPL) in our previous study. In this study,
associations of 194 microsatellite markers used in NPL analysis with maternal
infanticide behavior were further analyzed by transmission-disequilibrium test
(TDT). On this basis, seven genes (ESR2, EAAT2, BDNF, OXTR, 5-HTR2C, DRD1 and
GABRA6) at five genomic regions were selected and further analyzed. Associations 
of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes in each gene with
maternal infanticide behavior were evaluated.
RESULTS: Microsatellite markers on pig chromosome (SSC) 2, 13, 15, and X
displayed significance at P < 0.05 by both TDT and NPL. Of the seven candidate
genes, three ESR2 SNPs had nominal evidence for association (P < 0.05). Allele A 
at EAAT2 g. 233G > A and allele T at DRD1 g.1013C > G > T also showed evidence of
overtransmission to infanticidal sows. In the overall tests of association of
haplotypes, candidate genes of ESR2, EAAT2 and DRD1 achieved overall significance
level (P < 0.05). Haplotype [A; A; G], [G; A; G], [A; G; G] and [C; C],
respectively, from ESR2, EAAT2 and DRD1 showed higher frequencies to infanticidal
sows (P < 0.05). Alleles among haplotypes and SNPs which showed an
overtransmission to infanticidal sows were from White Duroc.
CONCLUSIONS: From association tests of SNPs and haplotypes, ESR2, EAAT2 and DRD1 
showed significant associations with maternal infanticide. This result supported 
the existence of QTL for maternal infanticide behavior on SSC1, SSC2 and SSC16.

PMCID: PMC3044675
PMID: 21303561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Apr;120(2):447-59. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr011. Epub 2011 Jan
20.

Increased sensitivity of estrogen receptor alpha overexpressing antral follicles 
to methoxychlor and its metabolites.

Paulose T(1), Hernández-Ochoa I, Basavarajappa MS, Peretz J, Flaws JA.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
Illinois 61802, USA.

Methoxychlor (MXC), an organochlorine pesticide, and its metabolites,
mono-hydroxy MXC (MOH) and bis-hydroxy MXC (HPTE) are known ovarian toxicants and
can cause inhibition of antral follicle growth. Since these chemicals bind to
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1), we hypothesized that ovaries overexpressing ESR1 
(ESR1 OE) would be more susceptible to toxicity induced by MXC and its
metabolites because the chemicals can bind to more ESR1 in the antral follicles. 
We cultured antral follicles from controls and ESR1 OE mouse ovaries with either 
the vehicle dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), MXC, MOH, or HPTE. The data show that at 96
h, the cultured antral follicles from ESR1 OE antral follicles are more
susceptible to toxicity induced by MXC, MOH, and HPTE because low doses of these 
chemicals cause follicle growth inhibition in ESR1 OE mice but not in control
mice. On comparing gene expression levels of nuclear receptors in the cultured
antral follicles of ESR1 OE and control follicles, we found differential
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of Esr1, estrogen receptor beta (Esr2), androgen 
receptor (Ar), progesterone receptor (Pr), and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr)
between the genotypes. We also analyzed mRNA levels of Cyp3a41a, the enzyme
metabolizing MOH and HPTE, in the cultured follicles and found that Cyp3a41a was 
significantly lower in DMSO-treated ESR1 OE follicles compared with controls. In 
ESR1 OE livers, we found that Cyp3a41a levels were significantly lower compared
with control livers. Collectively, these data suggest that MXC and its
metabolites cause differential gene expression in ESR1 OE mice compared with
controls. The results also suggest that the increased sensitivity of ESR1 OE
mouse ovaries to toxicity induced by MXC and its metabolites is due to low
clearance of the metabolites by the liver and ovary.

PMCID: PMC3061483
PMID: 21252393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Biol Reprod. 2011 May;84(5):1063-71. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085928. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

Ovarian steroid receptors and activated MAPK in the regional decidualization in
rats.

Vallejo G(1), Mestre-Citrinovitz AC, Mönckedieck V, Grümmer R, Winterhager E,
Saragüeta P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental, Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Though the decidua serves a critical function in implantation, the hormonal
regulated pathway in decidualization is still elusive. Here we describe in detail
the regional distribution and the effects of progesterone receptors (PGR),
estrogen receptors (ESR), and MAPK activation on decidualization. We showed an
increase in PGR A, PGR B, ESR1, and phosphorylated MAPK3-1 proteins (p-MAPK3-1), 
but not in ESR2, in the decidual tissue up to Day 8 of pregnancy. PGR was
predominantly found in the nuclei of mesometrial decidual cells and of
undifferentiated stromal cells where it colocalizes with ESR2 and ESR1. In the
antimesometrial decidua, all the receptors showed cytoplasmic localization. MAPK 
was activated exclusively in undifferentiated stromal cells of the junctional
zone between the antimesometrial and mesometrial decidua and at the border of the
antimesometrial decidua. Treatment with the progesterone antagonist onapristone
and/or the estrogen antagonist faslodex reduced the extent of decidual tissue and
downregulated the levels of PGR and ESR1. The expression level of ESR2 was
affected only by the progesterone receptor antagonist, while neither the
antiprogestin nor the antiestrogen significantly modified the p-MAPK3-1 level.
The inhibition of MAPK3-1 phosphorylation by PD98059 impaired the extent of
decidualization and the closure reaction of the implantation chamber, and
significantly downregulated ESR1. These results confirm a role of both steroid
receptors in the growth and differentiation of the different decidual regions and
suggest a new function for p-MAPK3-1 in regulating expression levels of ESR1,
thereby maintaining the proliferation capacity of stromal cells and limiting the 
differentiation process in specified regions of decidual tissues.

PMID: 21248290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Biol Reprod. 2011 May;84(5):1045-52. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.090076. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

Resveratrol modulates the expression of PTGS2 and cellular proliferation in the
normal rat endometrium in an AKT-dependent manner.

Singh M(1), Parent S, Leblanc V, Asselin E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group in Molecular Oncology and Endocrinology, Department of
Chemistry-Biology, Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières, Trois-Rivières, Québec,
Canada.

Resveratrol (trans-3,4N-trihydroxystilbene), a phytoalexin present in grapes and 
red wine is emerging as a natural compound with anticancer properties. However,
the physiological and molecular effects of resveratrol on normal uterine cells
are poorly understood. In the present study we evaluated the effects of
resveratrol on normal uterine cells and the mechanisms involved in vivo. Healthy 
immature rats were treated s.c. with resveratrol (0, 0.5, 5, and 50 mg/kg body
weight) for 7 consecutive days and euthanized on the eighth day. Uteri were
collected and weighed, and endometrium was recovered for total protein
extraction, followed by Western blot analysis. Estrogen receptor alpha 1 (ESR1)
and beta 2 (ESR2) affinity and activation by resveratrol were also determined by 
in vitro ESR-binding assays. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies were performed to
visualize the proliferation marker, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA),
and immunofluorescence (IF) studies were done to study the localization of PTGS2.
The results showed that resveratrol increased uterine wet weight and uterine body
weight ratios significantly. This local cellular proliferation in terms of the
thickening of the columnar epithelial cells and an increase in the number of
glands was accompanied by an increase of AKT 16 phosphorylation and PTGS2 and
XIAP protein expression. These results were further supported by IF and IHC
analyses. Total AKT, ESR1, and ESR2 protein expression levels were not modulated 
by the treatment; however, resveratrol showed moderate estrogenicity for both ESR
isoforms. Expression of progesterone receptor A (PGR) was induced in the presence
of resveratrol. These data support the hypothesis that resveratrol can act in a
prosurvival or antiapoptotic way through AKT, XIAP, and PTGS2 regulation in the
endometrium and could positively affect the outcome of pregnancy and favor
fertility.

PMID: 21248286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Arch Med Res. 2010 Nov;41(8):599-605. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2010.10.011.

Estrogen receptor beta genetic variants and combined oral contraceptive use as
relates to the risk of hypertension in Chinese women.

Chen C(1), Li Y, Chen F, Pan H, Shen H, Sun Z, Wu Y, Zhou J, Ba L, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Disease Control and Prevention of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) plays an important role in
cardiovascular physiology and blood pressure regulation, whereas estrogens may
influence gene expression, growth, and cellular differentiation in target tissues
by activating estrogen receptors. This study aims to investigate the association 
between common genetic variants of ESR2 gene and the risk of hypertension and to 
explore the combined effected of ESR2 variants and combined oral contraceptive
(COC) use for hypertension risk.
METHODS: A population-based case-control study was conducted in 621 female
hypertensive patients and 621 female normotensive controls.
RESULTS: ESR2 G1082A heterozygote genotype (GA) was in significant relationship
with hypertension (crude odds ratio [OR] = 1.38, 95% CI: 1.09-1.76; adjusted odds
ratio [OR] = 1.38, 95% CI: 1.09-1.76). No association was observed for ESR2
G1730A polymorphism. Furthermore, the joint effects of the heterozygote of G1082A
polymorphism (heterozygote model: GG/AA vs. GA) and cumulative COC use time =15
years significantly increased the risk of hypertension [adjusted odds ratio (OR) 
= 2.19, 95% CI: 1.49-3.24], and the interaction effects between those two risk
factors were significant (p = 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The heterozygote GA genotype of ESR2 gene G1082A polymorphism may be
a risk genotype for hypertension in Chinese women, and the GA genotype
(heterozygote model: GG/AA vs. GA) of G1082A locus together with COC use
simultaneously contributed to hypertension development.

Copyright Â© 2010 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21199728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Chem Biol Interact. 2011 May 30;191(1-3):206-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2010.12.013. 
Epub 2010 Dec 21.

Expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors and estrogen metabolizing
enzymes in different breast cancer cell lines.

Hevir N(1), Trot N, Debeljak N, Riner TL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Prolonged exposure to estrogens is a significant risk factor for the development 
of breast cancer. Estrogens exert carcinogenic effects by stimulating cell
proliferation or through oxidative metabolism that forms DNA-damaging species. In
the present study, we aimed to provide a better understanding of estrogen
metabolism and actions in breast cancer, and to characterize model breast cancer 
cell lines. We determined the expression profiles of the genes for the estrogen
and progesterone receptors, and for 18 estrogen-metabolizing enzymes in eight
cell lines: MCF-7, MCF-10A, T47D, SKBR3, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-361, Hs-578T and
Hs-578Bst cells. Similar gene expression profiles of these receptors and enzymes 
for the formation of estradiol via the aromatase and sulfatase pathways were
observed in the MCF-7 and T47D metastatic cell lines. The MDA-MB-361 cells
expressed ESR1, ESR2 and PGR as well, but differed in expression of the
estrogen-metabolizing enzymes. In the MDA-MB-231 and SKBR3 cells, all of these
estrogen-forming enzymes were expressed, although the lack of ESR1 and the low
levels of ESR2 expression suggested that the estrogens can only act via non-ER
mediated pathways. In the non-tumorigenic MCF-10A cell line, the key enzymes of
the aromatase pathway were not expressed, and the sulfatase pathway also had a
marginal role. The comparison between gene expression profiles of the
non-tumorigenic Hs-578Bst cells and the cancerous Hs-578T cells revealed that
they can both form estrogens via the sulfatase pathway, while the aromatase
pathway is less important in the Hs-578Bst cells. The Hs-578T cells showed low
levels of ESR1, ESR2 and PGR expression, while only ESR1 and ESR2 expression was 
detected in the Hs-578Bst cells. Our data show that the cell lines examined
provide the full range of model systems and should further be compared with the
expression profiles of breast cancer specimens.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21182832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Pharmacogenomics. 2011 Jan;12(1):41-7. doi: 10.2217/pgs.10.164.

The effect of ESR1 and ESR2 gene polymorphisms on the outcome of rheumatoid
arthritis treatment with leflunomide.

Dziedziejko V(1), Kurzawski M, Safranow K, Chlubek D, Pawlik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Medical Chemistry, Pomeranian Medical University,
Szczecin, Poland.

AIM: Leflunomide is the drug used in the therapy for rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Previous studies indicated that the efficacy of the therapy with antirheumatic
drugs is more effective in men than in women. Moreover, estrogens can decrease
the anti-inflammatory action of leflunomide. Estrogens act through the estrogen
receptors ESR1 and ESR2. In ESR1 and ESR2 genes, several polymorphisms have been 
detected. The aim of the present study was to examine the association between
polymorphisms in the ESR1 and ESR2 genes and the response to treatment of RA
patients with leflunomide.
MATERIALS & METHODS: The study was carried out on 115 women, mean age 54.1 ± 11.0
years, diagnosed with RA and treated with leflunomide (20 mg daily).
RESULTS: Our results indicated a better response to treatment in patients with
ESR1 rs9340799 AA and rs2234693 TT genotypes after 12 months of therapy. In these
patients, the improvement of erythrocyte sedimentation rate, patient's global
assessment of disease activity on a 100 mm visual analog scale and disease
activity score values was greater than in patients with other genotypes. The ESR1
rs9340799-rs2234693 A-T haplotype was associated with a better response to
treatment, the G-C haplotype with a worse response and the A-C haplotype was
neutral. There were no statistically significant associations of response to
treatment with ESR2 gene rs4986938 and rs1256049 polymorphisms.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study suggest that ESR1 gene polymorphisms
in females with RA may be associated with the response to treatment with
leflunomide.

PMID: 21174621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Plant Mol Biol. 2011 Feb;75(3):223-36. doi: 10.1007/s11103-010-9721-5. Epub 2010 
Dec 15.

Genetic integration of DORNRÖSCHEN and DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE reveals hierarchical
interactions in auxin signalling and patterning of the Arabidopsis apical embryo.

Chandler JW(1), Cole M, Jacobs B, Comelli P, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, Cologne Biocenter, University of Cologne, 
Zuelpicher Strasse 47b, 50674 Cologne, Germany.

DORNRÖSCHEN (DRN) and DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE (DRNL) encode AP2-domain transcription
factors, which act redundantly in cotyledon organogenesis. A more detailed
genetic study now integrates DRN and DRNL into the CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON (CUC)
regulatory network and places DRN and DRNL differentially within the auxin
signalling network: DRNL function overlaps with that of PIN-FORMED1, and DRN with
PINOID. DRN and DRNL act cell-autonomously and are co-expressed in the early
globular embryo, whereas expression patterns diverge during later stages of
embryogeny. Both genes synergize to provide essential patterning information in
the apical embryo domain, to establish correct CUC, SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and WUSCHEL
expression domains, which relates to the patterning of SAM anlagen to a central
apical position to create two planes of bilateral symmetry in wild type
Arabidopsis thaliana embryos.

PMID: 21161330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Cancer. 2010 Dec 15;9:314. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-314.

Blocking of ERK1 and ERK2 sensitizes human mesothelioma cells to doxorubicin.

Shukla A(1), Hillegass JM, MacPherson MB, Beuschel SL, Vacek PM, Pass HI, Carbone
M, Testa JR, Mossman BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine, 89
Beaumont Avenue, Burlington, VT 05405, USA. Arti.Shukla@uvm.edu

BACKGROUND: Malignant mesotheliomas (MM) have a poor prognosis, largely because
of their chemoresistance to anti-cancer drugs such as doxorubicin (Dox). Here we 
show using human MM lines that Dox activates extracellular signal-regulated
kinases (ERK1 and 2), causally linked to increased expression of ABC transporter 
genes, decreased accumulation of Dox, and enhanced MM growth. Using the MEK1/2
inhibitor, U0126 and stably transfected shERK1 and shERK2 MM cell lines, we show 
that inhibition of both ERK1 and 2 sensitizes MM cells to Dox.
RESULTS: U0126 significantly modulated endogenous expression of several important
drug resistance (BCL2, ABCB1, ABCC3), prosurvival (BCL2), DNA repair (BRCA1,
BRCA2), hormone receptor (AR, ESR2, PPAR<U+03B3>) and drug metabolism (CYP3A4) genes
newly identified in MM cells. In comparison to shControl lines, MM cell lines
stably transfected with shERK1 or shERK2 exhibited significant increases in
intracellular accumulation of Dox and decreases in cell viability. Affymetrix
microarray analysis on stable shERK1 and shERK2 MM lines showed more than 2-fold 
inhibition (p = 0.05) of expression of ATP binding cassette genes (ABCG1, ABCA5, 
ABCA2, MDR/TAP, ABCA1, ABCA8, ABCC2) in comparison to shControl lines. Moreover, 
injection of human MM lines into SCID mice showed that stable shERK1 or shERK2
lines had significantly slower tumor growth rates in comparison to shControl
lines after Dox treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies suggest that blocking ERK1 and 2, which play critical 
roles in multi-drug resistance and survival, may be beneficial in combination
with chemotherapeutic drugs in the treatment of MMs and other tumors.

PMCID: PMC3016286
PMID: 21159167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Dec 9;10:270. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-270.

Arabidopsis brassinosteroid biosynthetic mutant dwarf7-1 exhibits slower rates of
cell division and shoot induction.

Cheon J(1), Park SY, Schulz B, Choe S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-747, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Plant growth depends on both cell division and cell expansion. Plant 
hormones, including brassinosteroids (BRs), are central to the control of these
two cellular processes. Despite clear evidence that BRs regulate cell elongation,
their roles in cell division have remained elusive.
RESULTS: Here, we report results emphasizing the importance of BRs in cell
division. An Arabidopsis BR biosynthetic mutant, dwarf7-1, displayed various
characteristics attributable to slower cell division rates. We found that the
DWARF4 gene which encodes for an enzyme catalyzing a rate-determining step in the
BR biosynthetic pathways, is highly expressed in the actively dividing callus,
suggesting that BR biosynthesis is necessary for dividing cells. Furthermore,
dwf7-1 showed noticeably slower rates of callus growth and shoot induction
relative to wild-type control. Flow cytometric analyses of the nuclei derived
from either calli or intact roots revealed that the cell division index, which
was represented as the ratio of cells at the G2/M vs. G1 phases, was smaller in
dwf7-1 plants. Finally, we found that the expression levels of the genes involved
in cell division and shoot induction, such as PROLIFERATING CELL NUCLEAR ANTIGEN2
(PCNA2) and ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION2 (ESR2), were also lower in dwf7-1 as 
compared with wild type.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, results of callus induction, shoot regeneration,
flow cytometry, and semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis suggest that BRs play
important roles in both cell division and cell differentiation in Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC3017067
PMID: 21143877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Reproduction. 2011 Feb;141(2):269-81. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0177. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Influence of energy balance on the somatotrophic axis and matrix
metalloproteinase expression in the endometrium of the postpartum dairy cow.

Wathes DC(1), Cheng Z, Fenwick MA, Fitzpatrick R, Patton J.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction Group, Department of Veterinary Basic Sciences, Royal Veterinary 
College, London, UK. dcwathes@rvc.ac.uk

Postpartum dairy cows enter a period of negative energy balance (NEB) associated 
with low circulating IGF1, during which the uterus must undergo extensive repair 
following calving. This study investigated the effects of NEB on expression of
IGF family members and related genes in the involuting uterus. Cows were
allocated to two treatments using differential feeding and milking regimes to
produce mild NEB or severe NEB (SNEB). Uterine endometrial samples collected 2
weeks post partum were analysed by quantitative PCR. The expression of
IGF-binding protein 4 (IGFBP4) mRNA increased in the endometrium of SNEB cows,
with trends towards increased IGFBP1 and reduced IGFBP6 expression. There were no
significant differences between treatments in mRNA expression of IGF1, IGF2 or of
any hormone receptor studied, but significant correlations across all cows in the
expression levels of groups of receptors suggested common regulatory mechanisms: 
type 1 IGF receptor (IGF1R), IGF2R and insulin receptor (INSR); GHR with ESR1;
and ESR2 with NR3C1. The expression of IGF1R and INSR also positively correlated 
with the circulating urea concentration. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are
important in tissue remodelling and can affect IGF signalling via interaction
with IGFBPs. The expression levels of MMP1, MMP3, MMP9 and MMP13 mRNAs all showed
major upregulation in the endometrium of cows in SNEB and all except MMP9 were
highly correlated with expression of IGFBP4. Alpha(2)-HS-glycoprotein (AHSG) and 
PDK4, two genes implicated in insulin resistance, were also highly expressed in
SNEB. These results suggest that cows in SNEB experience alterations to the IGF
and insulin signalling pathways in the postpartum endometrium. This may affect
the rate of tissue repair with a possible negative impact on subsequent
fertility.

PMCID: PMC3021913
PMID: 21123519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(6):R103. doi: 10.1186/bcr2786. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Clinical significance of the nuclear receptor co-regulator DC-SCRIPT in breast
cancer: an independent retrospective validation study.

Sieuwerts AM(1), Ansems M, Look MP, Span PN, de Weerd V, van Galen A, Foekens JA,
Adema GJ, Martens JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Josephine Nefkens Institute and Cancer
Genomics Centre, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, GE, The Netherlands.
a.sieuwerts@erasmusmc.nl

INTRODUCTION: In this study we aimed to validate the prognostic value of
DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression in a large independent breast cancer cohort. In
addition, since DC-SCRIPT is a transcriptional co-regulator of nuclear receptors,
we explored its prognostic value in relation to estrogen-receptor-a (ESR1) and -ß
(ESR2) and evaluated its predictive value for response to tamoxifen treatment.
METHODS: DC-SCRIPT mRNA levels were measured by real-time PCR in 1,505 primary
invasive breast cancers and associated with outcome (disease-free survival (DFS),
metastasis-free survival (MFS) and overall survival (OS)) using univariate and
multivariable Cox regression analysis. Logistic and Cox regressions were used to 
associate DC-SCRIPT levels with clinical benefit and progression-free survival
(PFS) for 296 patients treated with first-line systemic tamoxifen for advanced
disease.
RESULTS: In univariate and multivariable analysis higher DC-SCRIPT levels were
associated with a favorable outcome for both the entire cohort and patients with 
lymph node-negative (LNN) disease that did not receive adjuvant therapy (DFS, MFS
and OS; all, P < 0.001). This association was most pronounced in small (pT1)
tumors, in ESR1-positive tumors and in tumors with low ESR2 expression. For
first-line endocrine therapy for advanced disease no predictive association was
seen with clinical benefit or PFS.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a higher level of evidence that DC-SCRIPT is
indeed an independent, pure prognostic, factor for primary breast cancer and
shows that DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression is most informative for either ESR1-positive
and/or ESR2-low pT1 tumors.

PMCID: PMC3046448
PMID: 21122099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Mar;19(3):363-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.182. Epub 2010 Dec 
1.

A population-based study of polymorphisms in genes related to sex hormones and
abdominal aortic aneurysm.

Golledge J(1), Biros E, Warrington N, Jones GT, Cooper M, van Rij AM, Palmer LJ, 
Norman PE.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Unit, Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, James Cook
University, Townsville, Queensland, Australia. jonathan.golledge@jcu.edu.au

Male gender and family history are risk factors for abdominal aortic aneurysm
(AAA). We hypothesized that genes involved in sex hormones might be important in 
AAA. We investigated the association of aortic diameter with single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes determining circulating sex hormones and their
action. We genotyped 74 tagging SNPs across four genes (steroid 5a reductase,
subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (SRD5A1), cytochrome P450, family 19, subfamily A,
polypeptide 1 (CYP19A1), androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2))
related to sex hormone production and action in 1711 men, 640 of whom had an AAA.
One genotype was also assessed in an independent cohort of 782 men, of whom 513
had large AAAs. Associations were assessed adjusting for other risk factors for
AAA. One SNP in CYP19A1 was strongly associated with aortic diameter. Subjects
who had the rare homozygote genotype (TT) for CYP19A1g.49412370C>T (SNP ID
rs1961177), had an increased aortic diameter (coefficient 5.058, SE 1.394,
P=0.0003, under a recessive model). This SNP was not associated with aortic
diameter in an independent cohort, which included patients with larger AAAs. Our 
findings do not support an important role of genetic polymorphisms in genes
determining sex hormones in aortic dilatation in men. The association of one SNP 
in CYPA9A1 with small but not large AAA may suggest differences between AAA
formation and progression. This SNP warrants further investigation in another
large population, including patients with small AAAs.

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 1018-4813/11

PMCID: PMC3062004
PMID: 21119710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Int J Cancer. 2011 Oct 1;129(7):1689-98. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25786. Epub 2011 Mar
11.

A candidate CpG SNP approach identifies a breast cancer associated ESR1-SNP.

Harlid S(1), Ivarsson MI, Butt S, Hussain S, Grzybowska E, Eyfjörd JE, Lenner P, 
Försti A, Hemminki K, Manjer J, Dillner J, Carlson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

Altered DNA methylation is often seen in malignant cells, potentially
contributing to carcinogenesis by suppressing gene expression. We hypothesized
that heritable methylation potential might be a risk factor for breast cancer and
evaluated possible association with breast cancer for single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) either involving CpG sequences in extended 5'-regulatory
regions of candidate genes (ESR1, ESR2, PGR, and SHBG) or CpG and missense coding
SNPs in genes involved in methylation (MBD1, MECP2, DNMT1, MGMT, MTHFR, MTR,
MTRR, MTHFD1, MTHFD2, BHMT, DCTD, and SLC19A1). Genome-wide searches for genetic 
risk factors for breast cancers have in general not investigated these SNPs,
because of low minor allele frequency or weak haplotype associations. Genotyping 
was performed using Mass spectrometry-Maldi-Tof in a screening panel of 538 cases
and 1,067 controls. Potential association to breast cancer was identified for 15 
SNPs and one of these SNPs (rs7766585 in ESR1) was found to associate strongly
with breast cancer, OR 1.30 (95% CI 1.17-1.45; p-value 2.1 × 10(-6)), when tested
in a verification panel consisting of 3,211 unique breast cancer cases and 4,223 
unique controls from five European biobank cohorts. In conclusion, a candidate
gene search strategy focusing on methylation-related SNPs did identify a SNP that
associated with breast cancer at high significance.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 21105050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Ann Nutr Metab. 2010;57(3-4):183-9. doi: 10.1159/000321514. Epub 2010 Nov 18.

Epigenetic control of estrogen receptor expression and tumor suppressor genes is 
modulated by bioactive food compounds.

Berner C(1), Aumüller E, Gnauck A, Nestelberger M, Just A, Haslberger AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The tumor suppressor genes p15(INK)4(b) and p16(INK)4(a) as well as
the estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) gene are abnormally methylated and expressed in
colon cancer. The cancer-preventative abilities of several bioactive food
components have been linked to their estrogenic and epigenetic activities.
METHODS: The effect of folic acid, zebularine, resveratrol, genistein and
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) on tumor cell growth, promoter methylation of
ESR1, p15(INK)4(b) and p16(INK)4(a) and gene expression of ESR1 and ESR2 was
analyzed in Caco-2 cells. Gene expression was measured using real-time PCR, and
promoter CpG methylation was assessed using bisulfite conversion and
methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: After exposure to a high concentration of folic acid (20 µmol/l),
enhanced cancer cell growth and concomitant increased methylation of the ESR1
(3.6-fold), p16(INK)4(a) and p15(INK)4(b) promoters was observed. A lower
concentration of folic acid (2 µmol/l) decreased cell growth. The phytoestrogens 
genistein and resveratrol enhanced expression of ESR1 (genistein 200 µmol/l:
2.1-fold; resveratrol 50 µmol/l: 6.3-fold) and ESR2 (2.6- and 3.6-fold,
respectively). Genistein and resveratrol treatment increased promoter methylation
of ESR1 (genistein 200 µmol/l: 2.9-fold; resveratrol 50 µmol/l: 1.4-fold). For
p16(INK)4(a), increased methylation was found after exposure to 10 µmol/l
resveratrol, but for p15(INK)4(b), decreased methylation was found. Both
components showed growth-inhibitory activities. For EGCG, growth inhibition at
100 µmol/l and suppressed promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes
(p16(INK)4(a): 0.9-fold; p15(INK)4(b): 0.6-fold) was seen.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that these food compounds regulate ESR and tumor
suppressor gene expression by multiple mechanisms including epigenetic processes.
An improved understanding of these epigenetic effects could therefore support
specific dietary concepts of epigenetic cancer prevention and intervention.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21088384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Nov 16;11:164. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-164.

Common genetic variation in the Estrogen Receptor Beta (ESR2) gene and
osteoarthritis: results of a meta-analysis.

Kerkhof HJ(1), Meulenbelt I, Carr A, Gonzalez A, Hart D, Hofman A, Kloppenburg M,
Lane NE, Loughlin J, Nevitt MC, Pols HA, Rivadeneira F, Slagboom EP, Spector TD, 
Stolk L, Tsezou A, Uitterlinden AG, Valdes AM, van Meurs JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to examine the relationship between
common genetic variation of the ESR2 gene and osteoarthritis.
METHODS: In the discovery study, the Rotterdam Study-I, 7 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped and tested for association with hip (284
cases, 2772 controls), knee (665 cases, 2075 controls), and hand OA (874 cases,
2184 controls) using an additive model. In the replication stage one SNP
(rs1256031) was tested in an additional 2080 hip, 1318 knee and 557 hand OA cases
and 4001, 2631 and 1699 controls respectively. Fixed- and random-effects
meta-analyses were performed over the complete dataset including 2364 hip, 1983
knee and 1431 hand OA cases and approximately 6000 controls.
RESULTS: The C allele of rs1256031 was associated with a 36% increased odds of
hip OA in women of the Rotterdam Study-I (OR 1.36, 95% CI 1.08-1.70, p = 0.009). 
Haplotype analysis and analysis of knee- and hand OA did not give additional
information. With the replication studies, the meta-analysis did not show a
significant effect of this SNP on hip OA in the total population (OR 1.06, 95% CI
0.99-1.15, p = 0.10). Stratification according to gender did not change the
results. In this study, we had 80% power to detect an odds ratio of at least 1.14
for hip OA (a = 0.05).
CONCLUSION: This study showed that common genetic variation in the ESR2 gene is
not likely to influence the risk of osteoarthritis with effects smaller than a
13% increase.

PMCID: PMC2997092
PMID: 21080949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Endocrinology. 2010 Dec;151(12):5795-806. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0581. Epub 2010
Nov 3.

Semicomprehensive analysis of the postnatal age-related changes in the mRNA
expression of sex steroidogenic enzymes and sex steroid receptors in the male rat
hippocampus.

Kimoto T(1), Ishii H, Higo S, Hojo Y, Kawato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

Although sex steroids play a crucial role in the postnatal brain development, the
age-related changes in the hippocampal steroidogenesis remain largely unknown. We
performed comprehensive investigations for the mRNA expressions of 26 sex
steroidogenic enzymes/proteins and three sex steroid receptors in the male rat
hippocampus, at the ages of postnatal day (PD) 1, PD4, PD7, PD10, PD14, 4 wk, and
12 wk (adult), by RT-PCR/Southern blotting analysis. The relative expression
levels of these enzymes/receptors at PD1 were Srd5a1 > Star > Ar ~ Hsd17b4 ~
Hsd17b1 ~ Hsd17b7 ~ Esr1 ~ Srd5a2 > Hsd17b3 > Esr2 > Cyp11a1 > Cyp17a1 > Cyp19a1 
~ Hsd17b2 > 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase I. The mRNA levels of essential
enzymes for progesterone/testosterone/estradiol metabolisms (Cyp17a1, Hsd17b7,
and Cyp19a1) were approximately constant between PD1 and PD14 and then declined
toward the adult levels. Cyp11a1 increased during PD4-PD14 and then considerably 
decreased toward the adult level (~8% of PD1). Hsd17b1, Hsd17b2, and
3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase I mRNA decreased approximately monotonously.
Hsd17b3 increased to approximately 200% of PD1 during PD4-PD14 and was maintained
at this high level. The 5a-reductase mRNA was maintained constant (Srd5a1) or
decreased monotonically (Srd5a2) toward the adult level. The Esr1 level peaked at
PD4 and decreased toward the adult level, whereas Ar greatly increased during
PD1-PD14 and was maintained at this high level. The Star and Hsd17b4 levels were 
maintained constant from neonate to adult. These results suggest that the
hippocampal sex steroidogenic properties are substantially altered during the
postnatal development processes, which might contribute to brain sexual
maturation.

PMID: 21047951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Int J Androl. 2011 Oct;34(5 Pt 1):420-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2010.01100.x.
Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Gper and ESRs are expressed in rat round spermatids and mediate
oestrogen-dependent rapid pathways modulating expression of cyclin B1 and Bax.

Chimento A(1), Sirianni R, Zolea F, Bois C, Delalande C, Andò S, Maggiolini M,
Aquila S, Carreau S, Pezzi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biology, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende
(CS), Italy.

Spermatogenesis is a precisely controlled and timed process, comprising mitotic
divisions of spermatogonia, meiotic divisions of spermatocytes, maturation and
differentiation of haploid spermatids giving rise to spermatozoa. It is well
known that the maintenance of spermatogenesis is controlled by gonadotrophins and
testosterone, the effects of which are modulated by a complex network of locally 
produced factors, including oestrogens. However, it remains uncertain whether
oestrogens are able to activate rapid signalling pathways directly in male germ
cells. Classically, oestrogens act by binding to oestrogen receptors (ESRs) 1 and
2. Recently, it has been demonstrated that rapid oestrogen action can also be
mediated by the G-protein-coupled oestrogen receptor 1 (Gper). The aim of the
present study was to investigate ESRs and Gper expression in primary cultures of 
adult rat round spermatids (RS) and define if oestradiol (E2) is able to
activate, through these receptors, pathways involved in the regulation of genes
controlling rat RS apoptosis and/or maturation. In this study, we demonstrated
that rat RS express ESR1, ESR2 and Gper. Short-time treatment of RS with E2, the 
selective Gper agonist G1 and the selective ESR1 and ERß agonists,
4,4',4"-(4-propyl-[1H]pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl) trisphenol (PPT) and
2,3-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile (DPN), respectively, determined activation
of Extra-cellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) through the involvement of
epidermal growth factor receptor transactivation. In addition, we investigated
the effects of ESRs and Gper pathway activation on factors involved in RS
maturation. Expression of cyclin B1 mRNA was downregulated by E2, G1 and PPT, but
not by DPN. A concomitant and inverse regulation of the pro-apoptotic factor Bax 
mRNA expression was observed in the same conditions, with DPN being the only one 
determining an increase in this factor expression. Collectively, these data
demonstrate that E2 activates, through ESRs and Gper, pathways involved in the
regulation of genes controlling rat RS apoptosis and differentiation such as
cyclin B1 and Bax.

© 2010 The Authors. International Journal of Andrology © 2011 European Academy of
Andrology.

PMID: 20969598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Lupus. 2011 Jan;20(1):85-9. doi: 10.1177/0961203310381514. Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Differential association of juvenile and adult systemic lupus erythematosus with 
genetic variants of oestrogen receptors alpha and beta.

Kisiel BM(1), Kosinska J, Wierzbowska M, Rutkowska-Sak L, Musiej-Nowakowska E,
Wudarski M, Olesinska M, Krajewski P, Lacki J, Rell-Bakalarska M, Jagodzinski PP,
Tlustochowicz W, Ploski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Diseases and Rheumatology, Military Institute of the
Health Services, Warsaw, Poland.

Oestrogens acting via nuclear receptors (encoded by ESR1 or ESR2) are important
for pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). rs2234693 and rs4986938
are two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) whose C and A variants increase
transcription of ESR1 and ESR2, respectively. The T allele of rs2234693 was
associated with early onset SLE, whereas the role of rs4986938 in SLE was not
reported. Our aim was to examine the role of rs2234693 and rs4986938 in
conferring susceptibility to juvenile and adult SLE (jSLE and aSLE). Genotype
distribution of both SNPs was analysed in 84 jSLE, 112 aSLE patients and 1001
controls. Allele C of rs2234693 was associated with jSLE (OR = 1.87, p = 0.006,
p(corrected)<U+2009>= 0.02), whereas allele A of rs4986938 showed an association with
aSLE (OR = 1.46, p = 0.008, p(corrected)<U+2009>= 0.03). In jSLE, rs2234693 C had lower 
frequency in patients with central nervous system involvement (OR = 0.39, p =
0.005, p(corrected)<U+2009>= 0.04) and showed a trend for increase among males, patients
with renal involvement and those without DR2/3 (p < 0.05, p(corrected)<U+2009>> 0.05).
Whereas our results are consistent with a role of ESR1 variation in jSLE, more
studies are needed since the direction of association was the opposite of that
reported previously. The association between rs4986938 (ESR2) and aSLE is a novel
finding, consistent with our recent report associating this variant with Graves' 
disease.

PMID: 20961965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Endocrine. 2010 Jun;37(3):415-24. doi: 10.1007/s12020-010-9322-8. Epub 2010 Mar
25.

Identification of novel transcript variants of estrogen receptor a, ß and
progesterone receptor gene in human endometrium.

Springwald A(1), Lattrich C, Skrzypczak M, Goerse R, Ortmann O, Treeck O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.

The human progesterone receptor (PR) and estrogen receptor genes (ESR1 and ESR2) 
are known to code for a multitude of transcript variants resulting from
alternative splicing. Many of them are translated into nuclear receptor proteins 
with altered structure and function. Expression of these alternative estrogen and
progesterone receptors modulates the cellular response to sexual steroid
hormones. Recent studies also suggested their significance in development of
hormone-dependent diseases like gynecological cancers. We report identification
of 12 new transcript variations of the PR, ESR1, and ESR2 gene in human
endometrium which result from differential exon-skipping. We succeeded in cloning
of four new double or triple exon-deletion transcript variants of ERa, four
single, double or triple exon-skipped mRNA isoforms of ERß, and four new
transcript variations of PR gene. Sequence analysis suggested that at least four 
of them, ERa<U+0394>5/6, ERa<U+0394>5/6/7, PR<U+0394>7, and PR<U+0394>6/7 are translated into receptor
proteins which might exert ligand-independent effects on steroid hormone
signalling. Comparison of pre- and post-menopausal endometrium revealed
differential expression of PR<U+0394>6/7, ERa<U+0394>5/6/7, ERa<U+0394>3/4/5, and ERß<U+0394>1-0N. We also
report differential expression of the exon-skipped isoforms in a panel of human
cancer cell lines derived from the breast, ovary, and endometrium. Our
identification of additional transcript variations further increases the
complexity of steroid hormone receptor gene expression and signalling.

PMID: 20960162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Endocrinology. 2010 Dec;151(12):5710-20. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0356. Epub 2010 Oct
6.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and chromosome mapping of reptilian estrogen
receptors.

Katsu Y(1), Matsubara K, Kohno S, Matsuda Y, Toriba M, Oka K, Guillette LJ Jr,
Ohta Y, Iguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institutes of Natural
Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan.

In many vertebrates, steroid hormones are essential for ovarian differentiation
during a critical developmental stage as well as promoting the growth and
differentiation of the adult female reproductive system. Although studies have
been extensively conducted in mammals and a few fish, amphibians, and bird
species, the molecular mechanisms of sex steroid hormone (estrogens) action have 
been poorly examined in reptiles. Here, we evaluate hormone receptor and ligand
interactions in two species of snake, the Okinawa habu (Protobothrops
flavoviridis, Viperidae) and the Japanese four-striped rat snake (Elaphe
quadrivirgata, Colubridae) after the isolation of cDNAs encoding estrogen
receptor a (ESR1) and estrogen receptor ß (ESR2). Using a transient transfection 
assay with mammalian cells, the transcriptional activity of reptilian (Okinawa
habu, Japanese four-striped rat snake, American alligator, and Florida red-belly 
freshwater turtle) ESR1 and ESR2 was examined. All ESR proteins displayed
estrogen-dependent activation of transcription via an estrogen-response
element-containing promoter; however, the responsiveness to various estrogens was
different. Further, we determined the chromosomal locations of the snake steroid 
hormone receptor genes. ESR1 and ESR2 genes were localized to the short and long 
arms of chromosome 1, respectively, whereas androgen receptor was localized to a 
pair of microchromosomes in the two snake species examined. These data provide
basic tools that allow future studies examining receptor-ligand interactions and 
steroid endocrinology in snakes and also expands our knowledge of sex steroid
hormone receptor evolution.

PMCID: PMC2999499
PMID: 20926589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Occup Environ Med. 2011 Jun;68(6):430-7. doi: 10.1136/oem.2009.053249. Epub 2010 
Oct 5.

Prenatal and concurrent exposure to halogenated organic compounds and gene
expression of CYP17A1, CYP19A1, and oestrogen receptor alpha and beta genes.

Karmaus W(1), Osuch JR, Landgraf J, Taffe B, Mikucki D, Haan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Norman J Arnold School of Public
Health, University of South Carolina, 800 Sumter Street, Columbia, SC 29208-0001,
USA. karmaus@sc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether prenatal exposure to dichlorodiphenyl ethylene
(DDE) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and concurrent exposure to DDE, PCBs
and polybrominated diphenylethers (PBDEs) affect gene expression of aromatase
(CYP19A1), 17-a-hydroxylase (CYP17A1), and oestrogen receptors a and ß (ESR 1 and
ESR2).
METHODS: Based on maternal PCB and DDE levels in the parent generation of the
Michigan Fisheater Cohort determined between 1973 and 1991, individual prenatal
exposures were estimated and have been published. In 2007, female adult offspring
of this cohort were examined. Gene expression and concurrent lipid-adjusted
exposures to DDE, PCBs and PBDEs were measured in blood and serum, respectively. 
Using mixed models and path analyses, gene-expression data were regressed on
prenatal and concurrent exposures controlling for confounders.
RESULTS: 139 daughters of Michigan fisheaters (65.3%) participated in the
investigation. While prenatal PCB levels were statistically significantly
associated with decreased expression of the aromatase and 17-a-hydroxylase genes,
prenatal DDE levels were significantly related to increased gene expression of
aromatase but not of 17-a-hydroxylase. The DDE association seems to be mediated
by concurrent lipid-adjusted p,p'-DDE serum levels. Prenatal and concurrent
exposure of both PCBs and DDE had comparable effects. No association was found
for PBDEs or for the gene expression of ESR 1 and ESR2.
CONCLUSIONS: A 40-year antecedent prenatal exposure and concurrent levels of PCBs
and DDE are associated with the expression of aromatase and 17-a-hydroxylase
genes. Prenatal exposures to organochlorines may instigate long-term alterations 
of gene expression. Mechanisms of prenatal induction of persistent
gene-expression alterations are speculated to be epigenetic in nature.

PMID: 20924025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Int J Androl. 2011 Oct;34(5 Pt 1):486-500. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2010.01109.x.
Epub 2010 Sep 27.

The anti-oestrogen fulvestrant (ICI 182,780) reduces the androgen receptor
expression, ERK1/2 phosphorylation and cell proliferation in the rat ventral
prostate.

Fernandes SA(1), Gomes GR, Siu ER, Damas-Souza DM, Bruni-Cardoso A, Augusto TM,
Lazari MF, Carvalho HF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo - Escola Paulista de Medicina, INFAR, Vila
Clementino, São Paulo, Brazil.

This study proposed to investigate further the role of oestrogens during pubertal
growth of rat ventral prostate, by analysing the effect of anti-oestrogen
fulvestrant (ICI 182,780) on the expression of androgen (AR) and oestrogen
receptors (ESR1 and ESR2), mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK1/2)
phosphorylation, and expression of Ki-67, a biomarker for cell proliferation.
Ventral prostates were obtained from 90-day-old rats treated once a week for 2
months with vehicle (control) or ICI 182,780 (10 mg/rat, s.c.). Transcripts for
AR, ESR1 and ESR2 were evaluated by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Expression of AR, ESR1, ESR2, total and phospho-ERK1/2 was analysed by 
Western blot or immunofluorescence. Ki-67-positive cells and myosin heavy chain
were detected by immunohistochemistry. Cylindrical epithelial cells slightly
taller, epithelial dysplasia and an increase in smooth muscle layer were observed
in the ventral prostate from ICI 182,780-treated rats. ICI 182,780 did not change
the mRNA, but decreased the protein levels for AR in the ventral prostate. The
expression of ESR1 (mRNA and protein) was upregulated by ICI 182,780, but no
changes were observed on ESR2 expression (mRNA and protein). ICI 182,780
decreased the phosphorylation state of ERK1/2, with no changes in total ERK1/2
levels. Ki-67-positive cells in the ventral prostate were also decreased by ICI
182,780. In conclusion, ICI 182,780 induces downregulation of AR expression and
may block the translocation of ESR1 and ESR2 from the nucleus to the plasma
membrane, decreasing ERK1/2 phosphorylation and prostatic epithelial cell
proliferation. These findings provide a basis for physiological roles of
oestrogen in the ventral prostate. Further studies with fulvestrant are necessary
in benign prostate hyperplasia and prostatic cancer models.

© 2010 The Authors. International Journal of Andrology © 2011 European Academy of
Andrology.

PMID: 20874728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2011 May;36(4):473-83. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.07.022. Epub 2010 Sep 17.

Variants in estrogen receptor alpha gene are associated with phenotypical
expression of obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Alonso P(1), Gratacòs M, Segalàs C, Escaramís G, Real E, Bayés M, Labad J,
Pertusa A, Vallejo J, Estivill X, Menchón JM.

Author information: 
(1)OCD Clinical and Research Unit, Psychiatry Department, Hospital Universitari
de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain. mpalonso@bellvitgehospital.cat

Compelling data from animal and clinical studies suggest that sex steroids may
play a role in the etiopathology of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). The aim 
of this study was to investigate whether variants in estrogen receptor genes ESR1
and ESR2 may contribute to the genetic susceptibility to OCD, through a
case-control association study using an extensive linkage disequilibrium-mapping 
approach. Twenty tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNPs) covering the ESR2 
region and nine tagSNPS from regions of ESR1 reported to be related to
transcriptional control were genotyped in 229 OCD patients and 279 controls. SNP 
association and haplotype analysis were performed. The association of these genes
and OCD subphenotypes was tested, considering early-onset OCD, comorbid tic and
affective disorders, and OCD symptom dimensions. No significant difference in the
distribution of alleles or genotypes was detected between controls and OCD
subjects. Nevertheless, on analyzing OCD subphenotypes, SNP rs34535804 in ESR1
and a five SNPs haplotype, located at the 5' end of intron 1 of ESR1, were
associated with the presence of contamination obsessions and cleaning
compulsions. Specifically, carriers of the ACCCG haplotype, a combination of
functional alleles related to higher ER alpha expression, showed a reduced risk
of suffering from these symptoms. Our results suggest that the ESR1 gene may
contribute to the genetic vulnerability to certain OCD manifestations. The
dissection of OCD into more homogeneous subphenotypes may well help to identify
susceptibility genes for the disorder.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20850223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Nov;88(5):626-9. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2010.143. Epub 2010 
Sep 8.

Estrogen receptor genotypes, menopausal status, and the effects of tamoxifen on
lipid levels: revised and updated results.

Hayes DF(1), Skaar TC, Rae JM, Henry NL, Nguyen AT, Stearns V, Li L, Philips S,
Desta Z, Flockhart DA; Consortium on Breast Cancer Pharmacogenomics (COBRA).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Breast Oncology Program, Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of Michigan Health and Hospitals System, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA. hayesdf@umich.edu

We previously reported that the ESR1 XbaI genotypes were associated with baseline
and tamoxifen-induced serum lipid profiles. The analysis in that study was
carried out by PCR followed by restriction-enzyme digestion. After reanalysis
using more robust TaqMan assays, the findings related to ~10% of the genotypes
for the ESR1 XbaI single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) were revised. For the
other genotypes (i.e., ESR1 PvuII, ESR2, and CYP2D6), the results were nearly
identical to those in the previous study. Upon reanalysis, previously reported
associations between the ESR1 Xba1 genotypes and baseline triglyceride and
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels were no longer observed.
Previously reported associations between the ESR1 XbaI genotypes and
tamoxifen-induced changes in levels of total cholesterol, triglycerides, and
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol were also no longer observed. However,
the following observations from the original report did not change: (i) the
levels of circulating lipids are lower in women taking tamoxifen; (ii) there is
an association between the ESR2-02 genotypes and changes in triglyceride levels; 
and (iii) neither ESR1 PvuII nor CYP2D6 is associated with any changes in serum
lipid concentrations in patients receiving treatment with tamoxifen.

PMCID: PMC4077673
PMID: 20827267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jan;84(1):52-61. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085340. Epub 2010 
Sep 8.

In vivo treatments with fulvestrant and anastrozole differentially affect gene
expression in the rat efferent ductules.

Gomes GR(1), Yasuhara F, Siu ER, Fernandes SA, Avellar MC, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Instituto Nacional de Farmacologia e Biologia 
Molecular, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, Brazil.

Estrogen plays a key role in maintaining the morphology and function of the
efferent ductules. We previously demonstrated that the antiestrogen fulvestrant
markedly affected gene expression in the rat efferent ductules. The mechanism of 
fulvestrant action to modulate gene expression may involve not only the blockade 
of ESR1 and ESR2 estrogen receptors, but also the activation of ESR1 and ESR2
when the receptors are tethered to AP-1 or SP1 transcription factors, or the
activation of the G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1. We therefore compared
the effects of two strategies to interfere with estrogen action in the rat
efferent ductules: treatment with fulvestrant or with the aromatase inhibitor
anastrozole. Whereas fulvestrant markedly increased Mmp7 and Spp1, and reduced
Nptx1 mRNA levels, no changes were observed with anastrozole. Fulvestrant caused 
changes in epithelial morphology that were not seen with anastrozole. Fulvestrant
shifted MMP7 immunolocalization in the epithelial cells from the supranuclear to 
the apical region; this effect was less pronounced with anastrozole. In vitro
studies of (35)S-methionine incorporation showed that protein release was
increased, whereas tissue protein content in the efferent ductules of
fulvestrant-treated rats was decreased. Although fulvestrant markedly affected
gene expression, no changes were observed on AP-1 and SP1 DNA-binding activity.
The blockade of ESRs seems to be the major reason explaining the differences
between both treatments. At least some of the effects of fulvestrant appear to
result from compensatory mechanisms activated by the dramatic changes caused by
ESR1 blockade.

PMID: 20826728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Hum Reprod. 2010 Oct;25(10):2664-71. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deq211. Epub 2010 Aug
17.

Genetic variation within the hypothalamus-pituitary-ovarian axis in women with
recurrent miscarriage.

Hanna CW(1), Bretherick KL, Liu CC, Stephenson MD, Robinson WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent miscarriage affects 1-2% of couples trying to conceive, and
is idiopathic in nearly half. Female fertility is controlled by the
hypothalamus-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis and we hypothesize that genetic
polymorphisms affecting the function of genes involved in regulating the HPO axis
will be associated with recurrent miscarriage.
METHODS: Whole peripheral blood DNA from 227 women with recurrent miscarriage and
130 control women was obtained for this study. Using the Sequenom iPlex assay for
fragment analysis, 31 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 4 short tandem
repeat (STR) polymorphisms in 20 candidate genes were evaluated for genetic
association with recurrent miscarriage.
RESULTS: Several candidate associations were identified with an uncorrected
P-value of 0.05. Genotype distribution at an SNP (rs37389) in the prolactin
receptor gene (P = 0.03), and allele distributions at an SNP (rs41423247) in the 
glucocorticoid receptor gene (P = 0.04) and an STR polymorphism in the estrogen
receptor ß gene (P = 0.03) were associated with recurrent miscarriage. The T
allele of an SNP (rs2033962) within the activin receptor type 1 gene (ACVR1) was 
associated with increased number of miscarriages in an additive manner (P =
0.02). These candidate associations were not statistically significant after
correcting for multiple analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Candidate associations were identified between recurrent miscarriage
and genetic variation within ESR2, PRLR, GCCR and ACVR1 genes. Independent
confirmation of these results is needed, as limitations of this study include the
heterogeneous etiology of recurrent miscarriage, limited sample size, partial
availability of reproductive history of the control group and investigation of
only a subset of the genetic variation within each gene.

PMID: 20716560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Biol Reprod. 2010 Nov;83(5):825-32. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.084301. Epub 2010
Aug 4.

Progesterone withdrawal, and not increased circulating relaxin, mediates the
decrease in myometrial relaxin receptor (RXFP1) expression in late gestation in
rats.

Vodstrcil LA(1), Shynlova O, Westcott K, Laker R, Simpson E, Wlodek ME, Parry LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Physiology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.

In pregnant rats, a significant decrease in myometrial relaxin family peptide
receptor 1 (RXFP1) expression, indicative of a functional relaxin withdrawal for 
activation of myometrial contractions, occurs in late gestation and during
spontaneous labor. This coincides with the highest level of circulating relaxin
and a decrease in progesterone. We investigated the potential regulatory role of 
these two systemic factors on myometrial RXFP1 expression by examining the
effects of the antiprogestin RU486 and a monoclonal antibody against rat relaxin 
(MCA1) in pregnant rats. Rats were injected with RU486 on Gestational Day (GD) 7,
16, or 19 and were killed on GD 8, 17, or 20. RU486 caused a significant
reduction in myometrial RXFP1. Plasma progesterone and 17beta-estradiol levels
were increased in RU486-treated animals compared with controls. RU486 treatment
also caused significant increases in myometrial Esr1 and Vegf and a decrease in
Esr2. MCA1 was administered i.v. to rats from GD 17 to GD 19. On GD 20, no
significant effect of MCA1 treatment on myometrial RXFP1 expression was observed 
compared with controls. Furthermore, there was no change in Esr1 or Esr2. A
significant reduction in myometrial Vegf, however, was observed. We suggest that 
blocking progesterone action with RU486 increases plasma 17beta-estradiol and
myometrial Esr1 and results in decreased RXFP1 expression. In summary, myometrial
RXFP1 expression is mediated mainly by progesterone and not circulating relaxin
in pregnant rats.

PMID: 20686183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Lung Cancer. 2011 Mar;71(3):258-63. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2010.06.011. Epub 2010
Jul 23.

Haplotypes of estrogen receptor-beta and risk of non-small cell lung cancer in
women.

Paulus JK(1), Zhou W, Kraft P, Johnson BE, Lin X, Christiani DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. jpaulus@hsph.harvard.edu

Epidemiologic and biologic evidence suggests that lung cancer has different
clinical and biological characteristics in women, and that estrogen may
contribute to the pathogenesis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We
investigated whether germline variation in the estrogen receptor-beta gene (ESR2)
is associated with lung cancer risk among 1021 female cases and 826 female
controls enrolled in the Lung Cancer Susceptibility Study at the Massachusetts
General Hospital from 1992 to 2004. Four haplotype-tagging polymorphisms (htSNPs)
(rs3020450, rs1256031, rs1256049, rs4986938) captured the common genetic
variation across the ESR2 locus from a set of markers culled from healthy
controls from a public database and sequencing the coding regions of 95 breast
cancer cases. Using the expectation-maximization algorithm, five common
haplotypes were resolved (CCGC (43%), TCAT (287%), TCAC (11%), CCAC (9%) and CCAT
(6%)). Multivariate logistic regression was used to estimate adjusted odds ratios
(OR) and their 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for individual htSNPs and
haplotype scores. Neither the four individual htSNPs nor their resolved
haplotypes were associated with lung cancer risk in the entire population, nor in
strata defined by parity (yes versus no), age (<50 years versus = 50 years) or
smoking history (current-, former-, never-smokers). Our findings indicate that
ESR2 is not associated with risk of lung cancer in women.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2988987
PMID: 20655613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Sep 1;247(2):98-104. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2010.05.017. Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Developmental programming: impact of fetal exposure to endocrine-disrupting
chemicals on gonadotropin-releasing hormone and estrogen receptor mRNA in sheep
hypothalamus.

Mahoney MM(1), Padmanabhan V.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Biosciences and Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois, 2001 
S. Lincoln Ave., Urbana, IL 61802, USA.

Bisphenol-A (BPA) and methoxychlor (MXC), two endocrine-disrupting chemicals
(EDCs) with estrogenic and antiandrogenic effects, disrupt the reproductive
system. BPA has profound effects on luteinizing hormone (LH) surge amplitude, and
MXC has profound effects on on LH surge timing in sheep. The neural mechanisms
involved in the differential disruption of the LH surge by these two EDCs remain 
to be elucidated. We tested the hypothesis that the differential effects of BPA
and MXC on LH surge system involved changes in hypothalamic
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and estrogen receptors (ESR), ESR1 and
ESR2, mRNA expression. Pregnant sheep were given daily injections of cottonseed
oil (controls), MXC, or BPA (5mg/kg/day) from day 30 to 90 of gestation (term
147d). Offspring from these animals were euthanized as adults, during the late
follicular phase following synchronization of estrus with prostaglandin
F(2alpha), just before the expected onset of preovulatory LH surge and changes in
mRNA expression of hypothalamic GnRH, ESR1, and ESR2 quantified following in situ
hybridization. GnRH mRNA expression was significantly lower in both groups of
EDC-treated females compared to controls. ESR1 expression was increased in
prenatal BPA- but not MXC-treated females in medial preoptic area relative to
controls. In contrast, ESR2 expression was reduced in the medial preoptic area of
both EDC-treated groups. Differences in expression of ESR1/ESR2 receptors may
contribute to the differential effects of BPA and MXC on the LH surge system.
These findings provide support that prenatal exposure to EDCs alters the neural
developmental trajectory leading to long-term reproductive consequences in the
adult female.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2914852
PMID: 20621667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Jul;19(7):1871-8. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-0216.

Inherited variations in AR, ESR1, and ESR2 genes are not associated with prostate
cancer aggressiveness or with efficacy of androgen deprivation therapy.

Sun T(1), Lee GS, Werner L, Pomerantz M, Oh WK, Kantoff PW, Freedman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sex steroid hormone receptors mediate essential processes in normal
prostate growth and contribute to prostate cancer development.
METHOD: In this study, we investigated the association between common inherited
variation of the AR, ESR1, and ESR2 genes and two clinically relevant traits: the
risk of developing aggressive prostate cancer and the response to androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT) in a hospital-based cohort. A total of 43 tagging
single nucleotide polymorphisms covering the loci of AR (n = 4), ESR1 (n = 32),
and ESR2 (n = 7) were successfully genotyped in 4,073 prostate cancer cases.
RESULTS: None of these single nucleotide polymorphisms were significantly
associated with disease aggressiveness as assessed by the D'Amico risk
classification, pathologic stage, or the response to ADT.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that common genetic variations in AR, ESR1, or
ESR2 are not strongly associated with prostate cancer aggressiveness or response 
to ADT.
IMPACT: Our study did not find convincing evidence of inherited variations in the
major receptors for androgens and estrogens and their associations with prostate 
cancer traits.

PMCID: PMC3755451
PMID: 20615892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Brain Res. 2010 Sep 10;1351:74-96. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.06.038. Epub 2010
Jun 22.

Distribution of estrogen receptor ß containing cells in the brains of bacterial
artificial chromosome transgenic mice.

Milner TA(1), Thompson LI, Wang G, Kievits JA, Martin E, Zhou P, McEwen BS, Pfaff
DW, Waters EM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology, Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill
Cornell Medical College, 407 East 61st Street, New York, NY 10065, USA.
tmilner@med.cornell.edu

Erratum in
    Brain Res. 2011 Jan 12;1368:361-2.
    Brain Res. 2011 Jun 17;1396:105.

In the brain, estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) plays important roles in autonomic 
functions, stress reactivity and learning and memory processes. However,
understanding the function of ERbeta has been restricted by the limited
availability of specific antisera, by difficulties discriminating the discrete
localization of ERbeta-immunoreactivity (ir) at the light microscopic level in
many brain regions and the identification of ERbeta-containing neurons in
neurophysiological and molecular studies. Here, we demonstrate that a Esr2
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic mouse line that expresses ERbeta
identified by enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) overcomes these
shortcomings. Throughout the brain, ERbeta-EGFP was detected in the nuclei and
cytoplasm of cells, the majority of which resembled neurons. EGFP often extended 
into dendritic processes and could be identified either natively or following
intensification of EGFP using immunolabeling. The distribution of ERbeta-EGFP
cells in brain closely corresponded to that reported for ERbeta protein and mRNA.
In particular, ERbeta-EGFP cells were found in autonomic brain regions (i.e.,
hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus, rostral ventrolateral medulla and nucleus
of the solitary tract), in regions associated with anxiety and stress behaviors
(i.e., bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, amygdala, periaqueductal gray, raphe 
and parabrachial nuclei) and in regions involved in learning and memory processes
(i.e., basal forebrain, cerebral cortex and hippocampus). Additionally, dual
label light and electron microscopic studies in select brain areas demonstrate
that cell containing ERbeta-EGFP colocalize with both nuclear and extranuclear
ERbeta-immunoreactivity. These findings support the utility of Esr2 BAC
transgenic reporter mice for future studies understanding the role of ERbeta in
CNS function.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2926254
PMID: 20599828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2010 Oct;122(4):193-203. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2010.06.011. Epub 2010 Jun 25.

Association of polymorphisms in the estrogen receptors alpha, and beta (ESR1,
ESR2) with the occurrence of male infertility and semen parameters.

Safarinejad MR(1), Shafiei N, Safarinejad S.

Author information: 
(1)safarinejad@urologist.md

Male infertility is a multifactorial condition with a strong genetic component.
In the last decade a large number of investigations focused on the identification
of gene variants affecting spermatogenesis in human. Polymorphisms of the
estrogen receptor (ER) genes, have been implicated in male infertility, however, 
comprehensive data are lacking. We investigated the association between the ER-a 
gene (ESR1) PvuII and XbaI and ER-ß gene (ESR2) RsaI and Alul polymorphisms and
the idiopathic male infertility in Iranian males. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
method and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) were used to detect
the ER-a, and ER-ß gene polymorphisms in 164 infertile men and 164 age-matched
healthy controls. Reproductive hormones were measured and at least two semen
analyses were performed in each subject. Significant differences were observed in
the frequency distribution of Pvull and XbaI in the ESR-a gene and RsaI and Alul 
in the ER-ß gene between patients and controls. The presence of the ER-a Pvull TC
(OR = 0.56, 95% CI: 0.26-0.80; P = 0.011), ER-a XbaI AG (OR = 0.51, 95% CI:
0.31-0.84; P = 0.017), and ER-ß Alul GG (OR = 0.48, 95% CI: 0.265-0.84; P =
0.012) genotypes suggest a protective effect for infertility. The ER-ß RsaI AG
(OR = 2.32, 95% CI: 1.61-3.22; P = 0.012) and ER-ß Alul AG (OR=2.76, 95% CI:
1.64-3.66; P=0.014) genotypes are associated with increased infertility risk.
Subjects (both fertile and infertile) with ER-a Pvull TT, ER-a XbaI AA, ER-ß RsaI
AG, and ER-ß Alul AG genotypes had significantly lower levels of serum sex
hormone binding globulin (SHBG), and luteinizing hormone (LH), but, higher serum 
levels of free estradiol and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH). The same
genotypes had significantly lower values for sperm density, sperm motility, and
percentage of sperm with normal morphology. Our results further suggest a
possible role of ESR-a, and ER-ß variants on male infertility. Further studies
are needed to replicate our findings as well as to better elucidate the
biological mechanisms of the modulation of ESR-a, and ER-ß on male infertility.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2011 Jun;27(6):425-33. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2010.495434.
Epub 2010 Jun 29.

Polymorphisms in ESR1, ESR2 and HSD17B1 genes are associated with fertility
status in endometriosis.

Lamp M(1), Peters M, Reinmaa E, Haller-Kikkatalo K, Kaart T, Kadastik U, Karro H,
Metspalu A, Salumets A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
merit.lamp@ut.ee

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether polymorphisms in genes involved in biosynthesis
and signalling of sex steroids influence susceptibility to endometriosis and to
infertility associated with it.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with endometriosis (n = 150) and fertile controls
(n = 199) were genotyped for polymorphisms in oestrogen receptor genes ESR1
(rs2234693 - T/C single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), dinucleotide (TA)(n)
repeat) and ESR2 (dinucleotide (CA)(n) repeat), progesterone receptor gene PGR
(rs10895068 - G/A SNP, 306-bp Alu-insertion), 17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type 1 gene HSD17B1 (rs605059 - A/G SNP), and aromatase gene CYP19A1 (rs10046 -
C/T SNP, (TTTA)(n) tetranucleotide repeat, 3-bp TCT insertion/deletion
polymorphism).
RESULTS: The HSD17B1 A/G SNP A allele increased overall endometriosis risk and
the risk of stage I-II disease, while ESR1 longer (TA)(n) repeats only correlated
with susceptibility to stage I-II endometriosis. When considering patients'
fertility status, HSD17B1 A/G SNP A allele and ESR1 longer (TA)(n) repeats were
associated with endometriosis accompanied by infertility, while ESR2 shorter
(CA)(n) repeats were linked with endometriosis without infertility. Other
polymorphisms were distributed similarly among patients and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants in ESR1, ESR2, and HSD17B1 genes could modify
susceptibility to endometriosis and might influence the fertility status in
endometriosis patients.

PMID: 20586553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Sep;45(3):147-59. doi: 10.1677/JME-10-0041. Epub 2010 Jun 
16.

Age- and cell-related gene expression of aromatase and estrogen receptors in the 
rat testis.

Bois C(1), Delalande C, Nurmio M, Parvinen M, Zanatta L, Toppari J, Carreau S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Estrogènes et Reproduction, EA 2608, Université de Caen Basse
Normandie, Esplanade de la Paix, F-14032 Caen Cedex, France.

Spermatogenesis is a complex and coordinated process leading to the formation of 
spermatozoa. This event, which is under the control of numerous endocrine and
paracrine factors, seems to also be controlled by estrogens which exert their
effects via nuclear estrogen receptors (ESRs) ESR1 and ESR2. Estrogens are
synthesized by aromatase which is biologically expressed in the rat testis. The
objective of our study was to clarify the gene expression patterns of aromatase
and ESRs according to age and in the two compartments of the adult rat testis. In
the adult, transcripts of aromatase vary according to the germ cell type and to
the stages of seminiferous epithelium, a maximum being observed at stage I. The
ESR1 gene is highly expressed in the adult testis and in stages from VIIc-d to
XIV. Moreover, both ESR mRNA levels are higher in purified round spermatids than 
in pachytene spermatocytes, suggesting a putative role of estrogens in the
haploid steps of spermatogenesis. The variability of the results in the
expression of both ESRs led us to explore the putative presence of variants in
the rat testis. Concerning ESR1, we have shown the presence of the full-length
form and of one isoform with exon 4 deleted. For ESR2, besides the wild type,
three isoforms were observed: one with exon 3 deleted, another with an insertion 
of 54 nucleotides, and the last one with both modifications. Therefore, the
stage-regulated expression of aromatase and ESR1 genes in the rat testis suggests
a likely role of estrogens in spermatogenesis.

PMID: 20554652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng. 2010 Jan;45(9):1054-9. doi: 
10.1080/10934529.2010.486329.

Improving solids retention in upflow anaerobic sludge blanket reactors at low
temperatures using lamella settlers.

Halalsheh MM(1), Muhsen HH, Shatanawi KM, Field JA.

Author information: 
(1)Water and Environmental Research and Study Centre, University of Jordan,
Amman, Jordan. Halalshe@ju.edu.jo

Lamella settlers were used to increase sludge concentration in pilot scale UASB
reactors treating concentrated sewage at low temperature. The aim was to increase
sludge retention time (SRT) and achieve better digestion in UASB reactors without
the need for increasing the hydraulic retention time (HRT). Two modified UASB
reactors were used for this purpose. In the first reactor, lamella settlers were 
installed in the settling zone of the UASB reactor and the reactor was named
UASB-ESR1. In the second reactor, lamella settlers were installed underneath the 
gas liquid separator (GLS) and the reactor was named UASB-ESR2. The sludge
concentration, sludge profile, and system performance of each reactor were
monitored. The obtained sludge concentrations were 50 and 53 g TS/l for UASB-ESR1
and UASB-ESR2, respectively. The measured concentrations were almost double the
concentrations reported for conventional UASB reactors ranging 16-26 g TS/l. The 
calculated SRT in the modified UASB reactors was 103 days in both reactors. The
average total COD (COD(tot)) and suspended COD (COD(ss)) removal efficiencies
were 38% and 60%, respectively for the UASB-ESR1. The average COD(tot) and
COD(ss) removal efficiencies for the UASB-ESR2 were 41% and 62%, respectively.
The modified reactors were considered at the startup period and the performances 
of the modified systems are expected to significantly improve when arriving at
steady state conditions.

PMID: 20526935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Calcif Tissue Int. 2010 Jul;87(1):25-35. doi: 10.1007/s00223-010-9375-y. Epub
2010 May 28.

Genotypes and haplotypes of the estrogen receptor genes, but not the
retinoblastoma-interacting zinc finger protein 1 gene, are associated with
osteoporosis.

Harsløf T(1), Husted LB, Carstens M, Stenkjaer L, Langdahl BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus Sygehus, Tage-Hansens Gade 2, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark. torbhars@rm.dk

Osteoporosis is a common age-related disease with a strong genetic influence.
Polymorphisms of ESR1 have consistently been shown to be associated with bone
mineral density (BMD) and fracture; however, in regulating bone metabolism, ESR1 
interacts with both ESR2 and RIZ1. We therefore examined the effects of
polymorphisms in the ESR1, ESR2, and RIZ1 genes and their haplotypes on vertebral
fractures and BMD in a case-control study comprising 462 osteoporotic patients
and 336 controls. In ESR1, we found the variant C allele of the XbaI polymorphism
to be associated with decreased risk of vertebral fractures in women (P < 0.01), 
whereas in men, the T allele seemed protective (P = 0.05). The variant G allele
of the PvuII polymorphism decreased the risk of vertebral fractures independently
of lumbar spine BMD in women (P = 0.04) but had no effect in men. Haplotype X-P-H
(XbaI:C, PvuII:G, and a high number of TA repeats) was associated with decreased 
risk of vertebral fractures in women (P = 0.04) but not men. In ESR2, the G
allele of the AluI polymorphism was associated with increased fracture risk (P = 
0.04), and the haplotype that comprises rs1256031:T and AluI:A increased lumbar
spine BMD by 0.04 +/- 0.02 g/cm(2) (P < 0.05) and decreased the risk of vertebral
fractures (P = 0.04). There was no effect of the RIZ1 polymorphism on BMD or
fracture risk and no evidence of interaction between the polymorphisms and
haplotypes thereof. We confirm that genetic variants in ESR1 and ESR2, but not
RIZ1, are important in osteoporosis. We found no evidence of interaction between 
polymorphisms, but we found that the effects of genetic variants in ESR1 might be
sex dependent.

PMID: 20508921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Vet Res Commun. 2010 Jun;34 Suppl 1:S203-6. doi: 10.1007/s11259-010-9380-7.

Genetic structure of candidate genes for litter size in Italian Large White pigs.

Dall'Olio S(1), Fontanesi L, Tognazzi L, Russo V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Protezione e Valorizzazione Agroalimentare, Università degli
Studi di Bologna, Sezione di Allevamenti Zootecnici, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
stefania.dallolio@unibo.it

The aim of this work was to verify whether polymorphisms in candidate genes for
litter size segregate in Italian Large White (ITLW) pigs. We genotyped 120 sows
that belonged to six different farms for 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of 10 different genes. Polymorphisms in the chosen genes had already been 
associated with litter-size traits in other pig populations and were candidates
for function and/or chromosomal location. The results indicated that the CLGN,
pDAZL, and RFN4 SNPs were not segregating in the genotyped samples. The remaining
seven markers were polymorphic with minor allele frequencies ranging from 0.10
(AFP) to 0.48 (RBP4). Because of the observed genetic variabilities in the
investigated loci, the polymorphisms in the AFP, BMPR1B, CXCL10, ESR2, GNRHR,
MAN2B2, and RBP4 genes can be considered suitable markers for association studies
with litter-size traits in ITLW pigs.

PMID: 20473567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Biol Reprod. 2010 Aug 1;83(2):307-17. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.084160. Epub
2010 May 5.

Expression and signaling of G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) in rat
sertoli cells.

Lucas TF(1), Royer C, Siu ER, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, INFAR, Vila
Clementino, São Paulo, Brazil.

Erratum in
    Biol Reprod. 2014 Nov;91(5):126.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the expression and signaling of
the G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) in cultured immature rat Sertoli
cells--in which we have previously described the classical estrogen receptors
(ESR1 and ESR2). Expression of GPER in cultured Sertoli cells from 15-day-old
rats was detected by RT-PCR and immunoassays. Gper transcripts also were present 
in testes from 5-, 15-, and 120-day-old rats. Short-term treatment of Sertoli
cells with 17beta-estradiol (E2), the GPER agonist G-1, or the ESR antagonist ICI
182,780 (ICI) rapidly activated MAPK3/1 (ERK1/2), even after down-regulation of
ESR1 and ESR2, suggesting a role for GPER in the rapid E2 action in these cells. 
MAPK3/1 phosphorylation induced by ICI or G-1 was blocked by pertussis toxin,
selective inhibitor of the SRC family of protein tyrosine kinases,
metalloprotease inhibitor, MAP2K1/2 inhibitor, and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) kinase inhibitor. Furthermore, E2, but not G-1, induced
up-regulation of cyclin D1 in the Sertoli cells. This effect was blocked by ICI. 
E2 and G-1 decreased BAX and increased BCL2 expression and these effects were
blocked by MAP2K1/2 inhibitor and EGFR kinase inhibitor. The pretreatment with
ICI did not block the effect of E2. Taken together, these results indicate that
in Sertoli cells 1) GPER-mediated MAPK3/1 activation occurs via EGFR
transactivation through G protein beta gamma subunits that promote SRC-mediated
metalloprotease-dependent release of EGFR ligands, which bind to EGFR and lead to
MAPK3/1 phosphorylation; 2) E2-ESRs play a role in Sertoli cell proliferation;
and 3) E2-GPER may regulate gene expression involved with apoptosis. ESR and GPER
may mediate actions important for Sertoli cell function and maintenance of normal
testis development and homeostasis.

PMID: 20445128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Reproduction. 2010 Jul;140(1):143-53. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0113. Epub 2010 Apr 19.

The effect of elevated progesterone and pregnancy status on mRNA expression and
localisation of progesterone and oestrogen receptors in the bovine uterus.

Okumu LA(1), Forde N, Fahey AG, Fitzpatrick E, Roche JF, Crowe MA, Lonergan P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture, Food Science and Veterinary Medicine, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

To investigate the effects of pregnancy or post-ovulatory progesterone (P(4))
supplementation on the expression of oestrogen and P(4) receptors (ESRs and PGRs)
in the bovine uterus, heifers (n=263) were randomly assigned to the following
treatments: i) cyclic, normal P(4); ii) cyclic, high P(4); iii) pregnant, normal 
P(4); and iv) pregnant, high P(4) on days 5, 7, 13 and 16 of pregnancy/oestrous
cycle. Elevated P(4) was achieved through P(4)-releasing intravaginal device
insertion on day 3 after oestrus, resulting in increased concentrations from day 
3.5 to 8 (P<0.05) in the high groups than in the normal groups. Irrespective of
treatment, PGR and ESR1 mRNA expressions were highest on days 5 and 7 and
decreased on day 13 (P<0.05), while ESR2 mRNA expression increased on day 7
(P<0.05) and similar levels were maintained within the normal P(4) groups
subsequently. Expression in the high P(4) groups decreased on day 13 (P<0.05).
PGR-AB and PGR-B protein expressions were high in the luminal and superficial
glands on days 5 and 7, but by day 13, expression had declined to very low or
undetectable levels and high P(4) concentration tended to decrease or decreased
significantly (P<0.05) the expression in these regions on days 5 and 7. ESR1
protein expression was high, with no treatment effect. ESR2 protein was also
highly expressed, with no clear effect of treatment. In conclusion, early
post-ovulatory P(4) supplementation advances the disappearance of PGR protein
from the luminal epithelium on days 5 and 7, and decreases ESR2 mRNA expression
during the mid-luteal phase, but has no effect on PGR or ESR1 mRNA expression.

PMID: 20403910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2010 May 27;365(1546):1517-35. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2009.0235.

Oestrogens and spermatogenesis.

Carreau S(1), Hess RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Caen, EA 2608, USC 2006 INRA, IFR
146, 14032 Caen, France.

The role of oestrogens in male reproductive tract physiology has for a long time 
been a subject of debate. The testis produces significant amounts of oestrogenic 
hormones, via aromatase, and oestrogen receptors (ERs)alpha (ESR1) and ERbeta
(ESR2) are selectively expressed in cells of the testis as well as the epididymal
epithelium, depending upon species. This review summarizes the current knowledge 
concerning the presence and activity of aromatase and ERs in testis and sperm and
the potential roles that oestrogens may have in mammalian spermatogenesis. Data
show that physiology of the male gonad is in part under the control of a balance 
of androgens and oestrogens, with aromatase serving as a modulator.

PMCID: PMC2871919
PMID: 20403867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Am J Ophthalmol. 2010 May;149(5):826-30.e1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2009.12.030.

Estrogen receptor beta gene polymorphism and intraocular pressure elevation in
female patients with primary open-angle glaucoma.

Mabuchi F(1), Sakurada Y, Kashiwagi K, Yamagata Z, Iijima H, Tsukahara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Yamanashi,
Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan. fmabuchi@yamanashi.ac.jp

PURPOSE: To assess whether the genetic polymorphisms of estrogen receptor beta
(ESR2) are associated with primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG).
DESIGN: Case-control study.
METHODS: Four hundred and twenty-five Japanese patients with POAG, including
normal-tension glaucoma (NTG, n = 213) and high-tension glaucoma (HTG, n = 212), 
and 191 control subjects without glaucoma were analyzed for polymorphisms of
rs1256031 and rs4986938 in the ESR2 gene. The genotypic and allelic frequencies
were compared between NTG or HTG patients and control subjects. The phenotypic
features of patients with POAG were compared between each genotype.
RESULTS: There were significant differences in the genotype frequencies of
rs1256031 and rs4986938 between the HTG patients and control subjects in women (P
= .033 and P = .043 respectively). The frequencies of the C allele of rs1256031
and G allele of rs4986938 were significantly higher in patients with HTG in
comparison to the control subjects in women (rs1256031: 53.6% vs 43.4%, P = .044;
rs4986938: 89.2% vs 80.6%, P = .027). The maximum intraocular pressures in female
POAG patients with the CC or TC genotypes of rs1256031 were significantly higher 
than that in female POAG patients with the TT genotype (P = .039, analysis of
variance, P = .018 and P = .026 respectively).
CONCLUSION: The ESR2 gene polymorphism is therefore considered to be associated
with an intraocular pressure elevation in female patients with POAG.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20399928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Feb;126(1):37-45. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-0891-2.

A systematic review of the relationship between polymorphic sites in the estrogen
receptor-beta (ESR2) gene and breast cancer risk.

Yu KD(1), Rao NY, Chen AX, Fan L, Yang C, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Cancer Hospital/Cancer Institute, Breast Cancer 
Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

The estrogen signal is mediated by the estrogen receptor (ER). The specific role 
of ER-beta, a second ER, in breast carcinogenesis is not known. A number of
association studies have been carried out to investigate the relationship between
polymorphic sites in the ESR2 gene and breast cancer risk, however, the results
are inconsistent. We searched PubMed, Medline, and Web of Science database
(updated to 10 January 2010) and identified 13 relevant case-control studies, and
approximately 28 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and one micro-satellite
marker were reported in the literature. The median number of study subjects was
776 (range 158-13,550). Three genetic variants [(CA)n, rs2987983, and rs4986938] 
showed significant overall associations with breast cancer, and rs4986938 was
reported twice. Because rs4986938 and rs1256049 were the most extensively studied
polymorphisms, we subsequently conducted a meta-analysis to evaluate their
relationship with breast cancer risk (9 studies of 10,837 cases and 16,021
controls for rs4986938; 8 studies of 11,652 cases and 15,726 controls for
rs1256049). For rs4986938, the women harboring variant allele seemed to be
associated with a decreased risk either in the dominant model [pooled OR = 0.944,
95% confidence interval (95% CI) 0.897-0.993, fixed-effects] or in the
co-dominant model (AG vs. GG) (OR = 0.944, 95% CI 0.895-0.997, fixed-effects).
rs1256049 was not associated with breast cancer risk in any model. Five studies
had investigated the effect of haplotypes in the ESR2 gene on breast cancer risk,
and four of them had positive outcomes. In summary, the present systematic review
suggests that SNP rs4986938 as well as haplotypes in the ESR2 gene might be
associated with breast cancer. The need for additional studies examining these
issues seems of vital importance.

PMID: 20390341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Reproduction. 2010 Jun;139(6):1057-66. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0069. Epub 2010 Apr
13.

Expression of basigin in reproductive tissues of estrogen receptor-{alpha} or
-{beta} null mice.

Chen L(1), Bi J, Nakai M, Bunick D, Couse JF, Korach KS, Nowak RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Animal Sciences Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois,
Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Basigin plays important roles in both male and female reproduction because
basigin (Bsg) null male and female mice are infertile. The aim of the present
study was to determine whether basigin expression in reproductive organs requires
estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1, ERalpha) or -beta (ESR2, ERbeta). Expression of
basigin protein in the testis, ovary, and male and female reproductive tracts was
studied in adult wild-type (WT), Esr1-null (alphaERKO), and Esr2-null (betaERKO) 
mice by immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting. Basigin mRNA levels in ovary and
uterus were examined by quantitative RT-PCR. In females, basigin protein
expression was observed mainly in granulosa and interstitial cells of the ovary
and epithelial cells of the proximal oviduct in all genotypes. Basigin protein
was also expressed in the uterine epithelium at proestrus and estrus in WT and
betaERKO mice but not in alphaERKO mice. However, a higher level of basigin mRNA 
was observed in uteri of alphaERKO mice compared with WT and betaERKO mice. In
males, basigin was expressed in Leydig cells and all germ cells except
spermatogonia in all genotypes. Basigin was present in epithelial cells lining
the efferent ductules in WT and betaERKO mice, but expression was greatly reduced
in alphaERKO mice. In epididymal ducts, basigin expression was observed in
epithelial cells in the caput and cauda in all genotypes. These data suggest that
expression of basigin protein requires ESR1, but not ESR2, in the uterus and
efferent ductules, but is independent of estrogen receptor in the ovary, oviduct,
testis, and epididymis.

PMCID: PMC4778977
PMID: 20388736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 Jul;35(8):1818-25. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.49. Epub
2010 Apr 7.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene (ESR1) is associated with restrictive anorexia nervosa.

Versini A(1), Ramoz N, Le Strat Y, Scherag S, Ehrlich S, Boni C, Hinney A,
Hebebrand J, Romo L, Guelfi JD, Gorwood P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U894-Team 1, Center of Psychiatry and Neurosciences, University Paris
Descartes, 2ter rue d'Alésia, Paris, France.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a highly heritable young-onset psychiatric illness the
etiology of which remains unknown. Estrogen alpha and beta receptors, encoded by 
ESR1 and ESR2 genes, are involved in food intake regulation and eating behavior, 
and may have a potential role in AN. We performed a family-based association
study of 17 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) encompassing ESR1 and ESR2
genes in a cohort of 321 French AN families. We attempted to replicate this
finding in a cohort of 41 restrictive AN (RAN) families and in a population-based
study of 693 young women. Using the transmission disequilibrium test, a
significant over-transmission was detected between AN and ESR1 rs726281 and
rs2295193. These SNPs and another among ESR1 were more specifically associated
with the RAN subtype (rs726281, p=0.005, odds ratio (OR)=2.1, 95% confidence
interval (95% CI)=1.2-3.6; rs3798577, p=0.021, OR=1.6, 95% CI=1.1-2.3; and
rs2295193, p=0.007, OR=1.7, 95% CI=1.2-2.5). A large eight-SNPs haplotype of ESR1
gene was also associated with AN (p<0.0001, OR=3.1, 95% CI=1.8-5.1). Association 
of ESR1 SNPs and RAN was driven by paternal over-transmissions (p<0.0001, OR=3.7,
95% CI=1.9-7.3). Furthermore, we confirmed the preferential paternal
over-transmission of the ESR1 rs726281 on the independent German sample of 41 RAN
trios (p=0.025, OR=3, 95% CI=1.1-8.3). Finally, rs3798577 was associated with
eating disorders in a population-based sample of 693 women (p<0.01). Our findings
are strongly in favor of an association between ESR1 polymorphisms and AN. In
particular, ESR1 gene confers a high risk of vulnerability to the restrictive
subtype of AN, and suggests that the estrogen pathway has to be further analyzed 
in AN.

PMCID: PMC3055492
PMID: 20375995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Endocrinol. 2010 Jun;205(3):253-62. doi: 10.1677/JOE-10-0029. Epub 2010 Mar 26.

Modulation of responses to stress by estradiol benzoate and selective estrogen
receptor agonists.

Serova LI(1), Harris HA, Maharjan S, Sabban EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, New York 10595, USA.

Previously, pretreatment with estradiol benzoate (EB) was found to modulate the
response of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and gene expression in
several catecholaminergic neuronal locations in ovariectomized (OVX) rats exposed
to single immobilization stress (IMO). Here, we investigated the role of estrogen
receptor (ER) subtypes, using selective agonists for ERalpha (propyl pyrazole
triol, PPT) or ERbeta (WAY-200070) in two major central noradrenergic systems and
the HPA axis after exposure to single and repeated IMO. OVX female rats received 
21 daily injections of either EB (25 mug/kg), PPT (10 mg/kg), WAY-200070 (10
mg/kg), or vehicle. Injections of EB and PPT, but not WAY-200070, elicited
reduced body weight and increased uterine weight, showing their selectivity. Both
EB and PPT increased corticosterone levels about two- to threefold, but prevented
any further rise with either single or repeated IMO, indicating an ERalpha
(ESR1)-, but not ERbeta (ESR2)-, mediated mechanism. In the locus coeruleus (LC),
the rise in dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (Dbh) mRNA with both stress paradigms was
abrogated in EB- or PPT-injected animals. However, WAY-200070 blocked the
response of DBH mRNA to single IMO but not to repeated IMO. In the nucleus of the
solitary tract (NTS), the rise in tyrosine hydroxylase and DBH mRNAs with both
IMOs was absent, or greatly attenuated, in EB- or PPT-treated rats. In most
cases, WAY-200070 inhibited the response to single IMO but not to repeated IMO.
The results demonstrate that pretreatment with estradiol, or ER-selective
agonists, modulates the stress-triggered induction of gene expression of
norepinephrine biosynthetic enzymes in LC and NTS, with ER selectivity depending 
on duration of the stress.

PMCID: PMC2927979
PMID: 20348154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Gastroenterology. 2010 Jul;139(1):130-9.e24. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.03.044.
Epub 2010 Mar 24.

Genetic risk factors for hepatopulmonary syndrome in patients with advanced liver
disease.

Roberts KE(1), Kawut SM, Krowka MJ, Brown RS Jr, Trotter JF, Shah V, Peter I,
Tighiouart H, Mitra N, Handorf E, Knowles JA, Zacks S, Fallon MB; Pulmonary
Vascular Complications of Liver Disease Study Group.

Collaborators: Horn EM, Okun J, Olsen S, Rabinowitz D, Reinen J, Rosenthal L,
Rybak D, Wiesner R, Stadheim L, Benza R, Bynon JS, Eckhoff D, Faulk D, Singh H,
Tanikella R, Wille K, Badesch D, Forman L, Perry T, Shrestha R, Nielsen C, Ahya
V, Harhay M, Kaplan S, Palevsky H, Reddy R, Taichman D, Kaplowitz N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02111,
USA. kroberts@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2010 Jul;139(1):20-2.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) affects 10%-30% of patients
with cirrhosis and portal hypertension and significantly increases mortality.
Studies in experimental models indicate that pulmonary angiogenesis contributes
to the development of HPS, but pathogenesis in humans is poorly understood. We
investigated genetic risk factors for HPS in patients with advanced liver
disease.
METHODS: We performed a multicenter case-control study of patients with cirrhosis
being evaluated for liver transplantation. Cases had an alveolar-arterial oxygen 
gradient > or = 15 mm Hg (or > or =20 mm Hg if age > 64 years) and contrast
echocardiography with late appearance of microbubbles after venous injection of
agitated saline (intrapulmonary vasodilatation); controls did not meet both
criteria for case status. The study sample included 59 cases and 126 controls. We
genotyped 1086 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 94 candidate
genes.
RESULTS: Forty-two SNPs in 21 genes were significantly associated with HPS after 
adjustments for race and smoking. Eight genes had at least 2 SNPs associated with
disease: CAV3, ENG, NOX4, ESR2, VWF, RUNX1, COL18A1, and TIE1. For example,
rs237872 in CAV3 showed an odds ratio of 2.75 (95% confidence interval:
1.65-4.60, P = .0001) and rs4837192 in ENG showed an odds ratio of 0.35 (95%
confidence interval: 0.14-0.89, P = .027). Furthermore, variation in CAV3 and
RUNX1 was associated with HPS in gene-based analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in genes involved in the regulation of angiogenesis
are associated with the risk of HPS. Further investigation of these biologic
pathways might elucidate the mechanisms that mediate the development of HPS in
certain patients with severe liver disease.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2908261
PMID: 20346360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Lupus. 2010 May;19(6):734-40. doi: 10.1177/0961203309359517. Epub 2010 Mar 19.

Association of estrogen and aromatase gene polymorphisms with systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Wang J(1), Nuite M, McAlindon TE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Experimental and animal studies suggested that estrogens play an important role
in the development of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) through a variety of
mechanisms involved in the regulation of the immune system. The objective of this
study was to investigate the association between genetic variations in estrogen
metabolic pathway genes, including estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1), estrogen
receptor beta (ESR2), and aromatase (CYP19A1), and risk of SLE. We performed a
genetic study of SLE among 46 medical record-confirmed female SLE cases and 102
female controls participating in an Internet-based case-control study of SLE.
Polymorphisms analysed included: ESR1 PvuII, XbaI, and GT repeat; ESR2 RsaI,
AluI, and CA repeat; and CYP19A1 RsaI, SfaN1, and TTTA repeat. We found
significant association of the ESR1 PvuII (PP vs. pp, odds ratio (OR): 3.1, 95%
confidence interval (CI): 1.1-9.3) and XbaI (XX vs. xx, adjusted OR: 3.4, 95% CI:
1.1-10.5) with SLE. Carrying the PPXX genotype conferred the highest risk (PPXX
vs. ppxx, OR: 4.6, 95% CI: 1.3-15.9). We also found an association of SLE with
the ESR2 CA repeat (SS vs. LL, OR: 2.8, 95% CI: 1.0-8.0). Our results support a
role of estrogen in pathogenesis of SLE and suggested that genetic variants in
the estrogen receptor genes might influence susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3653634
PMID: 20305046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Jul;16(6):370-5. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.02.012. Epub 2010 Mar 20.

Polymorphisms of caffeine metabolism and estrogen receptor genes and risk of
Parkinson's disease in men and women.

Palacios N(1), Weisskopf M, Simon K, Gao X, Schwarzschild M, Ascherio A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health 655 Huntington Ave.,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. palacios@hsph.harvard.edu

Caffeine intake has been associated with a decreased risk of Parkinson's disease 
(PD) in men but the effect in women is less clear, and appears to be modified by 
use of post-menopausal estrogens. In a nested case-control study within the
Nurses Health Study (NHS) and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS), we
examined associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of caffeine 
metabolizing genes (CYP1A2 and NAT2) and estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2),
their interaction with caffeine intake and hormone replacement therapy (PMH) use 
(collected prospectively) and risk of PD. We matched 159 female cases to 724
controls and 139 male cases to 561 controls on birth year, source of DNA (blood
or buccal smear), age and sex. The CYP1A2 rs762551 polymorphism (lower enzyme
inducibility) was marginally associated with an increased risk of PD (RR, for
increasing number of minor alleles=1.34; 95% CI 1.02, 1.78 in women, but not in
men. None of the NAT2 (classified as slow vs. fast acetylator), ESR1 or ESR2
polymorphisms were significantly associated with an altered risk of PD.
Marginally significant interactions were observed between caffeine intake and the
ESR1 polymorphism rs3798577 (p=0.07) and ESR2 polymorphism rs1255998 (p=0.07).
The observed increased risk of PD among female but not male carriers of the
rs762551 polymorphism of CYP1A2 and the interactions of caffeine with ESR1
rs3798577 and ESR2 rs1255998 may provide clues to explain the relationship
between gender, caffeine intake, estrogen status and risk of PD and need to be
replicated.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2916058
PMID: 20304699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 May;95(5):2384-90. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2101. Epub 
2010 Mar 9.

Genetics of hypospadias: are single-nucleotide polymorphisms in SRD5A2, ESR1,
ESR2, and ATF3 really associated with the malformation?

van der Zanden LF(1), van Rooij IA, Feitz WF, Vermeulen SH, Kiemeney LA, Knoers
NV, Roeleveld N, Franke B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, P.O.
Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

CONTEXT: Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external
genitalia with a multifactorial etiology. Little is known about the genes
involved in hypospadias. A few genetic associations have been reported but mainly
in studies of small sample size. Most of these associations have not been
replicated.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate whether previously reported
associations for four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in
hormonal pathways could be replicated in a large Dutch hypospadias sample. The
SNPs investigated are rs523349 in steroid-5 alpha-reductase (SRD5A2), rs6932902
in estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), rs2987983 in ESR2, and rs11119982 in activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3).
DESIGN, PARTICIPANTS, AND METHODS: We genotyped 620 Caucasian hypospadias cases
and 596 controls for these SNPs using TaqMan-based genotyping.
RESULTS: We did not replicate the associations of the SNPs in SRD5A2 and ESR1
with hypospadias. The SNPs in ESR2 and ATF3 were borderline associated with
hypospadias [odds ratios 0.9 (95% confidence interval 0.7-1.0) and 1.2 (95%
confidence interval 1.0-1.4), respectively] but in the opposite direction
compared with earlier publications. Stratification according to localization of
the urethral opening produced comparable results in the subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: The lack of consistency between our and previously performed studies
might represent spurious results or chance findings in our or the earlier
studies, differences in criteria used to select the study populations, or a real 
difference between populations, i.e. different genes contributing to disease
risk. These results once again confirm the importance of replication in genetic
association approaches.

PMID: 20215396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2012 Mar;120(3):154-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1249006.
Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Associations of estrogen receptor alpha and beta gene polymorphisms with sex
steroid levels and body fat content in men.

Sakka C(1), Efstathiadou ZA, Polyzos SA, Goutou M, Stakias N, Koukoulis GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital, School of Medicine,
University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: Estrogens play an important role in male physiology. We investigated
the possible association of four single nucleotide polymorphisms in Estrogen
Receptor a ( ESR1) and Estrogen Receptor ß ( ESR2) genes with circulating levels 
of sex steroids and Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG) in men.
DESIGN AND METHODS: SHBG, total and calculated free testosterone (TT and cal FT),
estradiol (E2) and free Estradiol (FE2) were determined in a population-based
cohort of 170 apparently healthy Greek men. Body mass index (BMI), waist
circumference (WC) and percentage of body fat (%fat) content were measured in all
participants. Genotyping for the PVU II and XBA I polymorphisms of the ESR1 gene 
and for the RSA I and ALU I polymorphisms of the ESR2 gene was performed.
RESULTS: PVU II showed an association with E2 levels [median (IQR) pp 58.5
(42.1-73.4) pg/ml vs. Pp 48.8 (42.9-60.1) and PP 57.7 (44-70.5), p=0.032], and
with %fat [mean±SD pp 24.6±5.3 vs. Pp 22.4±5.2 and PP 21.2±6.7, p=0.044], after
adjustment for age and WC. Furthermore, the effect of PVU II on E2 was
independent of %fat (p=0.038). A synergistic effect of the two ESR1 polymorphisms
on E2 (p=0.023), FE2 (p=0.03) and %fat (p=0.004) was present. Finally, a
synergistic effect of the ESR1 and ESR2 genes on TT (p=0.009), independent of
age, WC and %fat also emerged.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variation in ESR1 is associated with serum estradiol levels 
and body fat content regulation in men. Furthermore, a synergistic effect of ESR1
and ESR2 genes is exerted on serum testosterone levels.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 20200813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010 Mar;3(3):301-11. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-09-0069. Epub 2010 Feb 23.

Gene expression patterns in the human breast after pregnancy.

Asztalos S(1), Gann PH, Hayes MK, Nonn L, Beam CA, Dai Y, Wiley EL, Tonetti DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago,
833 South Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Epidemiologic studies have established that pregnancy has a bidirectional,
time-dependent effect on breast cancer risk; a period of elevated risk is
followed by a long-term period of protection. The purpose of the present study
was to determine whether pregnancy and involution are associated with gene
expression changes in the normal breast, and whether such changes are transient
or persistent. We examined the expression of a customized gene set in normal
breast tissue from nulliparous, recently pregnant (0-2 years since pregnancy),
and distantly pregnant (5-10 years since pregnancy) age-matched premenopausal
women. This gene set included breast cancer biomarkers and genes related to
immune/inflammation, extracellular matrix remodeling, angiogenesis, and hormone
signaling. Laser capture microdissection and RNA extraction were done from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded reduction mammoplasty and benign biopsy
specimens and analyzed using real-time PCR arrays containing 59 pathway-specific 
and 5 housekeeping genes. We report 14 of 64 (22%) of the selected gene set to be
differentially regulated (at P < 0.05 level) in nulliparous versus parous breast 
tissues. Based on gene set analysis, inflammation-associated genes were
significantly upregulated as a group in both parous groups compared with
nulliparous women (P = 0.03). Moreover, parous subjects had significantly reduced
expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha, ESR1), progesterone receptor
(PGR), and ERBB2 (Her2/neu) and 2-fold higher estrogen receptor-beta (ESR2)
expression compared with nulliparous subjects. These initial data, among the
first on gene expression in samples of normal human breast, provide intriguing
clues about the mechanisms behind the time-dependent effects of pregnancy on
breast cancer risk.

PMID: 20179293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Apr;95(4):1898-908. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2071. Epub
2010 Feb 19.

Effect of polymorphisms in selected genes involved in pituitary-testicular
function on reproductive hormones and phenotype in aging men.

Huhtaniemi IT(1), Pye SR, Holliday KL, Thomson W, O'Neill TW, Platt H, Payne D,
John SL, Jiang M, Bartfai G, Boonen S, Casanueva FF, Finn JD, Forti G, Giwercman 
A, Han TS, Kula K, Lean ME, Pendleton N, Punab M, Silman AJ, Vanderschueren D,
Labrie F, Wu FC; European Male Aging Study Group.

Collaborators: Forti G, Petrone L, Corona G, Vanderschueren D, Boonen S, Borghs
H, Kula K, Slowikowska-Hilczer J, Walczak-Jedrzejowska R, Huhtaniemi I, Giwercman
A, Wu F, Silman A, O'Neill T, Finn J, Steer P, Tajar A, Lee D, Pye S, Casanueva
F, Lage M, Bartfai G, Földesi I, Fejes I, Punab M, Korrovitz P, Jiang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus,
Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom. ilpo.huhtaniemi@imperial.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Polymorphisms in genes involved in regulation, biosynthesis, metabolism,
and actions of testicular sex hormones may influence hormone balance and
phenotype of aging men.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the relationships between polymorphisms in genes
related to pituitary-testicular endocrine function and health status.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Using cross-sectional baseline data, we conducted a
multinational prospective cohort observational study consisting of a population
survey of community-dwelling men.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 2748 men, aged 40-79 (mean +/- sd, 60.2 + 11.2) yr, were
randomly recruited from eight European centers. Forty-three polymorphisms were
genotyped in the following genes: androgen receptor (AR), estrogen receptor-alpha
and -beta (ESR1 and ESR2), steroid 5alpha-reductase type II (SRD5A2),
17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1), aromatase (CYP19A1), sex
hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), LH beta-subunit (LHB), and LH receptor (LHCGR).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We measured the associations between gene polymorphisms
and endocrine, metabolic, and phenotypic parameters related to aging and sex
hormone action.
RESULTS: Several polymorphisms in SHBG, ESR2, AR, CYP19A1, and LHB were
significantly associated with circulating levels of SHBG, LH, total, free, and
bioavailable testosterone and estradiol, the LH x testosterone product, and
indices of insulin sensitivity. Apart from several previously reported
associations between genes affecting estrogen levels and heel ultrasound
parameters, no associations existed between polymorphisms and nonhormonal
variables (anthropometry, blood lipids, blood pressure, hemoglobin, prostate
symptoms, prostate-specific antigen, sexual dysfunction, cognition).
CONCLUSION: In aging men, polymorphisms in genes related to the
pituitary-testicular endocrine function significantly influence circulating LH,
testosterone, and estradiol levels, but the downstream effects may be too small
to influence secondary phenotypic parameters.

PMID: 20173016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Carcinogenesis. 2010 May;31(5):842-6. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq038. Epub 2010 Feb
19.

Polymorphisms of estrogen receptors and risk of biliary tract cancers and
gallstones: a population-based study in Shanghai, China.

Park SK(1), Andreotti G, Rashid A, Chen J, Rosenberg PS, Yu K, Olsen J, Gao YT,
Deng J, Sakoda LC, Zhang M, Shen MC, Wang BS, Han TQ, Zhang BH, Yeager M, Chanock
SJ, Hsing AW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
National Institute of Health, EPS-MSC 7234, 6120 Executive Boulevard, Bethesda,
MD 20892-7234, USA.

Biliary tract cancer encompasses tumors of the gallbladder, bile duct and ampulla
of Vater. Gallbladder cancer is more common in women, whereas bile duct cancer is
more common in men, suggesting that sex hormones may play a role in the etiology 
of these cancers. The intracellular action of estrogens is regulated by the
estrogen receptor (ESR); thus, we examined the role of common genetic variants in
ESR genes on the risk of biliary tract cancers and stones in a population-based
case-control study in Shanghai, China (411 cancer cases, 895 stone cases and 786 
controls). We genotyped six single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), four in ESR1 
(rs2234693, rs3841686, rs2228480 and rs1801132) and two in ESR2 (rs1256049 and
rs4986938). In all participants, the ESR1 rs1801132 (P325P) G allele was
associated with excess risks of bile duct [odds ratio (OR) = 1.7, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) 1.1-2.8] and ampulla of Vater cancers (OR = 2.1, 95% CI 0.9-4.9)
compared with the CC genotype. The association with bile duct cancer was apparent
among men (OR = 2.8, 95% CI 1.4-5.7) but not among women (P-heterogeneity =
0.01). Also, the ESR2 rs4986938 (38 bp 3' of STP) GG genotype was associated with
a higher risk of bile duct cancer (OR = 3.3, 95% CI 1.3-8.7) compared with the AA
genotype, although this estimate was based on a small number of subjects. None of
the other SNPs examined was associated with biliary tract cancers or stones.
False discovery rate-adjusted P-values were not significant (P > 0.1). No
association was found for ESR1 haplotype based on four SNPs. These preliminary
results suggest that variants in ESR genes could play a role in the etiology of
biliary tract cancers, especially bile duct cancer in men.

PMCID: PMC2864412
PMID: 20172949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Cancer Causes Control. 2010 Jun;21(6):897-908. doi: 10.1007/s10552-010-9518-5.
Epub 2010 Feb 11.

Genetic variation in sex-steroid receptors and synthesizing enzymes and
colorectal cancer risk in women.

Lin J(1), Zee RY, Liu KY, Zhang SM, Lee IM, Manson JE, Giovannucci E, Buring JE, 
Cook NR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. jhlin@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVES: Several lines of evidence have suggested that female hormones may
lower the risk for developing colorectal cancer. However, the mechanisms by which
sex hormones affect colorectal cancer development remain unknown. We sought to
determine whether the association may be under genetic control by evaluating
genetic variation in estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2), progesterone receptor
(PGR), aromatase cytochrome 450 enzyme (CYP19A1), and 17 beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 2 gene (HSD17B2).
METHODS: We included 158 incident cases of colorectal cancer and 563 randomly
chosen control subjects from 28,345 women in the Women's Health Study aged 45 or 
older who provided blood samples and had no history of cancer or cardiovascular
disease at baseline in 1993. All cases and controls were Caucasians of European
descent. A total of 63 tagging and putative functional SNPs in the 5 genes were
included for analysis. Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate
odds ratio (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: There was no association between variation in ESR1, ESR2, PGR, CYP19A1
and HSD17B2 and colorectal cancer risk after correction for multiple comparisons 
(p values after correction > or =0.25). There was also no association with any of
the haplotypes examined (p > or = 0.15) and no evidence of joint effects of
variants in the 5 genes (p > or = 0.51).
CONCLUSION: Our data offer insufficient support for an association between
variation in ESR1, ESR2, PGR, CYP19A1, and HSD17B2 and risk for developing
colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2873149
PMID: 20148360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2009 Nov;53(8):923-33.

Estrogen receptors and function in the male reproductive system.

Lazari MF(1), Lucas TF, Yasuhara F, Gomes GR, Siu ER, Royer C, Fernandes SA,
Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Setor de Endocrinologia Experimental, Departamento de Farmacologia, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

A substantial advance in our understanding on the estrogen signaling occurred in 
the last decade. Estrogens interact with two receptors, ESR1 and ESR2, also known
as ERalpha and ERbeta, respectively. ESR1 and ESR2 belong to the nuclear receptor
family of transcription factors. In addition to the well established
transcriptional effects, estrogens can mediate rapid signaling, triggered within 
seconds or minutes. These rapid effects can be mediated by ESRs or the G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor GPER, also known as GPR30. The effects of
estrogen on cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis are often mediated 
by growth factors. The understanding of the cross-talk between androgen, estrogen
and growth factors signaling pathways is therefore essential to understand the
physiopathological mechanisms of estrogen action. In this review we focused on
recent discoveries about the nature of the estrogen receptors, and on the
signaling and function of estrogen in the male reproductive system.

PMID: 20126844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Hum Genet. 2010 Mar;127(3):249-85. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0773-z. Epub 2009 Dec 
12.

Genetics of osteoporosis: accelerating pace in gene identification and
validation.

Li WF(1), Hou SX, Yu B, Li MM, Férec C, Chen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The First Affiliated Hospital, General Hospital of
the People's Liberation Army, 100037 Beijing, China.

Osteoporosis is characterized by low bone mineral density and structural
deterioration of bone tissue, leading to an increased risk of fractures. It is
the most common metabolic bone disorder worldwide, affecting one in three women
and one in eight men over the age of 50. In the past 15 years, a large number of 
genes have been reported as being associated with osteoporosis. However, only in 
the past 4 years we have witnessed an accelerated pace in identifying and
validating osteoporosis susceptibility loci. This increase in pace is mostly due 
to large-scale association studies, meta-analyses, and genome-wide association
studies of both single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variations. A
comprehensive review of these developments revealed that, to date, at least 15
genes (VDR, ESR1, ESR2, LRP5, LRP4, SOST, GRP177, OPG, RANK, RANKL, COLIA1, SPP1,
ITGA1, SP7, and SOX6) can be reasonably assigned as confirmed osteoporosis
susceptibility genes, whereas, another >30 genes are promising candidate genes.
Notably, confirmed and promising genes are clustered in three biological
pathways, the estrogen endocrine pathway, the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway,
and the RANKL/RANK/OPG pathway. New biological pathways will certainly emerge
when more osteoporosis genes are identified and validated. These genetic findings
may provide new routes toward improved therapeutic and preventive interventions
of this complex disease.

PMID: 20101412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biol Reprod. 2010 May;82(5):815-24. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.082065. Epub 2010
Jan 14.

Endocrine characterization of the reproductive axis in highly prolific lacaune
sheep homozygous for the FecLL mutation.

Drouilhet L(1), Taragnat C, Fontaine J, Duittoz A, Mulsant P, Bodin L, Fabre S.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 444 INRA-ENVT, Laboratoire de Génétique Cellulaire, Castanet-Tolosan,
France.

A prolific allele named FecL(L) is known to segregate in the meat breed of the
French Lacaune sheep on the basis of ovulation rate record. To gain more
knowledge about the physiological effects of FecL(L), ewes homozygous for FecL(L)
(L/L) were compared to wild-type ewes (+/+) for ovarian phenotype and
reproductive endocrine profiles. At the ovarian level, the increased ovulation
rate in L/L ewes was associated with an increased number of antral follicles of
greater than 3 mm and with preovulatory follicles being, on average, 1 mm
smaller. Intrafollicular estradiol and testosterone concentrations were not
significantly different between the two genotypes. In contrast, L/L large
follicles (>or=6 mm) had lower intrafollicular progesterone concentration. At the
molecular level, expressions of ovarian markers, such as CYP19A1, CYP11A1,
CYP17A1, LHR, and INHA, were not significantly different between the two
genotypes. In contrast, FSHR and STAR mRNA levels increased in granulosa cells
from L/L ewes. Plasma concentrations of estradiol, luteinizing hormone (LH),
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and progesterone measured across a
synchronized estrous cycle revealed a significant increase in estradiol levels
during the follicular phase, a precocious LH surge, and an increase in
progesterone level during the luteal phase of L/L ewes compared to +/+ ewes.
Circulating concentrations of FSH were not different between the two genotypes.
The precocious LH surge was associated with an increase in frequency of LH
pulsatility during the follicular phase. At the pituitary level, mRNA levels for 
LHB, FSHB, GNRHR, and ESR1 were not significantly different between the two
genotypes. In contrast, ESR2 mRNA expression was decreased in L/L ewes compared
to +/+ ewes. Based on ovarian phenotype and endocrine profiles, these findings
suggest that the mutation in the FecL gene affects ovarian function in a
different way compared to other known prolific mutations affecting the bone
morphogenetic protein signaling system in the ovine species.

PMID: 20075395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Jun;31(6):1060-7. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq009. Epub 2010 Jan 
11.

Hormone therapy, DNA methylation and colon cancer.

Wu AH(1), Siegmund KD, Long TI, Cozen W, Wan P, Tseng CC, Shibata D, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1441 Eastlake Avenue, Los Angeles, CA, USA. annawu@usc.edu

Observational epidemiological studies and randomized trials have reported a
protective effect of estrogen and progestin therapy (EPT) on the risk of
colorectal cancer but the findings on estrogen-alone therapy (ET) are less
consistent. The mechanism by which menopausal hormones influence risk of
colorectal cancer has not been well studied. To further investigate the
relationship between menopausal hormones and risk of colon cancer, we conducted a
population-based case-control study in Los Angeles County involving 831 women
with newly diagnosed colon cancer and 755 population-based control women. Risk of
colon cancer decreased significantly with increasing duration of current use of
ET and EPT; the adjusted relative risk was 0.83 [95% confidence interval (95% CI)
= 0.76-0.99)] per 5 years of ET use and 0.88 (95% CI = 0.78-0.99) per 5 years of 
EPT use. Risk of colon cancer was unrelated to past ET or EPT use. We explored if
current use of menopausal hormones is associated with DNA methylation of estrogen
receptor (ESR1 and ESR2), progesterone receptor and other genes in the colonic
tissues of a subset of colon cancer patients (n = 280) we interviewed. Our
results suggest that current menopausal hormone users compared with non-current
users displayed increased DNA methylation of progesterone receptor in the
'normal' colonic tissues (P = 0.055) and increased DNA methylation of ESR1 in the
'tumorous' colonic tissues (P = 0.056). These findings on DNA methylation and
hormone therapy use need confirmation in larger studies.

PMCID: PMC2878358
PMID: 20064828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2010 Mar;30(3):171-88. doi: 10.1089/jir.2009.0037.

Identification of cellular genes induced in human cells after activation of the
OAS/RNaseL pathway by vaccinia virus recombinants expressing these antiviral
enzymes.

Domingo-Gil E(1), González JM, Esteban M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, CSIC, Ciudad Universitaria Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain.

Interferon (IFN) type I induces the expression of antiviral proteins such as
2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetases (OAS). The enzyme OAS is activated by dsRNA to
produce 5'-phosphorylated, 2-5-linked oligoadenylates (2-5A) that activate RNaseL
which, in turn, triggers RNA breakdown, leading to multiple biological functions.
Although RNaseL is required for IFN antiviral function, there are many aspects of
the molecular mechanisms that remain obscure. Here, we have used microarray
analyses from human HeLa cells infected with vaccinia virus (VACV) recombinants
expressing OAS-RNaseL enzymes (referred as 2-5A system) with the aim to identify 
host genes that are up- or down-regulated in the course of infection by the
activation of this antiviral pathway. We found that activation of the 2-5A system
from VACV recombinants produces a remarkable stimulation of transcription for
genes that regulate many cellular processes, like those that promote cell growth 
arrest, GADD45B and KCTD11, apoptosis as CUL2, PDCD6, and TNFAIP8L2,
IFN-stimulated genes as IFI6, and related to tumor suppression as PLA2G2A. The
2-5A system activation produces down-regulation of transcription of some genes
that promote cell growth as RUNX2 and ESR2 and of genes in charge to maintain
mitochondria homeostasis as MIPEP and COX5A. These results reveal new genes
induced in response to the activation of the 2-5A system with roles in apoptosis,
translational control, cell growth arrest, and tumor suppression.

PMID: 20038200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Reproduction. 2010 Mar;139(3):599-611. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0305. Epub 2009 Dec
22.

Ontogeny of the oestrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 during gonadal development in
the tammar wallaby, Macropus eugenii.

Calatayud NE(1), Pask AJ, Shaw G, Richings NM, Osborn S, Renfree MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, 
Australia. nec@unimelb.edu.au

Oestrogen has wide ranging effects in development mediated mainly via the two
oestrogen receptors, alpha (ESR1, also known as ERalpha) and beta (ESR2, also
known as ERbeta). Oestrogen is the key factor that directs the indifferent gonad 
to become an ovary in many non-mammalian vertebrates. Oestrogen is not required
for early ovarian differentiation in mammals but can disrupt normal testicular
development in eutherians. Surprisingly, exogenous oestrogen can cause sex
reversal of an XY gonad in two marsupials, the North American opossum and the
tammar wallaby. To understand the mechanism by which oestrogen induces sex
reversal, we characterised the genes for ESR1 and ESR2 and examined their
expression during gonadal differentiation in the tammar wallaby, Macropus
eugenii. Both receptors were expressed in the somatic cells and germ cells of the
indifferent gonad in both XX and XY foetuses throughout all stages of
development, and persisted in these cells into adulthood. ERs were also present
in many other tissues including kidney, pituitary and mammary gland. ER mRNA was 
not significantly altered by exogenous oestrogen in cultured XY gonads but the
receptors translocated to the nucleus in its presence. These findings confirm
that there is conserved expression of the ERs in the indifferent gonad despite
the lack of available ligand during early gonadal development. The receptors can 
respond to exogenous estrogen at this early stage and are capable of transducing 
signals in the early mammalian gonad. However, the selective forces that
maintained conserved ER expression in this tissue remain unknown.

PMID: 20028801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Endocrinol. 2010 Apr;205(1):15-23. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0379. Epub 2009 Dec 17.

The importance of ERbeta signalling in the ovary.

Drummond AE(1), Fuller PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Victoria, Australia.
ann.drummond@princehenrys.org

This review examines the evidence for a central role of oestrogen receptor beta
(ERbeta or ESR2 as listed in the MGI Database) in folliculogenesis and hence
reproductive biology. Knockout mouse models have been a valuable resource in this
respect. The ERbeta-null mouse exhibits a granulosa cell phenotype associated
with the partial arrest of folliculogenesis and ovulatory dysfunction.
Phyto-oestrogens such as genistein, which preferentially activate ERbeta, have
been shown to alleviate the ovarian phenotype of the oestrogen-depleted aromatase
knockout mouse. In normal adult mice, genistein has been shown to cause
reproductive defectives following neonatal administration. Studies of ovarian
cancer have also informed the literature. A decline in ERbeta levels in
epithelial ovarian cancers has been hypothesised to be associated with severity
of disease and prognosis. Whereas the abundant expression of ERbeta in granulosa 
cell tumours (GCT) of the ovary and evidence that ERbeta signalling is
transrepressed by the nuclear factor-kappaB pathway in GCT cell lines suggest a
pathogenetic role for ERbeta in GCT. In recent years, studies into the impact of 
environmental oestrogens (either in the form of pesticides or plastics) on
reproductive function have shown that ERbeta-selective toxins cause reproductive 
dysfunction and impair fertility. It remains to be established as to what genes
are regulated by ERbeta in the ovary. Finally, ERbeta has been shown to be
regulated by gonadotrophins, the pituitary hormones mediating ovarian function.

PMID: 20019181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Open Endocrinol J. 2009;3:5-11.

Do Genetic Alterations in Sex Steroid Receptors Contribute to Lacrimal Gland
Disease in Sjögren's Syndrome?

Richards SM(1), Sullivan DA.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Defects in sex steroid receptors have been linked to the onset,
progression and severity, as well as the sex-related prevalence, of a variety of 
autoimmune disorders, including lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis
and diabetes. We hypothesize that defects in estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1),
estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) and/or the androgen receptor (AR) may also
contribute to the development of lacrimal gland autoimmune sequelae in Sjögren's 
syndrome. To begin to test this hypothesis, we examined whether mutations exist
in the coding regions of ESR1, ESR2 and AR transcripts in lacrimal tissues of
mouse models of Sjögren's syndrome. METHODS: Lacrimal and submandibular glands
were collected from adult MRL/MpJ-Tnfrsf6(lpr), nonobese diabetic and/or BALB/c
mice. Tissues were pooled according to sex and experiment and processed for cDNA 
generation. PCR primers were designed to amplify 566-875 base pair segments of
the entire open reading frame of each receptor. Segments were amplified, purified
and then sequenced. Receptor sequences were assembled and compared to each other 
and to known NCBI sequences. RESULTS: Our results show that almost all ESR1, ESR2
and AR sequences in exocrine tissues of male and female autoimmune and
non-autoimmune mice were identical to those of NCBI standards. There was a G-->A 
shift at position 998 of the ESR2 complete coding sequence in all tissue samples 
when compared to NCBI reference sequence U81451.1, but this polymorphism was not 
found in other ESR2 reference sequences. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that 
defects in the coding region of sex steroid receptors do not contribute to the
pathogenesis of lacrimal gland disease in mouse models of Sjögren's syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2789469
PMID: 19997529  [PubMed]


366. Br J Cancer. 2010 Jan 19;102(2):294-300. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605460. Epub 2009
Dec 1.

Lack of association between oestrogen receptor polymorphisms and change in bone
mineral density with tamoxifen therapy.

Henry NL(1), Nguyen A, Azzouz F, Li L, Robarge J, Philips S, Cao D, Skaar TC, Rae
JM, Storniolo AM, Flockhart DA, Hayes DF, Stearns V.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Oncology Program, University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. norahh@med.umich.edu

BACKGROUND: Tamoxifen, a selective oestrogen receptor (ER) modulator, increases
bone mineral density (BMD) in postmenopausal women and decreases BMD in
premenopausal women. We hypothesised that inherited variants in candidate genes
involved in oestrogen signalling and tamoxifen metabolism might be associated
with tamoxifen effects in bone.
METHODS: A total of 297 women who were initiating tamoxifen therapy were enrolled
in a prospective multicentre clinical trial. Lumbar spine and total hip BMD
values were measured using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) at baseline and
after 12 months of tamoxifen therapy. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
ESR1, ESR2, and CYP2D6 were tested for associations in the context of menopausal 
status and previous chemotherapy, with a mean percentage change in BMD over 12
months.
RESULTS: The percentage increase in BMD was greater in postmenopausal women and
in those patients who had been treated with chemotherapy. No significant
associations between tested SNPs and either baseline BMD or change in BMD with 1 
year of tamoxifen therapy were detected.
CONCLUSION: The evaluated SNPs in ESR and CYP2D6 do not seem to influence BMD in 
tamoxifen-treated subjects.

PMCID: PMC2816645
PMID: 19953095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Circulation. 2009 Dec 15;120(24):2448-54. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.865501.

Integrative predictive model of coronary artery calcification in atherosclerosis.

McGeachie M(1), Ramoni RL, Mychaleckyj JC, Furie KL, Dreyfuss JM, Liu Y,
Herrington D, Guo X, Lima JA, Post W, Rotter JI, Rich S, Sale M, Ramoni MF.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Partners Center for Genetics and Genomics, Harvard Medical School, 77 
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Many different genetic and clinical factors have been identified as
causes or contributors to atherosclerosis. We present a model of preclinical
atherosclerosis based on genetic and clinical data that predicts the presence of 
coronary artery calcification in healthy Americans of European descent 45 to 84
years of age in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We assessed 712 individuals for the presence or absence of
coronary artery calcification and assessed their genotypes for 2882
single-nucleotide polymorphisms. With the use of these single-nucleotide
polymorphisms and relevant clinical data, a Bayesian network that predicts the
presence of coronary calcification was constructed. The model contained 13
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (from genes AGTR1, ALOX15, INSR, PRKAB1, IL1R2,
ESR2, KCNK1, FBLN5, PPARA, VEGFA, PON1, TDRD6, PLA2G7, and 1 ancestry informative
marker) and 5 clinical variables (sex, age, weight, smoking, and diabetes
mellitus) and achieved 85% predictive accuracy, as measured by area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve. This is a significant (P<0.001)
improvement on models that use just the single-nucleotide polymorphism data or
just the clinical variables.
CONCLUSIONS: We present an investigation of joint genetic and clinical factors
associated with atherosclerosis that shows predictive results for both cases, as 
well as enhanced performance for their combination.

PMCID: PMC2810344
PMID: 19948975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov 30;7:139. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-139.

Mating changes the subcellular distribution and the functionality of estrogen
receptors in the rat oviduct.

Orihuela PA(1), Zuñiga LM, Rios M, Parada-Bustamante A, Sierralta WD, Velásquez
LA, Croxatto HB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunología de la Reproducción, Facultad de Química y Biología,
Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile. pedro.orihuela@usach.cl

BACKGROUND: Mating changes the mode of action of 17beta-estradiol (E2) to
accelerate oviductal egg transport from a nongenomic to a genomic mode, although 
in both pathways estrogen receptors (ER) are required. This change was designated
as intracellular path shifting (IPS).
METHODS: Herein, we examined the subcellular distribution of ESR1 and ESR2
(formerly known as ER-alpha and ER-beta) in oviductal epithelial cells of rats on
day 1 of cycle (C1) or pregnancy (P1) using immunoelectron microscopy for ESR1
and ESR2. The effect of mating on intraoviductal ESR1 or ESR2 signaling was then 
explored comparing the expression of E2-target genes c-fos, brain creatine kinase
(Ckb) and calbindin 9 kDa (s100g) in rats on C1 or P1 treated with selective
agonists for ESR1 (PPT) or ESR2 (DPN). The effect of ER agonists on egg transport
was also evaluated on C1 or P1 rats.
RESULTS: Receptor immunoreactivity was associated with the nucleus, cytoplasm and
plasma membrane of the epithelial cells. Mating affected the subcellular
distribution of both receptors as well as the response to E2. In C1 and P1 rats, 
PPT increased Ckb while both agonists increased c-fos. DPN increased Ckb and
s100g only in C1 and P1 rats, respectively. PPT accelerated egg transport in both
groups and DPN accelerated egg transport only in C1 rats.
CONCLUSION: Estrogen receptors present a subcellular distribution compatible with
E2 genomic and nongenomic signaling in the oviductal epithelial cells of C1 and
P1 although IPS occurs independently of changes in the distribution of ESR1 and
ESR2 in the oviductal epithelial cells. Mating affected intraoviductal
ER-signaling and induced loss of functional involvement of ESR2 on E2-induced
accelerated egg transport. These findings reveal a profound influence on the ER
signaling pathways exerted by mating in the oviduct.

PMCID: PMC2789086
PMID: 19948032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2009 Nov;117(10):610-5.

Estrogen receptor beta gene variants may be associated with more favorable
metabolic profile in postmenopausal women undergoing coronary angiography.

Saltiki K(1), Mantzou E, Doukas C, Kanakakis I, Zotos P, Lazaros L, Georgiou I,
Alevizaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department Medical Therapeutics, ALEXANDRA Hospital, Athens University School 
of Medicine, Greece. saze@otenet.gr

AIM: Estrogen action is exerted on the vasculature through estrogen receptors ER 
alpha and ER beta. We have previously reported significant association of ER
alpha gene (ESR1) variants with more severe coronary artery disease (CAD) in
postmenopausal women. The influence of ER beta gene (ESR2) variants on the
cardiovascular system is not well established. We investigated the association of
common ESR2 variants with risk factors for cardiovascular disease and with the
severity of CAD in postmenopausal women.
METHODS: ESR2 polymorphisms Alu I (1730 G > A) and Rsa I (1082 G > A) were
studied in 174 postmenopausal women undergoing coronary angiography (age 45 - 88 
yrs). The severity of CAD (0 - 3 vessels with > 50 % stenosis), indices of
obesity and other predisposing risk factors for cardiovascular disease,
biochemical and hormonal parameters were recorded.
RESULTS: 75 women had 0, 39 had one, 37 had two and 23 had three vessels with
severe stenosis in the coronary angiography. There was no association between Alu
I (allele frequency = 40.2 %) and Rsa I (allele frequency = 2.6 %) variants and
CAD severity. Carriers of Alu I had lower BMI (p = 0.044), lower waist perimeter 
(p = 0.029) and lower total cholesterol (p = 0.033) and LDL levels (p = 0.029).
There was no association between Rsa I polymorphism and any metabolic risk
factors.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR2 Alu I polymorphism may have a favorable influence on risk
factors for cardiovascular disease such as obesity indices and cholesterol
levels. It does not appear to be associated with the severity of CAD in women.

PMID: 19938352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Menopause Int. 2009 Dec;15(4):150-6. doi: 10.1258/mi.2009.009043.

Multigenic combination of estrogen-related genes is associated with age at
natural menopause in a Spanish population.

Mendoza N(1), Sánchez-Borrego R, Galiano D, Salamanca A, Mozas J, Quereda F,
Vázquez F, Martínez-Astorquiza T, Moron F.

Author information: 
(1)Clínica MAR&Gen, Granada, Spain. nmendozal@sego.es

OBJECTIVE: Age at natural menopause (ANM) can be considered a complex parameter
that depends on the interaction of multiple factors. In the present study, the
role of interaction between genetic variants within estrogen synthesis and
signalling pathways in the ANM in Spanish women is studied.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located at
different candidate genes related to the estrogen signalling pathway were
analysed in 1980 Spanish postmenopausal women.
RESULTS: Independently, none of the nine markers were significantly associated
with early ANM. Only heterozygosis at the NRIP rs2229741 locus could be
associated with early menopause; however, this marker does not maintain
statistical significance. In contrast, linear regression analysis suggests
several epistatic interactions including these markers in relation to ANM,
especially between ESR2, NRIP1 and BMP15. The genetic variant that appears most
in these interactions is that of the BMP15 rs3897937. It was observed that AA-TC 
combined genotype for NRIP-BMP15 (rs3897937), respectively, appears to be
associated with a lower ANM than other possible combinations of these SNP
(46.1+/-5.9 versus 50.4+/-3.3; P = 0.002). In the multilocus analysis, the
multigenic interaction formed by ESR2 (AA), BMP15 rs3897937 (TC) and NRIP1 (AA)
has the lower ANM (45.37+/-6.8 versus 48.69+/-5; P = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that epistatic interactions of estrogen-related 
alleles may contribute to variance in ANM in Spanish women. Moreover, BMP15 and
NRIP1 also appear as attractive candidate genes for premature menopause but
require further investigation to confirm them.

PMID: 19933466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Brain Res Rev. 2010 Mar;62(2):147-64. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2009.10.007.
Epub 2009 Nov 18.

Molecular mechanisms underlying anorexia nervosa: focus on human gene association
studies and systems controlling food intake.

Rask-Andersen M(1), Olszewski PK, Levine AS, Schiöth HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Functional Pharmacology, Uppsala University, BMC, 
Box 593, 75124 Uppsala, Sweden.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a complex multi-factorial disease with high
heritability. The psychological AN symptoms are poorly connected with specific
molecular mechanisms. Here we review the molecular basis of AN with the focus on 
human genetic association studies; we put these in the experimental biological
context with emphasis on molecular systems controlling food intake and body
weight in a direct or indirect manner. We systematically searched for human
genetic studies related to AN and grouped data into main categories/systems
reflecting their major known roles: (1) Systems related to mental disorders
(serotonin, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), norepinephrine (NE),
glutamate (NMDA) receptor and SK3 channel, KCCN3). (2) Hunger regulatory systems 
(leptin, AGRP, MSH, melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), NPY, ghrelin, cholecystokinin
(CCK). (3) Feeding motivation- and reward-related systems (opioids, OPRD1,
cannabinoids (anandamide (AEA), THC, CBR1), dopamine, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4,
catecholamine-O-methyl transferase (COMT). (4) Systems regulating energy
metabolism (uncoupling proteins 2 and 3 (UCP2 and UCP3). (5) Neuroendocrine
systems with emphasis on sex hormones (estrogen receptor-beta (ESR2). (6) The
immune system and inflammatory response (tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha)). Overall, we found that in total 175 association studies have been
performed on AN cohorts on 128 different polymorphisms related to 43 genes. We
review the strongest associations, identify some genes that have an important
role in regulating BMI whose possible relationship to AN has not been
investigated and discuss the potential targets for pharmacological interventions.

PMID: 19931559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Hum Genet. 2010 Jan;55(1):50-4. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.122. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Association between ESR1 and ESR2 gene polymorphisms and hyperlipidemia in
Chinese Han postmenopausal women.

Zhao T(1), Zhang D, Liu Y, Zhou D, Chen Z, Yang Y, Li S, Yu L, Zhang Z, Feng G,
He L, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 294 Taiyuan Road, Shanghai, PR China.

Estrogen was considered to be an important protective factor for cardiovascular
diseases in women. Genetic association studies suggested that variations of
ESR1and ESR2 genes might have a potential role in lipid profile. Our study aimed 
to investigate the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of ESR1 
and ESR2 with hyperlipidemia in Chinese Han postmenopausal women. A total of 443 
postmenopausal women aged between 55 and 71 years were recruited from Shanghai,
China for a case-control study (154 women with hyperlipidemia and 289 controls). 
We measured plasma estradiol concentration, glucose and lipid profile levels,
evaluated their lifestyle and sequenced four SNPs, namely PvuII (rs2234693) and
XbaI (rs9340799) of ESR1 and 1082A>G (rs1256049) and 1730A>G (rs4986938) of ESR2.
PvuII (rs2234693) and XbaI (rs9340799) showed significantly different
distributions between cases and controls (P=0.002 and P=0.023, respectively). In 
addition, haplotypes constructed from PvuII-XbaI were also associated with
hyperlipidemia (global P=0.012). Haplotypes T-A (P=0.005, odds ratio (OR) 1.52,
95% confidence interval (95% CI): 1.13-2.05) and C-G (P=0.010, OR 0.62, 95% CI:
0.43-0.89) had susceptible and protective effects, respectively. 1082A>G
(rs1256049) and 1730A>G (rs4986938) showed no statistical association with
hyperlipidemia. In conclusion, our results suggested that ESR1 might have a
potential role in hyperlipidemia risk, independent of age, estradiol level, body 
mass index and lifestyle in Chinese Han postmenopausal women.

PMID: 19927160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Rheumatol. 2009 Dec;36(12):2772-9. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.081208. Epub 2009 Nov 2.

The relationship of estrogen receptor-alpha and -beta genes with osteoarthritis
of the hand.

Wise BL(1), Demissie S, Cupples LA, Felson DT, Yang M, Shearman AM, Aliabadi P,
Hunter DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Framingham Heart Study, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We examined reported associations between radiographic hand
osteoarthritis (OA) and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in 2 candidate
genes associated with OA in other joints: estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta
(ESR2).
METHODS: In 539 Framingham Offspring Study participants (49% men; mean age 61 +/-
9 yrs) joint-specific radiographic hand OA was defined as Kellgren/Lawrence (K/L)
scores >or= 2 in the first carpometacarpal joint (CMC), distal interphalangeal
joints (DIP), first-digit interphalangeal joint (IP), or proximal interphalangeal
joints (PIP). Four SNP were genotyped for ESR1 (PvuII-rs2234693, XbaI-rs9340799, 
rs2077647, and rs1801132) and 4 for ESR2 (rs1256031, rs1256034, rs1256059,
rs944460). Logistic regression analyses were performed to evaluate the
relationships between genotypes and hand OA, adjusting for age, sex, height, and 
weight.
RESULTS: Radiographic hand OA was identified in at least one investigated joint
of DIP (39%), PIP (33%), and first CMC (40%). There was no evidence of
association between OA and genotype at any polymorphism. We found no significant 
association between our OA phenotypes or generalized or severe generalized OA as 
defined by Ushiyama and heterozygosity for rs2234693 and rs9340799, although in
metaanalysis with the former study this heterozygosity remained significantly
associated with generalized or severe generalized OA.
CONCLUSION: We found no significant association between hand OA and the
investigated polymorphisms of ESR1 or ESR2 despite published reports of
association and a priori hypotheses implicating their potential roles. However,
we could not absolutely exclude associations with rs2234693, rs9340799, or
rs944460.

PMCID: PMC3641579
PMID: 19884274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2010 Jan 29;17(1):17-25. doi: 10.1677/ERC-09-0176. Print
2010 Mar.

Association of testicular germ cell tumor with polymorphisms in estrogen receptor
and steroid metabolism genes.

Ferlin A(1), Ganz F, Pengo M, Selice R, Frigo AC, Foresta C.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Clinical Pathology and Centre for Male Gamete Cryopreservation,
Department of Histology, Microbiology and Medical Biotechnologies, University of 
Padova, Via Gabelli 63, 35121 Padova, Italy.

It is generally assumed that the development of testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT)
is under endocrine control. In particular, unbalanced androgen/estrogen levels
and/or activity are believed to represent the key events for TGCT development and
progression. Furthermore, recent evidence has suggested a strong genetic
component for TGCT. In this study, we analyzed whether a genetic variation in
estrogen receptor (ESR) genes and steroid hormone metabolism genes is associated 
with TGCT. We genotyped for 17 polymorphic markers in 11 genes in 234 TGCT cases 
and 218 controls: ESR (ESR1 and ESR2); CYP19A1 (aromatase); 17beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase types 1 and 4 (HSD17B1 and HSD17B4) dehydrogenases that convert
potent androgens and estrogens to weak hormones; cytochrome P450 hydroxylating
enzymes CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1; and the metabolic enzymes COMT, SULT1A1, and 
SULT1E1. We observed a significant association of rs11205 in HSD17B4 with TGCT.
TGCT risk was increased twofold per copy of the minor A allele at this locus
(odds ratios (OR)=2.273, 95% confidence interval (CI)=1.737-2.973). Homozygous
carriage of the minor A allele was associated with an over fourfold increased
risk of TGCT (OR=4.561, 95% CI=2.615-7.955) compared with homozygous carriage of 
the major G allele. The risk was increased both for seminoma (OR=5.327, 95%
CI=2.857-9.931) and for nonseminoma (OR=3.222, 95% CI=1.471-7.059). We found for 
the first time an association of polymorphisms in HSD17B4 gene with TGCT. Our
findings expand the current knowledge on the role of genetic contribution in
testicular cancer susceptibility, and support the hypothesis that variations in
hormone metabolism genes might change the hormonal environment implicated in
testicular carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19776291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):194-201. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.077305. Epub
2009 Sep 16.

Influences of sex, incubation temperature, and environmental quality on gonadal
estrogen and androgen receptor messenger RNA expression in juvenile American
alligators (Alligator mississippiensis).

Moore BC(1), Milnes MR, Kohno S, Katsu Y, Iguchi T, Guillette LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
bmoore2@tulane.edu

Gonadal steroid hormone receptors play a vital role in transforming ligand
signals into gene expression. We have shown previously that gonads from
wild-caught juvenile alligators express greater levels of estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1) than estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2). Furthermore, sexually dimorphic ESR2 mRNA
expression (female > male) observed in animals from the reference site (Lake
Woodruff, FL, USA) was lost in alligators from the contaminated Lake Apopka (FL, 
USA). We postulated that environmental contaminant exposure could influence
gonadal steroid hormone receptor expression. Here, we address questions regarding
gonadal estrogen and androgen receptor (AR) mRNA expression in 1-yr-old,
laboratory-raised alligators. What are relative expression levels within gonads? 
Do these levels vary between sexes or incubation temperatures? Can contaminant
exposure change these levels? We observed a similar pattern of expression (ESR1 >
AR > ESR2) in ovary and testis. However, both incubation temperature and
environment modulated expression. Males incubated at 33.5 degrees C expressed
greater AR levels than females incubated at 30 degrees C; dimorphic expression
was not observed in animals incubated at 32 degrees C. Compared to Lake Woodruff 
alligators, Lake Apopka animals of both sexes showed lesser ESR2 mRNA expression 
levels. Employing cluster analyses, we integrated these receptor expression
patterns with those of steroidogenic factors. Elevated ESR2 and CYP19A1
expressions were diagnostic of alligator ovary, whereas elevated HSD3B1, CYP11A1,
and CYP17A1 expressions were indicative of testis. In contrast, AR, ESR1, and
NR5A1 showed variable expressions that were not entirely associated with sex.
These findings demonstrate that the mRNA expression of receptors required for
steroid hormone signaling are modified by exposure to environmental factors,
including temperature and contaminants.

PMCID: PMC2802122
PMID: 19759368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Anim Sci. 2010 Jan;88(1):1-15. doi: 10.2527/jas.2009-1985. Epub 2009 Sep 11.

Association analyses of candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms on reproductive
traits in swine.

Rempel LA(1), Nonneman DJ, Wise TH, Erkens T, Peelman LJ, Rohrer GA.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, US Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, NE 68933-0166, USA.

The ability to identify young females with superior reproduction would have a
large economic impact on commercial swine production. Previous studies have
discovered SNP associated with economically important traits such as litter size,
growth rate, and feed intake. The objective of this study was to test for
association of candidate SNP with sow prolificacy reproductive traits in gilts of
a Landrace-Duroc-Yorkshire composite population. Association analyses regressed
additive (A), dominant (D), and imprinting (I) SNP effects on each trait with an 
animal model. A carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A SNP and a glycogen synthase 1
SNP were associated with age at puberty (AP; D = 10 d; P = 0. 0037 and A = 3.8 d;
P = 0.0078, respectively). Four IGF2 SNP were associated with AP as well, having 
additive or dominant effects (3.2 to 5.8 d; P < or = 0.0052). Two mannosidase 2B2
SNP and 2 prolactin receptor (PRLR) SNP were also associated with AP. Solute
carrier 22, subfamily member 5 SNP was weakly associated with AP (D = 3.9 d; P < 
0.10). Polymorphisms within glycogen synthase 1 and protein kinase AMP-activated,
gamma 3 noncatalytic subunit had associations with ovulation rate. Estrogen
receptor (ESR) 1, ESR2, PPAR gamma coactivator 1, and IGFBP3 SNP were
significantly associated with weaning-to-estrus interval. Two PRLR SNP were
associated with total number of piglets born (A = 0.57 piglets; P = 0.0095 and D 
= 0.61 piglets; P = 0.0016, respectively). A SNP within PRLR was also associated 
with number of piglets born alive (D = 0.61; P = 0.0016). The PPAR gamma
coactivator 1 SNP was associated with total number of piglets born (D = 0.38
piglets; P = 0.0391) and number of piglets born alive (D = 0.53 piglets; P =
0.0032). The SNP within ESR1 (A = 0.65 piglets; P = 0.0950), ESR2 (A = -0.33
piglets; P = 0.0176), IGF2 SNP (A = -0.26 piglets; P = 0.0032), and IGFBP3 SNP (D
= 0.35 piglets; P = 0.0683) were associated with number of piglets born dead. A
leptin SNP was associated with mummified fetuses (D = 0.09 piglets; P = 0.0978). 
Many of the SNP analyzed in this study are from genes involved in regulation of
metabolism, suggesting that there is an important link between physiological
events associated with reproduction and energy utilization. Furthermore, these
production and growth trait SNP may serve to assist in selection of young females
for superior reproductive performance.

PMID: 19749016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jun 15;126(12):2935-46. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24892.

Polymorphisms in genes of the steroid receptor superfamily modify postmenopausal 
breast cancer risk associated with menopausal hormone therapy.

MARIE-GENICA Consortium on Genetic Susceptibility for Menopausal Hormone Therapy 
Related Breast Cancer Risk.

Collaborators: Abbas S, Beckmann L, Chang-Claude J, Hein R, Kropp S, Parthimos M,
Dünnebier T, Hamann U, Brors B, Eils R, Zapatka M, Brauch H, Justenhoven C,
Flesch-Janys D, Braendle W, Brüning T, Pesch B, Spickenheuer A, Baisch C, Ko YD, 
Dahmen N.

Menopausal hormone therapy (HT) is associated with increased breast cancer risk
among postmenopausal women. Nuclear receptors are involved in steroid hormone-
and xenobiotic-mediated signal transduction playing a crucial role in regulating 
gene expression. Therefore, variations within these genes may influence
HT-associated breast cancer risk. We investigated 3,149 postmenopausal breast
cancer patients and 5,489 controls from 2 German population-based case-control
studies. Thirty-three polymorphisms selected on the basis of known or putative
functional relevance located in ESR1, ESR2, PGR, PXR and AR were genotyped.
Conditional logistic regression was used to assess multiplicative statistical
interaction between polymorphisms and duration of estrogen-progestagen therapy
and of estrogen monotherapy with regard to breast cancer risk assuming
log-additive and codominant modes of inheritance. We observed an increased risk
for women carrying short AR_(CAG) alleles of <22 repeats associated with combined
estrogen-progestagen therapy compared with those with long alleles (> or =22
repeats) (p(interaction) = 0.03). Additionally, risk associated with combination 
therapy use was significantly modified by 2 PXR polymorphisms with reduction of
risk effects in carriers of the minor PXR_rs6785049_G and PXR_rs1054191_A alleles
(p(interaction) = 0.04 and 0.05, respectively). Variants in both ESR1 and ESR2
modified risk associated with estrogen monotherapy use. Higher risk were observed
in homozygotes for the major ESR1_rs910416_T allele (p(interaction) < 0.01) and
in homozygotes for the minor ESR2_rs1271572_T, major ESR2_rs4986938_G and minor
ESR2_rs928554_G alleles (p(interaction) = 0.02, 0.05, 0.02, respectively). Risk
effect modification by ESR1_rs910416 and AR_(CAG)n polymorphisms remained
significant after correction for multiple testing. We conclude that genetic
variants in nuclear receptor genes may modify HT-associated postmenopausal breast
cancer risk.

PMID: 19739075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. DNA Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;28(12):633-6. doi: 10.1089/dna.2009.0917.

No association between estrogen receptor beta polymorphisms and uterine
leiomyoma.

Zhai XD(1), Ye Y, Yang Y, Wang Z, Mo YN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Forensic Medicine, Hennan University of Science and Technology,
Luoyang 471003, Henan, China.

Numerous candidate genes have been proposed as susceptibility factors for the
development of uterine leiomyoma. Interaction of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1)
and estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) plays a pivotal role in tunica muscularis uteri
cell proliferation, differentiation, and tumorigenesis of myometrium. To our
knowledge, no study has examined the relationship between the ESR2 and uterine
leiomyoma. The aim of the study was to evaluate the association of ESR2
polymorphisms with uterine leiomyoma in Chinese women. We investigated two common
ESR2 polymorphisms, rs1256049 (G1082A) and rs928554 (Cx + 56 A --> G), to find
their association with uterine leiomyoma risk by polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism and DNA sequencing method. A
total of 150 Chinese women with clinically diagnosed uterine leiomyoma and 150
healthy, normal Chinese women were included in the study. The results suggest
that there were no significant differences in the genotype and allele frequencies
of ESR2 polymorphisms between uterine leiomyoma patients and controls in Chinese 
women (p > 0.05). Further studies are still needed to explore the complicated
interaction between environmental factors and ESR2 polymorphisms in the risk of
uterine leiomyoma, particularly in ethnically different populations.

PMID: 19715484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Med Rep. 2009 Sep-Oct;2(5):831-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000180.

Estrogen in combination with 5-azacitidine up-regulates p75NTR expression and
induces apoptosis in 22Rv1 prostate cancer cells.

Yu JD(1), Yang K, Mao QQ, Kong DB, Zheng XY, Xie LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310003, P.R. China.

Previous studies suggest that the low-affinity neurotrophin receptor p75NTR
inhibits the proliferation of human prostate cancer cells, and that estrogen
interacts with p75NTR in many tissues. In this study, we exposed 22Rv1
androgen-independent prostate cancer cells to 17-ß-estradiol and the DNA
demethylating agent 5-azacitidine (5-AzaC) to explore the interactions between
estrogen and p75NTR. We found that estrogen induced estrogen receptor (ESR)
subtype?2 and p75NTR expression in 22Rv1 cells, and that 5-AzaC further enhanced 
these effects. Estrogen in combination with 5-AzaC induced cell apoptosis, which 
was associated with the inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B translocation to the nucleus. These
results provide evidence that the up-regulation of ESR2 and p75NTR by estrogen
plus 5-AzaC may be a potential therapeutic strategy for the treatment of
androgen-refractory prostate cancer.

PMID: 21475909  [PubMed]


380. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 5;4(8):e6523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006523.

Genetic polymorphisms of estrogen receptors alpha and beta and the risk of
developing prostate cancer.

Chae YK(1), Huang HY, Strickland P, Hoffman SC, Helzlsouer K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; United States of America. youngkwang.chae@gmail.com

Estrogen may be involved in the development of prostate cancer. The association
between genetic polymorphisms of estrogen receptors alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) 
and prostate cancer risk was examined in a nested case-control study in
Washington County, Maryland. Incident prostate cancer cases (n = 269) were
matched to one or two controls (n = 440) by age, sex, race, and date of blood
donation. Associations between estrogen receptor genotypes or dietary intake and 
the development of prostate cancer were examined in conditional logistic
regression models. Results from this study showed that six single base-pair
polymorphisms (SNPs) of ESR1 (rs1801132, rs2077647, rs746432, rs2273206,
rs851982, rs2228480) and four SNPs of ESR2 (rs4986938, rs928554, rs8018687, rs
number not available for ESR2 5696 bp 3' of STP A>G) were not significantly
associated with prostate cancer risk, either by allelic or genotypic frequencies.
However, an interactive association with BMI was observed in the relationship
between prostate cancer risk and genotypes of ESR2 38 bp 3' of STP G>A
(rs4986938) (p = 0.031). An interaction between intake level of phytoestrogen and
genotypes of ESR1 Ex1-192G>C (rs746432) and between intake level of phytoestrogen
and genotypes of ESR1 Ex8+229G>A (rs2228480) and risk of prostate cancer was
observed (p = 0.0009 and p = 0.044, respectively). In conclusion, selected
genetic polymorphisms of ESR1 and ESR2, overall, were not associated with
prostate cancer risk. However, a variation in risk by BMI and phytoestrogen
intake was implicated.

PMCID: PMC2715882
PMID: 19654868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2010 Jan;26(1):4-9. doi: 10.3109/09513590903159573.

Estrogen receptor beta gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to uterine fibroids.

Fischer C(1), Juhasz-Boess I, Lattrich C, Ortmann O, Treeck O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Regensburg, 93053
Regensburg, Germany.

Uterine fibroids are the most common benign tumors of the female genital tract.
Steroid hormones, especially estradiol and progesterone, play an important role
in the pathobiology of this frequent disease. Recent studies suggested that both 
expression levels and polymorphisms of estrogen receptor (ER) alpha and beta
might affect development of uterine fibroids. In this study, we tested whether
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the promoter of estrogen receptor beta 
gene (ESR2) are associated with susceptibility to uterine fibroids. For this
purpose, we compared the frequency of three SNPs in the promoter region of ESR2
gene (rs2987983, rs3020450 and rs3020449) in 101 women with uterine fibroids and 
102 healthy women serving as controls by means of allele-specific tetra-primer
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Regarding allele frequency, allele positivity,
genotype and haplotype frequencies of these SNPs we did not observe any
significant difference between healthy women and women with uterine fibroids. In 
conclusion, our data clearly suggest that the tested SNPs in the promotor region 
of human ESR2 gene are not associated with the development of uterine fibroids.

PMID: 19639498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;203(1):87-97. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0065. Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Regulation of GNRH production by estrogen and bone morphogenetic proteins in
GT1-7 hypothalamic cells.

Otani H(1), Otsuka F, Takeda M, Mukai T, Terasaka T, Miyoshi T, Inagaki K, Suzuki
J, Ogura T, Lawson MA, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho,
Kitaku, Okayama City 700-8558, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are important
regulators in the pituitary-gonadal endocrine axis. We here investigated the
effects of BMPs on GNRH production controlled by estrogen using murine GT1-7
hypothalamic neuron cells. GT1-7 cells expressed estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha; ESR1 as listed in MGI Database), ERbeta (ESR2 as listed in MGI
Database), BMP receptors, SMADs, and a binding protein follistatin. Treatment
with BMP2 and BMP4 had no effect on Gnrh mRNA expression; however, BMP6 and BMP7 
significantly increased Gnrh mRNA expression as well as GnRH production by GT1-7 
cells. Notably, the reduction of Gnrh expression caused by estradiol (E(2)) was
restored by cotreatment with BMP2 and BMP4, whereas it was not affected by BMP6
or BMP7. E(2) activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 and
stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK) signaling 
but did not activate p38-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling in
GT1-7 cells. Inhibition of ERK1/ERK2 reversed the inhibitory effect of estrogen
on Gnrh expression, whereas SAPK/JNK inhibition did not affect the E(2) actions. 
Expression levels of Eralpha and Erbeta were reduced by BMP2 and BMP4, but were
increased by BMP6 and BMP7. Treatment with an ER antagonist inhibited the E(2)
effects on Gnrh suppression including reduction of E(2)-induced ERK
phosphorylation, suggesting the involvement of genomic ER actions in Gnrh
suppression. BMP2 and BMP4 also suppressed estrogen-induced phosphorylation of
ERK1/ERK2 and SAPK/JNK signaling, suggesting that BMP2 and BMP4 downregulate
estrogen effects by attenuating ER-MAPK signaling. Considering that BMP6 and BMP7
increased the expression of alpha1E-subunit of R-type calcium channel (Cacna1e), 
which is critical for GNRH secretion, it is possible that BMP6 and BMP7 directly 
stimulate GNRH release by GT1-7 cells. Collectively, a newly uncovered
interaction of BMPs and ER may be involved in controlling hypothalamic GNRH
production and secretion via an autocrine/paracrine mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2768486
PMID: 19635757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(4):R51. doi: 10.1186/bcr2340. Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Sex steroid metabolism polymorphisms and mammographic density in pre- and early
perimenopausal women.

Crandall CJ(1), Sehl ME, Crawford SL, Gold EB, Habel LA, Butler LM, Sowers MR,
Greendale GA, Sinsheimer JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California, Los Angeles, UCLA Medicine/GIM, 911 Broxton Ave, 1st floor, Los
Angeles, CA 90024, USA. ccrandall@mednet.ucla.edu

INTRODUCTION: We examined the association between mammographic density and
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes encoding CYP1A1, CYP1B1,
aromatase, 17beta-HSD, ESR1, and ESR2 in pre- and early perimenopausal white,
African-American, Chinese, and Japanese women.
METHODS: The Study of Women's Health Across the Nation is a longitudinal
community-based cohort study. We analyzed data from 451 pre- and early
perimenopausal participants of the ancillary SWAN Mammographic Density study for 
whom we had complete information regarding mammographic density, genotypes, and
covariates. With multivariate linear regression, we examined the relation between
percentage mammographic breast density (outcome) and each SNP (primary
predictor), adjusting for age, race/ethnicity, parity, cigarette smoking, and
body mass index (BMI).
RESULTS: After multivariate adjustment, the CYP1B1 rs162555 CC genotype was
associated with a 9.4% higher mammographic density than the TC/TT genotype (P =
0.04). The CYP19A1 rs936306 TT genotype was associated with 6.2% lower
mammographic density than the TC/CC genotype (P = 0.02). The positive association
between CYP1A1 rs2606345 and mammographic density was significantly stronger
among participants with BMI greater than 30 kg/m2 than among those with BMI less 
than 25 kg/m2 (Pinteraction = 0.05). Among white participants, the ESR1 rs2234693
CC genotype was associated with a 7.0% higher mammographic density than the CT/TT
genotype (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: SNPs in certain genes encoding sex steroid metabolism enzymes and
ESRs were associated with mammographic density. Because the encoded enzymes and
ESR1 are expressed in breast tissue, these SNPs may influence breast cancer risk 
by altering mammographic density.

PMCID: PMC2750112
PMID: 19630952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Autism Res. 2009 Jun;2(3):157-77. doi: 10.1002/aur.80.

Genes related to sex steroids, neural growth, and social-emotional behavior are
associated with autistic traits, empathy, and Asperger syndrome.

Chakrabarti B(1), Dudbridge F, Kent L, Wheelwright S, Hill-Cawthorne G, Allison
C, Banerjee-Basu S, Baron-Cohen S.

Author information: 
(1)Autism Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, Cambridge University, UK.
bhisma@cantab.net

Genetic studies of autism spectrum conditions (ASC) have mostly focused on the
"low functioning" severe clinical subgroup, treating it as a rare disorder.
However, ASC is now thought to be relatively common ( approximately 1%), and
representing one end of a quasi-normal distribution of autistic traits in the
general population. Here we report a study of common genetic variation in
candidate genes associated with autistic traits and Asperger syndrome (AS). We
tested single nucleotide polymorphisms in 68 candidate genes in three functional 
groups (sex steroid synthesis/transport, neural connectivity, and
social-emotional responsivity) in two experiments. These were (a) an association 
study of relevant behavioral traits (the Empathy Quotient (EQ), the Autism
Spectrum Quotient (AQ)) in a population sample (n=349); and (b) a case-control
association study on a sample of people with AS, a "high-functioning" subgroup of
ASC (n=174). 27 genes showed a nominally significant association with autistic
traits and/or ASC diagnosis. Of these, 19 genes showed nominally significant
association with AQ/EQ. In the sex steroid group, this included ESR2 and CYP11B1.
In the neural connectivity group, this included HOXA1, NTRK1, and NLGN4X. In the 
socio-responsivity behavior group, this included MAOB, AVPR1B, and WFS1. Fourteen
genes showed nominally significant association with AS. In the sex steroid group,
this included CYP17A1 and CYP19A1. In the socio-emotional behavior group, this
included OXT. Six genes were nominally associated in both experiments, providing 
a partial replication. Eleven genes survived family wise error rate (FWER)
correction using permutations across both experiments, which is greater than
would be expected by chance. CYP11B1 and NTRK1 emerged as significantly
associated genes in both experiments, after FWER correction (P<0.05). This is the
first candidate-gene association study of AS and of autistic traits. The most
promising candidate genes require independent replication and fine mapping.

PMID: 19598235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Nov;1791(11):1037-47. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.06.006. Epub 2009 Jul 6.

New insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying effects of estrogen on
cholesterol gallstone formation.

Wang HH(1), Liu M, Clegg DJ, Portincasa P, Wang DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Liver Center and Gastroenterology Division, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School and Harvard Digestive
Diseases Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Epidemiological and clinical studies have found that at all ages women are twice 
as likely as men to form cholesterol gallstones, and this gender difference
begins since puberty and continues through the childbearing years, which
highlight the importance of female sex hormones. Estrogen is a crucial hormone in
human physiology and regulates a multitude of biological processes. The actions
of estrogen have traditionally been ascribed to two closely related classical
nuclear hormone receptors, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and ESR2. Recent studies
have revealed that the increased risk for cholesterol gallstones in women vs. men
is related to differences in how the liver metabolizes cholesterol in response to
estrogen. A large number of human and animal studies have proposed that estrogen 
increases the risk of developing cholesterol gallstones by increasing the hepatic
secretion of biliary cholesterol, which, in turn, leads to an increase in
cholesterol saturation of bile. Furthermore, it has been identified that hepatic 
ESR1, but not ESR2, plays a major role in cholesterol gallstone formation in mice
in response to high doses of 17beta-estradiol. The mechanisms mediating
estrogen's action have become more complicated with the recent identification of 
a novel estrogen receptor, G protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30), a member of the
seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. In this review, we
provide an overview of the evidence for the lithogenic actions of estrogen
through ESR1 and discuss the cellular and physiological actions of GPR30 in
estrogen-dependent processes and the relationship between GPR30 and classical
ESR1 on gallstone formation.

PMCID: PMC2756670
PMID: 19589396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Dec;129(12):2795-804. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.173. Epub
2009 Jul 2.

Global gene expression analysis reveals evidence for decreased lipid biosynthesis
and increased innate immunity in uninvolved psoriatic skin.

Gudjonsson JE(1), Ding J, Li X, Nair RP, Tejasvi T, Qin ZS, Ghosh D, Aphale A,
Gumucio DL, Voorhees JJ, Abecasis GR, Elder JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, 1910 Taubman Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. johanng@med.umich.edu

Psoriasis is a genetically determined inflammatory skin disease. Although the
transition from uninvolved into lesional skin is accompanied by changes in the
expression of multiple genes, much less is known about the difference between
uninvolved skin from psoriatic patients as opposed to skin from normal
individuals. Multiple biochemical and morphological changes were reported decades
ago in uninvolved psoriatic skin but remain poorly understood. Here, we show
dysregulation of 223 transcripts representing 179 unique genes in uninvolved
psoriatic skin, 178 of which were not previously known to be altered in their
expression. The proteins encoded by these transcripts are involved in lipid
metabolism, antimicrobial defenses, epidermal differentiation, and control of
cutaneous vasculature. Cluster analysis of transcripts with significantly altered
expression identified a group of genes involved in lipid metabolism with highly
correlated gene expression. Promoter analysis showed enrichment for binding sites
of three transcription factors; peroxisome proliferator-activator receptor alpha 
(PPARA), sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBF), and estrogen receptor
2 (ESR2), suggesting that the coordinate regulation of lipid metabolic genes may 
be related to the action of these factors. Taken together, our results identify a
"pre-psoriatic" gene expression signature, suggesting decreased lipid
biosynthesis and increased innate immunity in uninvolved psoriatic skin.

PMCID: PMC2783967
PMID: 19571819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Arthritis Res Ther. 2009;11(3):R97. doi: 10.1186/ar2742. Epub 2009 Jun 25.

A prospective study of androgen levels, hormone-related genes and risk of
rheumatoid arthritis.

Karlson EW(1), Chibnik LB, McGrath M, Chang SC, Keenan BT, Costenbader KH, Fraser
PA, Tworoger S, Hankinson SE, Lee IM, Buring J, De Vivo I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
ekarlson@partners.org

Comment in
    Arthritis Res Ther. 2009;11(5):126.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is more common in females than males and 
sex steroid hormones may in part explain this difference. We conducted a
case-control study nested within two prospective studies to determine the
associations between plasma steroid hormones measured prior to RA onset and
polymorphisms in the androgen receptor (AR), estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2),
aromatase (CYP19) and progesterone receptor (PGR) genes and RA risk.
METHODS: We genotyped AR, ESR2, CYP19, PGR SNPs and the AR CAG repeat in RA
case-control studies nested within the Nurses' Health Study (NHS), NHS II (449 RA
cases, 449 controls) and the Women's Health Study (72 cases, and 202 controls).
All controls were matched on cohort, age, Caucasian race, menopausal status, and 
postmenopausal hormone use. We measured plasma dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
(DHEAS), testosterone, and sex hormone binding globulin in 132 pre-RA samples and
396 matched controls in the NHS cohorts. We used conditional logistic regression 
models adjusted for potential confounders to assess RA risk.
RESULTS: Mean age of RA diagnosis was 55 years in both cohorts; 58% of cases were
rheumatoid factor positive at diagnosis. There was no significant association
between plasma DHEAS, total testosterone, or calculated free testosterone and
risk of future RA. There was no association between individual variants or
haplotypes in any of the genes and RA or seropositive RA, nor any association for
the AR CAG repeat.
CONCLUSIONS: Steroid hormone levels measured at a single time point prior to RA
onset were not associated with RA risk in this study. Our findings do not suggest
that androgens or the AR, ESR2, PGR, and CYP19 genes are important to RA risk in 
women.

PMCID: PMC2714153
PMID: 19555469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Biol Reprod. 2009 Nov;81(5):1002-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070599. Epub 2009
Jun 24.

Effects of diethylstilbestrol on programmed oocyte death and induction of
polyovular follicles in neonatal mouse ovaries.

Kim H(1), Nakajima T, Hayashi S, Chambon P, Watanabe H, Iguchi T, Sato T.

Author information: 
(1)International Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Yokohama City University, 
Yokohama, Japan.

In mice, neonatal exposure to a synthetic estrogen, diethylstilbestrol (DES),
induces polyovular follicles, which contain two or more oocytes per ovarian
follicle. We reported previously that the estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) mediates 
DES signaling in polyovular follicle induction. However, the specific mechanism
of polyovular follicle induction has not yet been clarified. Folliculogenesis in 
rodents begins soon after birth, accompanied by programmed oocyte death and germ 
cell loss. In this study, the effects of DES on oocyte death and on mRNA
expression of genes thought to be involved in polyovular follicle induction were 
analyzed during a crucial period of folliculogenesis in the ovary of C57BL/6J,
Fas(lpr/lpr) (lacking cell death receptor, FAS), and Esr2 knockout (Esr2 KO)
mice. Neonatal DES exposure reduced programmed oocyte death in C57BL/6J mice;
however, this reduction was not observed in Esr2 KO mice. In control Fas(lpr/lpr)
mice, the oocyte apoptotic index was significantly lower than that in the control
C57BL/6J mice. However, the polyovular follicle incidence in control 20-day-old
Fas(lpr/lpr) mice was similar to that in the control C57BL/6J mice. Moreover, DES
exposure changed mRNA expression of inhibin-alpha (Inha) in 2-day-old C57BL/6J
mice. These results suggest that inhibition of oocyte death by DES through ESR2
may be one of the triggers for polyovular follicle induction. The FAS system is
also involved in neonatal oocyte death; however, reduction of oocyte death is not
sufficient for polyovular follicle induction. The combination of increased Inha
mRNA and reduction of oocyte death in the ovaries of mice by DES through ESR2
might be correlated with polyovular follicle induction.

PMID: 19553606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Sep;30(9):1581-90. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp132. Epub 2009 Jun
11.

Disruption of estrogen receptor signaling enhances intestinal neoplasia in
Apc(Min/+) mice.

Cleveland AG(1), Oikarinen SI, Bynoté KK, Marttinen M, Rafter JJ, Gustafsson JA, 
Roy SK, Pitot HC, Korach KS, Lubahn DB, Mutanen M, Gould KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

Estrogen receptors (ERs) [ERalpha (Esr1) and ERbeta (Esr2)] are expressed in the 
human colon, but during the multistep process of colorectal carcinogenesis,
expression of both ERalpha and ERbeta is lost, suggesting that loss of ER
function might promote colorectal carcinogenesis. Through crosses between an
ERalpha knockout and Apc(Min) mouse strains, we demonstrate that ERalpha
deficiency is associated with a significant increase in intestinal tumor
multiplicity, size and burden in Apc(Min/+) mice. Within the normal intestinal
epithelium of Apc(Min/+) mice, ERalpha deficiency is associated with an
accumulation of nuclear beta-catenin, an indicator of activation of the
Wnt-beta-catenin-signaling pathway, which is known to play a critical role in
intestinal cancers. Consistent with the hypothesis that ERalpha deficiency is
associated with activation of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling, ERalpha deficiency in
the intestinal epithelium of Apc(Min/+) mice also correlated with increased
expression of Wnt-beta-catenin target genes. Through crosses between an ERbeta
knockout and Apc(Min) mouse strains, we observed some evidence that ERbeta
deficiency is associated with an increased incidence of colon tumors in
Apc(Min/+) mice. This effect of ERbeta deficiency does not involve modulation of 
Wnt-beta-catenin signaling. Our studies suggest that ERalpha and ERbeta signaling
modulate colorectal carcinogenesis, and ERalpha does so, at least in part, by
regulating the activity of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway.

PMCID: PMC2736300
PMID: 19520794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2009 Jun;13(3):339-42. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2008.0129.

Estrogen receptor beta gene variant is associated with vascular dementia in
elderly women.

Dresner-Pollak R(1), Kinnar T, Friedlander Y, Sharon N, Rosenmann H, Pollak A.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Service, Department of Medicine, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. rivkap@hadassah.org.il

OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) and vascular dementia (VaD) are the main
causes of dementia. Postmenopausal estrogen deficiency was suggested as a
contributor to cognitive decline; however, replacement therapy failed to prove
beneficial in its prevention or therapy. Sequence variants in the estrogen
receptor alpha gene (ESR1) and beta gene (ESR2) may alter the effects of
estrogen.
METHODS: This is a case-control association study of sporadic AD, VaD, and
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in ESR1 (rs2234693 and rs9340799), the TA
dinucleotide repeat in the ESR1 promoter, and the rs4986938 single-nucleotide
polymorphism in ESR2. Two hundred forty-six women (118 AD, age 83 +/- 7; 60 VaD, 
age 82 +/- 6; and 68 cognitively intact, age 81 +/- 7) residing in nursing homes 
were studied. The association of genotypes and AD or VaD was determined by
logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and ethnic origin.
RESULTS: An association of VaD and ESR2 rs4986938 was found. Carriers of each A
allele had a 1.7 increased risk compared to carriers of the G allele (odds ratio 
1.71, 95% confidence interval 1-2.95). The ApoE epsilon 4 allele was associated
with AD (odds ratio 3.35, confidence interval 1.44-7.82), but not with VaD. No
association of AD or VaD with ESR1 genotypes or haplotypes was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: The ESR2 rs4986938 polymorphism is associated with susceptibility
for VaD in elderly Jewish women. These results need to be confirmed in replicate 
studies in other populations.

PMID: 19473078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Genomic Med. 2008 Dec;2(3-4):113-25. doi: 10.1007/s11568-009-9080-y. Epub 2009
May 15.

Identification of gene biomarkers for respiratory syncytial virus infection in a 
bronchial epithelial cell line.

Huang YC(1), Li Z, Hyseni X, Schmitt M, Devlin RB, Karoly ED, Soukup JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Box 2733, Durham, NC, 
27710, USA, huang002@mc.duke.edu.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection involves complex virus-host
interplay. In this study, we analyzed gene expression in RSV-infected BEAS-2B
cells to discover novel signaling pathways and biomarkers. We hybridized RNAs
from RSV- or vehicle-treated BEAS-2B to Affymetrix HU133 plus 2.0 microarrays (n 
= 4). At 4 and 24 h post-infection, 277 and 900 genes (RSV/control ratio >/=2.0
or </=0.5), and 1 and 12 pathways respectively were significantly altered.
Twenty-three and 92 genes at 4 and 24 h respectively matched respiratory disease 
biomarkers with ARG2 flagged at 24 h and SCNN1G, EPB41L4B, CSF1, PTEN, TUBB1 and 
ESR2 at both time points. Hierachical clustering showed a cluster containing ARG2
and IL8. In human bronchial epithelial cells, RSV upregulated arginase II
protein. Knockdown of ARG2 increased RSV-induced IL-8, LDH and histone release.
With microarray, we identified novel proximal airway epithelial cell genes that
may be tested in the sputum samples as biomarkers of RSV infection.

PMCID: PMC2694865
PMID: 19459069  [PubMed]


392. BJOG. 2009 Jul;116(8):1053-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2009.02185.x. Epub 2009
May 11.

Estrogen receptor polymorphisms and the risk of endometrial cancer.

Ashton KA(1), Proietto A, Otton G, Symonds I, McEvoy M, Attia J, Gilbert M,
Hamann U, Scott RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Medical Genetics, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of
Health, University of Newcastle; and the Hunter Medical Research Institute,
Newcastle, NSW, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: There is evidence that estrogens and some of their metabolites are
involved in endometrial cancer pathogenesis. As estrogens mediate their effects
via the estrogen receptors, ESR1 and ESR2, the objective of this investigation
was to determine whether six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these two 
genes were over-represented in a population of endometrial cancer patients
compared with a healthy matched control population, thereby associating
differences in these genes with endometrial cancer.
DESIGN: The study is a case-control investigation large enough to detect a
two-fold increased risk, assuming a dominant genetic model, with P = 0.05 and 80%
power.
SETTING: The study and control populations were all from the Hunter-New England
region of New South Wales, Australia collected between the years 1992 and 2005.
POPULATION: The study consisted of 191 endometrial cancer patients and 291
healthy controls matched for gender and age.
METHODS: Two SNPs in ESR1 and four SNPs in ESR2 were genotyped using PCR-based
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and real-time PCR. Odds ratios 
were calculated using unconditional logistic regression and SIMHAP was used for
haplotype analysis, adjusting for potential endometrial cancer risk factors.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis, Cox regression and t tests were used to examine
the patient's age of diagnosis of endometrial cancer and genotype.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Over-representation of ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms in the 
endometrial cancer population compared with the control population indicates an
involvement in the development and/or progression of disease.
RESULTS: Two ESR1 (rs2234693 and rs9340799) and two ESR2 (rs1255998 and rs944050)
polymorphisms were associated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer.
Following adjustment for risk factors, the association with the ESR1 and ESR2
polymorphisms (rs2234693, rs1255998 and rs944050) remained highly significant.
Haplotype analysis revealed that carriers of the ESR1 haplotype (variant alleles;
rs2234693 and rs9340799) and the ESR2 haplotype (variant allele; rs1255998 and
wild-type alleles; rs944050, rs4986938 and rs1256049) were at an increased risk
(OR 1.862, P = 0.013 and OR 1.918, P = 0.046 respectively). This risk was even
greater in women carrying both risk haplotypes (OR 5.041, P = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the ESR1 (rs2234693 and rs9340799) and the
ESR2 (rs1255998 and rs944050) polymorphisms may be associated with an increased
risk of developing endometrial cancer.

PMID: 19438492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2009 Apr;114(3-5):207-11. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2009.02.012. Epub 2009 Mar 3.

Polymorphisms in the promoter region of ESR2 gene and breast cancer
susceptibility.

Treeck O(1), Elemenler E, Kriener C, Horn F, Springwald A, Hartmann A, Ortmann O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Regensburg, Landshuter 
Strasse 65, Regensburg, Germany. otreeck@caritasstjosef.de

Genetic variations like single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved 
in estrogen biosynthesis, metabolism and signal transduction have been suggested 
to affect breast cancer susceptibility. In this study we tested the hypothesis
that polymorphisms in the promoter of ESR2 gene may be associated with increased 
risk for breast cancer. We analyzed three SNPs in the promoter region of human
ESR2 gene by means of allele-specific tetra-primer PCR. A total of 318 sporadic
breast cancer cases and 318 age-matched controls were included in the study. With
regard to homozygous genotypes, women with sporadic breast cancer more frequently
carried the CC genotype of ESR2 promoter SNP rs2987983 (OR 1.99, p=0.005).
Calculation of allele positivity demonstrated that presence of T allele of this
SNP was more frequent in healthy women. Our data suggest that a SNP in the
promoter region of ESR2 gene might be able to affect breast cancer risk. These
results further support the emerging hypothesis that ERbeta is an important
factor in breast cancer development.

PMID: 19429453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Apr 22;7:32. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-32.

Age-specific effects of estrogen receptors' polymorphisms on the bone traits in
healthy fertile women: the BONTURNO study.

Massart F(1), Marini F, Bianchi G, Minisola S, Luisetto G, Pirazzoli A, Salvi S, 
Micheli D, Masi L, Brandi ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Skeletal characteristics such as height (Ht), bone mineral density
(BMD) or bone turnover markers are strongly inherited. Common variants in the
genes encoding for estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) are proposed as
candidates for influencing bone phenotypes at the population level.
METHODS: We studied 641 healthy premenopausal women aged 20-50 years (yrs)
participating into the BONTURNO study. Exclusion criteria were irregular cyclic
menses, low trauma fracture, metabolic bone or chronic diseases. Serum
C-telopeptide of type I collagen (CTX), osteocalcin (OC), and N-terminal
propeptide of type I procollagen (P1NP) were measured in all enrolled subjects,
who underwent to lumbar spine (LS), total hip (TH) and femoral neck (FN) BMD
evaluation by DXA. Five hundred seventy Caucasian women were genotyped for ESR1
rs2234693 and rs9340799 and ESR2 rs4986938 polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Although no genotype differences were found in body parameters, subjects
with combined ESR1 CCGG plus ESR2 AA-AG genotype were taller than those with
opposite genotype (P = 0.044). Moreover, ESR1 rs2234693 genotypes correlated with
family history of osteoporosis (FHO) and hip fracture (FHF) (P < 0.01), while
ESR2 AA-AC genotypes were strongly associated with FHF (OR 2.387, 95% CI
1.432-3.977; P < 0.001).When clustered by age, 20-30 yrs old subjects, having at 
least one ESR1 rs2234693 C allele presented lower LS- (P = 0.008) and TH-BMD (P =
0.047) than TT genotypes. In 41-50 yrs age, lower FN-BMD was associated with ESR2
AA (P = 0.0180) subjects than in those with the opposite genotype. ESR1 rs2234693
and rs9340799 and ESR2 rs4986938 polymorphisms did not correlate with
age-adjusted values of OC, CTX and P1NP.
CONCLUSION: These findings support the presence of age-specific effects of ESR1
and ESR2 polymorphisms on various skeletal traits in healthy fertile women.

PMCID: PMC2679035
PMID: 19386104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Nutr. 2009 May;139(5):993-1001. doi: 10.3945/jn.108.101691. Epub 2009 Mar 25.

The protective association of high plasma enterolactone with breast cancer is
reasonably robust in women with polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha and 
beta genes.

Sonestedt E(1), Ivarsson MI, Harlid S, Ericson U, Gullberg B, Carlson J, Olsson
H, Adlercreutz H, Wirfält E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Nutrition Epidemiology, Lund University,
SE-20502 Malmö, Sweden. Emily.Sonestedt@med.lu.se

It is plausible that polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha and beta genes 
(ESR1 and ESR2) may modulate the association between enterolactone and breast
cancer. Seven polymorphisms in ESR1 (rs827422, rs1709184, rs2347867, rs3020328,
rs72207, rs2982896, and rs2234693) and 5 polymorphisms in ESR2 (rs915057,
rs1269056, rs1256033, rs3020450, and rs3020443) were selected. The risk of breast
cancer for these polymorphisms was estimated among 542 cases and 1076 matched
controls from the population-based Malmö Diet and Cancer cohort. The joint effect
of these polymorphisms and enterolactone was estimated among those individuals
about whom we had information on enterolactone blood concentration (365 cases and
728 controls). Breast cancer risk was not significantly associated with any of
the selected polymorphisms. We found a tendency for an interaction between a
polymorphism in intron 3 of ESR1 (rs2347867) and enterolactone concentration (P =
0.07). Breast cancer and enterolactone concentration were not associated among
those homozygous for the major allele (A) (P = 0.93), whereas we found an inverse
association among carriers of the minor allele (G) (P = 0.007). None of the other
polymorphisms seem to modify the association between enterolactone and breast
cancer. This study suggests that the protective association of enterolactone is
reasonably robust across the investigated genotypes. The suggested interaction
between enterolactone concentration and rs2347867 needs to be confirmed in larger
samples.

PMID: 19321582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Apr;200(4):427.e1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2009.01.025.

Estrogen receptor-beta mediates cyclooxygenase-2 expression and vascular
prostanoid levels in human placental villous endothelial cells.

Su EJ(1), Lin ZH, Zeine R, Yin P, Reierstad S, Innes JE, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Regulation of fetoplacental blood flow is likely mediated by factors
such as prostanoids. Estrogen and its receptors affect prostanoid biosynthesis.
Previously, we demonstrated that villous endothelial cells express estrogen
receptor-beta (ESR2), and we sought to determine its role in the mediation of
fetoplacental vascular function.
STUDY DESIGN: Villous endothelial cells from uncomplicated pregnancies were
isolated, cultured, and treated with estrogen. RNA interference, real-time
polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting, and enzyme immunoassays were
performed.
RESULTS: Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression levels were not altered consistently
by estrogen. RNA interference of ESR2 led to a concomitant decrease in COX-2
messenger RNA (P < .0001) and protein (P < .05) in the presence and absence of
estradiol. ESR2 knock-down also led to diminished prostacyclin and thromboxane
concentrations in the absence of estradiol (P < .005).
CONCLUSION: ESR2 mediates COX-2 expression levels and both prostacyclin and
thromboxane concentrations in the basal state, which suggests the possibility of 
ligand-independent regulation of COX-2 activity and prostaglandin H2 substrate
availability. Further investigation regarding ESR2 regulation of prostanoid
biosynthesis and its effects on the fetoplacental vasculature is warranted.

PMID: 19318151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Endocrinol. 2009 Jun;201(3):397-406. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0060. Epub 2009 Mar
17.

Inner ear pathology and loss of hearing in estrogen receptor-beta deficient mice.

Simonoska R(1), Stenberg AE, Duan M, Yakimchuk K, Fridberger A, Sahlin L,
Gustafsson JA, Hultcrantz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. rusana.simonoska@karolinska.se

There are well known differences between males and females in hearing. In the
present study, the role of estrogen receptor-beta (ER-beta; listed as ESR2 in the
MGI Database) in hearing was investigated by comparing hearing and morphology of 
the inner ear in ER-beta knock-out mice (ER-beta(-/-)) with that of wild-type
(WT) littermates. Hearing was analyzed with auditory brainstem response
audiometry at 3 and 12 months. The ER-beta(-/-) mice were deaf at 1 year of age, 
and the morphological analysis showed absence of hair cells and loss of the whole
organ of Corti initiated in the basal turn of the cochlea. Furthermore, in
ER-beta(-/-), but not in WT mice, the spiral ganglion was lacking many of its
neurons. Immunostaining showed the presence of both ER-alpha (listed as ESR1 in
the MGI Database) and ER-beta in the nuclei of some neurons in the inner ear in
WT mice, but no ER-beta was found in the ER-beta(-/-) mice as expected. ER-alpha 
staining was predominant in the nuclei of large neurons and ER-beta in nuclei of 
small neurons and fibroblasts. These results reveal that both ERs are present in 
the inner ear at specific localizations suggesting subtype-specific functions. It
is concluded that ER-beta is important for the prevention of age-related hearing 
loss. These findings strengthen the hypothesis that estrogen has a direct effect 
on hearing functions.

PMID: 19293293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Reproduction. 2009 May;137(5):865-77. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0491. Epub 2009 Mar 4.

Developmental programming: prenatal androgen excess disrupts ovarian steroid
receptor balance.

Ortega HH(1), Salvetti NR, Padmanabhan V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, National University of Litoral,
Esperanza 3800, Santa Fe, Argentina.

Steroid hormones play an important role in reproduction and the receptors through
which they signal change in a developmental time, follicle stage, and
cell-specific manner. Disruption in steroid receptor expression affects follicle 
formation and differentiation. In this study, using prenatal testosterone (T) and
dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-treated female sheep as model systems, we tested the
hypothesis that prenatal androgen excess disrupts the developmental ontogeny of
ovarian steroid receptor protein expression. Pregnant Suffolk ewes were injected 
twice weekly with T propionate or DHT propionate (a non-aromatizable androgen) in
cottonseed oil from days 30 to 90 of gestation. Changes in ovarian estrogen
receptors (ER; ESR1, ESR2), androgen receptor (AR) and progesterone receptor
(PGR) proteins were determined at fetal (days 90 and 140), postpubertal (10
months), and adult (21 months; only prenatal T-treated sheep studied) ages by
immunohistochemistry. Prenatal T and DHT treatment induced selective increase in 
AR but not ER or PGR expression in the stroma and granulosa cells of fetal days
90 and 140 ovaries. An increase in ESR1 and decrease in ESR2 immunostaining
coupled with increased AR expression were evident in granulosa cells of antral
follicles of 10- and 21-month-old prenatal T but not DHT-treated females
(analyzed only at 10 months). These findings provide evidence that an early
increase in ovarian AR is the first step in the altered ovarian developmental
trajectory of prenatal T-treated females, and manifestations of postnatal ovarian
dysfunction are likely facilitated via altered equilibrium of antral follicular
granulosa cell ER/AR protein expression.

PMCID: PMC3968529
PMID: 19261835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jun;80(6):1262-71. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.074237. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

Clomiphene citrate causes aberrant tubal apoptosis and estrogen receptor
activation in rat fallopian tube: implications for tubal ectopic pregnancy.

Shao R(1), Nutu M, Weijdegård B, Egecioglu E, Fernandez-Rodriguez J,
Karlsson-Lindahl L, Gemzell-Danielsson K, Bergh C, Billig H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology/Endocrinology, Core Facilities, The Sahlgrenska
Academy at Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden. ruijin.shao@fysiologi.gu.se

Clomiphene citrate (CC) therapy for disorders of anovulatory infertility has been
linked to an increased frequency of tubal ectopic pregnancy. Although CC enhances
apoptotic processes in the ovaries, villi, and decidual tissues, its effect on
apoptosis in the fallopian tube is unknown. Here, we show that chronic treatment 
with CC induces tubal apoptosis, but not necrosis, through an intrinsic
mitochondria-dependent signaling pathway in vivo. The apoptosis was specific to
epithelial cells in the isthmus, and the damage was reversed with
17beta-estradiol (E2); however, pretreatment or concomitant treatment with E2 did
not protect against tubal apoptosis induced by chronic treatment with CC. Chronic
treatment activated estrogen receptors (ESRs), particularly cilia-localized ESR2A
(formerly ERbeta2). In contrast to E2, acute treatment of superovulating rats
with a high dose of CC or the ESR2-selective agonist 2,3-bis
(4-hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile (DPN) significantly delayed the transport of
oocyte-cumulus complexes through the fallopian tube. Our findings suggest that in
response to chronic CC therapy, isthmus-specific apoptosis of epithelial cells
and activation of cilia-ESR2A act in parallel to block gamete and embryo passage 
through the fallopian tube, eventually resulting in tubal ectopic pregnancy.

PMID: 19211805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Evid Based Soc Work. 2009 Jan;6(1):79-91. doi: 10.1080/15433710802633569.

Treatment of anxiety, depression, and alcohol disorders in the elderly: social
work collaboration in primary care.

Rinfrette ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Work, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14260, USA.
esr2@buffalo.edu

Anxiety and depressive disorders and symptoms are quite prevalent in older adults
as are alcohol problems. Older adults tend to minimize psychological problems and
consider psychological symptoms to be related to physical illness. Engagement of 
the older adult in mental health/substance abuse treatment has been found to be
more successful if it occurs in collaboration with primary care treatment.
Collaboration between social workers and physicians appears to be an obvious
solution to meeting the needs of elderly persons with mental health and/or
substance abuse problems who present for medical concerns in their physician's
office.

PMID: 19199138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Hum Hypertens. 2009 Oct;23(10):636-44. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2009.1. Epub 2009 Feb
5.

Association between arterial stiffness and variations in oestrogen-related genes.

Peter I(1), Kelley-Hedgepeth A, Huggins GS, Housman DE, Mendelsohn ME, Vita JA,
Vasan RS, Levy D, Benjamin EJ, Mitchell GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine of
New York University, New York, NY 10029, USA. inga.peter@mssm.edu

Increased arterial stiffness and wave reflection have been identified as
cardiovascular disease risk factors. In light of significant sex differences and 
the moderate heritability of vascular function measures, we hypothesized that
variation in the genes coding for oestrogen receptors alpha (ESR1) and beta
(ESR2) and aromatase (CYP19A1) is associated with aortic stiffness and pressure
wave reflection as measured by non-invasive arterial tonometry. In all, 1261
unrelated Framingham Offspring Study participants who attended the seventh
examination cycle (mean age 62+/-10 years, 52% women) and had arterial tonometry 
and genotyping data were included in the study. Analysis of covariance was used
to assess the association of polymorphisms with forward wave amplitude, augmented
pressure, augmentation index (AI), carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity and mean
arterial pressure with adjustment for potential confounders. In the sex-pooled
analysis, those homozygous for the minor allele at any of four ESR1 variants that
were in strong linkage disequilibrium ((TA)(n), rs2077647, rs2234693 and
rs9340799) had on an average 18% higher augmented pressure and 16% greater AI
compared with carriers of one or two major alleles (P=0.0002-0.01). A similar
magnitude of association was detected in those homozygous for the common allele
at two ESR2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (P=0.007-0.02). Our results are
consistent with the hypothesis that variation in ESR1 and ESR2, but not CYP19A1, 
is associated with an increased wave reflection that may contribute to
associations between these variants and adverse clinical events demonstrated
earlier. Our findings will need to be replicated in additional cohorts.

PMCID: PMC2746260
PMID: 19194457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Biol Reprod. 2009 May;80(5):954-64. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.073791. Epub 2009
Jan 21.

Variation in the ovarian reserve is linked to alterations in intrafollicular
estradiol production and ovarian biomarkers of follicular differentiation and
oocyte quality in cattle.

Ireland JJ(1), Zielak-Steciwko AE, Jimenez-Krassel F, Folger J, Bettegowda A,
Scheetz D, Walsh S, Mossa F, Knight PG, Smith GW, Lonergan P, Evans AC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture Food Science and Veterinary Medicine and Conway
Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

The mechanisms whereby the high variation in numbers of morphologically healthy
oocytes and follicles in ovaries (ovarian reserve) may have an impact onovarian
function, oocyte quality, and fertility are poorly understood. The objective was 
to determine whether previously validated biomarkers for follicular
differentiation and function, as well as oocyte quality differed between cattle
with low versus a high antral follicle count (AFC). Ovaries were removed (n = 5
per group) near the beginning of the nonovulatory follicular wave, before
follicles could be identified via ultrasonography as being dominant, from heifers
with high versus a low AFC. The F1, F2, and F3 follicles were dissected and
diameters determined. Follicular fluid and thecal, granulosal, and cumulus cells 
and the oocyte were isolated and subjected to biomarker analyses. Although the
size and numerous biomarkers of differentiation, such as mRNAs for the
gonadotropin receptors, were similar, intrafollicular concentrations of estradiol
and the abundance of mRNAs for CYP19A1 in granulosal cells and ESR1, ESR2, and
CTSB in cumulus cells were greater, whereas mRNAs for AMH in granulosal cells and
TBC1D1 in thecal cells were lower for animals with low versus a high AFC during
follicle waves. Hence, variation in the ovarian reserve may have an impact on
follicular function and oocyte quality via alterations in intrafollicular
estradiol production and expression of key genes involved in follicle-stimulating
hormone action (AMH) and estradiol (CYP19A1) production by granulosal cells,
function and survival of thecal cells (TBC1D1), responsiveness of cumulus cells
to estradiol (ESR1, ESR2), and cumulus cell determinants of oocyte quality
(CTSB).

PMID: 19164170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Maturitas. 2009 Feb 20;62(2):179-83. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2008.11.006. Epub
2008 Dec 25.

Association of estrogen receptor 2 gene polymorphisms with obesity in women
(obesity and estrogen receptor 2 gene).

Goulart AC(1), Zee RY, Rexrode KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, 900 Commonwealth Avenue, 3rd Floor, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
agoulart@hu.usp.br

OBJECTIVE: Few studies have examined the association between genetic variants of 
the estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) and obesity in postmenopausal women.
METHODS: The relationship of three polymorphisms (rs1271572, rs1256049 and
rs4986938) and their associated haplotypes in the ESR2 gene with obesity and
overweight were evaluated in 561 apparently healthy women (median age 63 years)
from the Women's Health Study. Most of the women were postmenopausal (99.1%). The
associations between genotypes and haplotypes with obesity (BMI> or =30kg/m(2))
and overweight (BMI> or =25kg/m(2)) were evaluated by logistic regression,
assuming an additive model.
RESULTS: No association was observed for any of the three polymorphisms with BMI,
overweight or obesity. In haplotype analyses, one haplotype (major allele for all
polymorphisms) was associated with a borderline inverse association with
overweight but not obesity (OR=0.62, 95% CI=0.39-0.98).
CONCLUSIONS: An inverse and borderline significant association was found between 
the ESR2 G-G-G haplotype and overweight in postmenopausal women. Further
investigation regarding the association between ESR2 and adiposity should be
performed to confirm these findings.

PMCID: PMC2693958
PMID: 19111408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Headache. 2008 Nov-Dec;48(10):1438-50.

Multilocus analyses reveal involvement of the ESR1, ESR2, and FSHR genes in
migraine.

Oterino A(1), Toriello M, Cayón A, Castillo J, Colas R, Alonson-Arranz A,
Ruiz-Alegria C, Quintela E, Monton F, Ruiz-Lavilla N, Gonzalez F, Pascual J.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla-Neurology, Santander, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Female hormone genes have been investigated in migraine in recent
years. Research in this field has been controversial, especially in regard to
ESR1 gene findings. None of the reports have yet to approach the problem from a
multigenic point of view.
METHODS: We investigated 5 polymorphisms implicated in female hormone metabolism 
(FSHR, CYP19A1, ESR1, NRIP1, and ESR2) in a cohort of 730 subjects matched for
age and sex. The effect of gene-gene interaction was assessed using the set
association approach, and the corresponding haplotypes were studied with PM Plus 
software. To corroborate initial results, we analyzed the selected markers using 
a cohort of 134 families in which 168 trios were suitable for
transmission-disequilibrium test (TDT) analysis under the migraine with aura (MA)
phenotype.
RESULTS: A total of 356 consecutive migraine patients (198 with MA [76% females] 
and 158 migraine without aura [MO, 74% females], and 374 matched controls [71%
females]) were genotyped. In the 2-point analyses, the ESR1 and ESR2
polymorphisms showed nominal association under MA/MO phenotype, and this
association was higher with the FSHR polymorphism in MA females (P = .004,
uncorrected). Using the SUMSTAT program, we observed ESR2-ESR1-FSHR significant
gene-gene interaction, suggesting association with the MA/MO phenotype (P = .005;
P = .003 in females), and with MA alone (P = .021; P = .030 for females).We
corroborated that ESR2-ESR1-FSHR haplotypes interacted for migraine under a
model-free hypothesis (empirical P = .010 for the whole sample; P = .001 for
females), and the association was stronger for the MA phenotype alone (empirical 
P = 5.0e-4, under the heterogeneity model; P = .001 for females). These results
were corroborated using family-based association approaches. We observed nominal 
association for ESR2 and ESR1 (P = .031 and .034, respectively) in the TDT study,
and significant association for ESR1 using family-based association test
statistics. Haplotype-TDT analyses showed further significant gene-gene
interaction for ESR1-ESR2 (global P = .009), ESR2-FSHR (global P = .011), and
nominally significant interaction for ESR2-ESR1-FSHR genes (global P = .037).
CONCLUSION: We found significant association of female hormone metabolism
polymorphisms under the perspective of multigene approach.

PMID: 19093296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Jun;115(3):643-50. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0264-2. 
Epub 2008 Dec 12.

Estrogen receptor genotype is associated with risk of venous thromboembolism
during tamoxifen therapy.

Onitilo AA(1), McCarty CA, Wilke RA, Glurich I, Engel JM, Flockhart DA, Nguyen A,
Li L, Mi D, Skaar TC, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Marshfield Clinic Weston Center, 3501
Cranberry Boulevard, Weston, WI 54476, USA. onitilo.adedayo@marshfieldclinic.org

Thromboembolism is a serious complication of tamoxifen therapy in women with
breast cancer. Banked DNA from tamoxifen-treated individuals with breast cancer
from the Marshfield Clinic Personalized Medicine Research Project, a
population-based DNA repository, was tested for association between incidence of 
tamoxifen-associated thromboembolic events (TTE) and single nucleotide
polymorphisms encoding the estrogen receptors 1,2 (ESR1, ESR2) or drug metabolism
enzymes cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) and aromatase (CYP19). TTE were experienced 
by 16/220 subjects with risk association noted for XbaI (rs9340799) genotype and 
ESR1 Xbal/PvuII diplotype (rs9340799 and rs2234693) (hazard ratio 3.47, 95% CI
0.97-12.44, P = 0.035). Association persisted after adjusting for classical risk 
factors including age at diagnosis and body mass index at enrollment. Initial
evidence of association between increased risk for TTE and ESR1 genotype and ESR1
diplotype is presented. Determination of estrogen receptor genotype may identify 
a subset of women at increased risk for thromboembolism with tamoxifen exposure.

PMID: 19082882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2009 Apr;7(2):111-7. doi: 10.1089/met.2008.0030.

Associations of the estrogen receptors 1 and 2 gene polymorphisms with the
metabolic syndrome in women.

Goulart AC(1), Zee RY, Pradhan A, Rexrode KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. alecgoulart@yahoo.com.br

BACKGROUND: Genetic variation of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta
(ESR2) has been associated with components of the metabolic syndrome.
METHODS: The relationships of two ESR1 (rs2234693 and rs9340799) and three ESR2
(rs1271572, rs1256049, and rs4986938) polymorphisms with the metabolic syndrome
were examined in 532 Caucasian female participants (median age 63.1 years) in the
Women's Health Study. Most women (99.1%) were postmenopausal. The associations
between ESR1 and ESR2 genotypes and haplotypes with the metabolic syndrome were
evaluated. Effect modification by hormone therapy was also assessed.
RESULTS: Genotype and haplotype distributions were similar between women with and
without metabolic syndrome. We found no consistent associations between the
genotypes and haplotypes tested and the metabolic syndrome, or its components, in
logistic regression models. No effect modification by hormone therapy use was
noted.
CONCLUSIONS: No association between these genetic variants in ESR1 and ESR2 and
the metabolic syndrome was observed among these Caucasian women. Further
investigation regarding the potential involvement of estrogen receptor genes and 
the metabolic syndrome may be warranted in other ethnic groups.

PMCID: PMC2674981
PMID: 19032032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Jun;129(6):1527-38. doi: 10.1038/jid.2008.371. Epub 2008 
Nov 20.

Development of alopecia areata is associated with higher central and peripheral
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal tone in the skin graft induced C3H/HeJ mouse
model.

Zhang X(1), Yu M, Yu W, Weinberg J, Shapiro J, McElwee KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Jun;129(6):1324-6.

The relationship of the stress response to the pathogenesis of alopecia areata
(AA) was investigated by subjecting normal and skin graft-induced, AA-affected
C3H/HeJ mice to light ether anesthesia or restraint stress. Plasma corticosterone
(CORT), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and estradiol (E2) levels were
determined by RIA, whereas gene expression in brains, lymphoid organs, and skin
was measured by quantitative RT-PCR for corticotropin-releasing hormone (Crh),
arginine vasopressin (Avp), proopiomelanocortin (Pomc), glucocorticoid receptor
(Nr3c1), mineralocorticoid receptor (Nr3c2), corticotropin-releasing hormone
receptor types 1 and 2 (Crhr1, Crhr2), interleukin-12 (Il12), tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (Tnf alpha), and estrogen receptors type-1 (Esr1) and type-2 (Esr2).
AA mice had a marked increase in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) tone and
activity centrally, and peripherally in the skin and lymph nodes. There was also 
altered interaction between the adrenal and gonadal axes compared with that in
normal mice. Stress further exacerbated changes in AA mouse HPA activity both
centrally and peripherally. AA mice had significantly blunted CORT and ACTH
responses to acute ether stress (physiological stressor) and a deficit in
habituation to repeated restraint stress (psychological stressor). The positive
correlation of HPA hormone levels with skin Th1 cytokines suggests that altered
HPA activity may occur as a consequence of the immune response associated with
AA.

PMID: 19020552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Dec 20;26(36):5849-54. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.16.8377. Epub
2008 Nov 17.

Estrogen receptor genotypes influence hot flash prevalence and composite score
before and after tamoxifen therapy.

Jin Y(1), Hayes DF, Li L, Robarge JD, Skaar TC, Philips S, Nguyen A, Schott A,
Hayden J, Lemler S, Storniolo AM, Flockhart DA, Stearns V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2008 Dec 20;26(36):5841-2.

PURPOSE: Hot flashes are common and frequently lead to drug discontinuation among
women prescribed tamoxifen. We determined whether genetic polymorphisms in
estrogen receptors (ESRs) alpha and beta (ESR1 and ESR2, respectively) are
associated with tamoxifen-induced hot flashes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We determined ESR1 PvuII and XbaI and ESR2-02 genotypes in 
297 women who were initiating tamoxifen. One-week hot flash diaries were
collected to calculate a hot flash score (frequency x severity) before and 1, 4, 
8, and 12 months after starting tamoxifen.
RESULTS: Approximately 80% of 297 participants reported hot flashes before or
during the first year of tamoxifen. After 4 months of tamoxifen, premenopausal
women who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy had a four-fold increase in hot
flash score (from 5.9 to 23.6; P = .003) compared with a 1.17-fold increase (from
19.6 to 23; P = .34) in those who received chemotherapy. In premenopausal women, 
increased number of ESR1 PvuII and XbaI CG alleles was associated with higher
baseline hot flash scores compared with those who had other haplotypes (P =
.0026). At 4 months, postmenopausal women with ESR1 PvuII CC and ESR2-02 GG
genotypes had 4.6 times increases in hot flash scores than other postmenopausal
women (56 v 12; P = .0007). Women who had the ESR2-02 AA genotype were
significantly less likely to experience tamoxifen-induced hot flashes than women 
who carried at least one ESR-02 G allele (hazard ratio, 0.26; 95% CI, 0.10 to
0.63; P = .001).
CONCLUSION: Knowledge of menopausal status, prior chemotherapy, and ESR genotype 
may help predict which women are most likely to suffer hot flashes during
tamoxifen treatment.

PMCID: PMC2645113
PMID: 19018086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Biol Reprod. 2009 Feb;80(2):219-26. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.069021. Epub 2008
Nov 5.

Cloning and expression levels of genes relating to the ovulation rate of the
Yunling black goat.

Cui HX(1), Zhao SM, Cheng ML, Guo L, Ye RQ, Liu WQ, Gao SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, Yunnan
Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China.

This study investigated the nucleotide sequences and tissue expression levels of 
genes relating to the ovulation rate in Yunling black goats, a famous Yunnan
province, China, local breed with low fecundity. Five genes, FSHB, FSHR, BMP15,
BMPR1B, and ESR2, were investigated; the complete cDNA sequences of these genes
were 390, 2088, 1185, 1509, and 1585 bp, respectively, and compared with Boer
goats (a more fecund breed), the sequence identities were 99%, 99%, 99%, 100%,
and 99%, respectively. There were two base differences in FSHB and BMP15, four in
FSHR, and three in ESR2. There were fewer follicles and oocytes in Yunling black 
goats than in Boer goats. Expression levels of FSHB, FSHR, and BMP15 genes in
Yunling black goats were lower, and expression levels of BMPR1B and ESR2 genes
were higher. Serum FSH content was lower in Yunling black goats, but serum
estrogen content was higher. Protein expression levels of FSHR, BMP15, BMPR1B,
and ESR2 in ovary and pituitary correlated positively with gene mRNA expression
levels. In Yunling black goats, the mRNA expression levels of FSHB, FSHR, and
BMP15 positively correlated with litter size, but those of BMPR1B and ESR2
correlated negatively. Together, base changes and variations in mRNA and protein 
expression levels of genes relating to the ovulation rate result in low fecundity
in the Yunling black goat. Reduced BMP15 and FSHR levels may be related to the
observed fewer oocytes and, consequently, fewer follicles.

PMID: 18987334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Eur J Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;160(1):101-6. doi: 10.1530/EJE-08-0321. Epub 2008 Oct 
24.

Association between estrogen and androgen receptor genes and prostate cancer
risk.

Nicolaiew N(1), Cancel-Tassin G, Azzouzi AR, Grand BL, Mangin P, Cormier L,
Fournier G, Giordanella JP, Pouchard M, Escary JL, Valeri A, Cussenot O.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine, Institut Mondor de Médecine Moléculaire (IFR10),
Université Paris 12, Créteil, France.

OBJECTIVE: Prostate cancer (PC) is one of the principal causes of death among
men. Steroid hormones are involved in normal prostate growth and carcinogenesis. 
The purpose of our study was to investigate the effects on PC risk of
polymorphisms from three steroid hormone receptor genes: the androgen (AR), and
the alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) estrogen receptors.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The study was performed on a Caucasian population of 1045 PC 
patients and 814 controls. Using a logistic regression model, the different
alleles and genotypes from those polymorphisms were analyzed according to
case/control status, the tumor aggressiveness, and the age at onset.
RESULTS: A significant association between PC risk and the pooled 4/5, 5/6, and
6/6 genotypes of the GGGA repeat located in the first intron of ESR1 (odds ratio 
(OR)=3.00, 95% CI=1.32-6.82, P=0.008) was observed. When we stratified the cases,
this association was confined to patients with a Gleason score of 2-4 (OR=8.34,
95% CI=2.91-23.91, P<0.0001) or late onset PC (OR=2.91, 95% CI=1.22-6.93,
P=0.016). An association between a short AR CAG repeat (less than 17 repeats) was
also observed among patients with late onset PC (OR=2.34, 95% CI=1.15-4.76,
P=0.019).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the GGGA repeat from ESR1 and the CAG
repeat from AR may be associated with risk of late onset PC.

PMID: 18952763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Genet Test. 2008 Dec;12(4):537-40. doi: 10.1089/gte.2008.0034.

Estrogen receptor 2 polymorphism and carotid intima-media thickness.

Nikkari ST(1), Henttonen A, Kunnas T, Kähönen M, Hutri-Kähönen N, Juonala M,
Marniemi J, Viikari J, Raitakari OT, Lehtimäki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Tampere Medical School ,
Tampere, Finland. seppo.nikkari@uta.fi

AIMS: The present study was designed to investigate the effects of estrogen
receptor 2 gene (ESR2) rs1256049 polymorphism to carotid artery intima-media
thickness (CIMT), as part of the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study.
RESULTS: The frequencies of ESR2 genotypes G/G, G/A, and A/A were 85.1%, 14.3%,
and 0.7%, respectively, in the whole study population (n = 2211). Compared with
subjects with genotype GG, those with the A allele had higher mean CIMT (p =
0.004) and maximal CIMT (p = 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: In a Finnish population, the ESR2 rs1256049 polymorphism A allele is
associated with preclinical atherosclerosis in young adulthood. Our results and
those of others also suggest that some effects of this genetic variation may be
population specific.

PMID: 18939943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;200(1):75-84. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0199. Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Estradiol increases angiotensin II type 1 receptor in hearts of ovariectomized
rats.

Ricchiuti V(1), Lian CG, Oestreicher EM, Tran L, Stone JR, Yao T, Seely EW,
Williams GH, Adler GK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA. vricchiuti@partners.org

We tested the hypothesis that 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) has dual effects on the
heart, increasing levels of proteins thought to have beneficial cardiovascular
effects (e.g. endothelial nitric oxide (NO) synthase (eNOS)) as well as those
thought to have detrimental cardiovascular effects (e.g. type 1 angiotensin II
(AngII) receptor (AT(1)R)). Ovariectomized Wistar rats consuming a high-sodium
diet received one of four treatments (n=7 per group): group 1, placebo pellets;
group 2, E(2) (0 x 5 mg/pellet, 21-day release); group 3, NOS inhibitor,
N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine-methyl-ester (L-NAME; 40 mg/kg per day for 14 days)
plus Ang II (0 x 225 mg/kg per day on days 11-14); group 4, E(2) plus L-NAME/Ang 
II. E(2) increased cardiac levels of estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2, an
ESR-associated membrane protein caveolin-3, eNOS, and phosphorylated (p)eNOS,
thus, exerting potentially beneficial cardiovascular effects on NO. However, E(2)
also increased cardiac levels of proteins associated with cardiovascular injury
and inflammation including, AT(1)R, protein kinase C delta (PRKCD),
phosphorylated PRKC, and phosphorylated extracellular signal regulated kinase
(pMAPK)3/1, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), osteopontin and ED-1, a
monocyte/macrophage-specific protein. E(2) treatment led to similar protein
changes in the hearts of L-NAME/Ang II-treated rats except that the increase in
peNOS was prevented, and L-NAME/Ang II and E(2) had additive effects in
increasing cardiac PRKCD and PAI-1. Thus, the highest levels of cardiac PAI-1 and
PRKCD occurred in L-NAME/Ang II-treated rats receiving E(2). In summary, E(2)
treatment increased cardiac expression of AT(1)R as well as the expression of
pro-inflammatory and prothrombotic factors.

PMCID: PMC2927364
PMID: 18931023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Plant Mol Biol. 2009 Jan;69(1-2):57-68. doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9405-6. Epub 2008
Oct 2.

BIM1, a bHLH protein involved in brassinosteroid signalling, controls Arabidopsis
embryonic patterning via interaction with DORNROSCHEN and DORNROSCHEN-LIKE.

Chandler JW(1), Cole M, Flier A, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Gyrhofstrasse 17,
50923 Cologne, Germany. john.chandler@uni-koeln.de

The BIM1 protein which has been implicated in brassinosteroid (BR) signal
transduction was identified from a two hybrid screen using the N-terminus,
including the AP2 domain, of the transcription factors DORNROESCHEN (DRN) and
DORNROESCHEN-LIKE (DRNL) which control embryonic patterning. The protein-protein 
interaction between BIM1 and DRN or DRNL was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation 
and for DRN also in vivo by bimolecular fluorescence complementation. BIM1 can
also physically interact with PHAVOLUTA (PHV), another interaction partner of DRN
and DRNL. Loss of BIM1 function results in embryo patterning defects at low
penetrance, including cell division defects in the hypophyseal region and apical 
domain defects such as cotyledon fusion and polycotyledony, in addition to
polyembryony. BIM1 expression overlaps with that of DRN and DRNL from early
globular embryo stages onwards. Higher order mutants between bim1, drn, drnl and 
phv suggest that although BIM1 may act partially redundantly with DRN in early
embryo development, all genes function within the same pathway determining
cotyledon development, supporting the hypothesis that they participate in a
multimeric transcription factor complex. A role of BIM1 in embryonic development 
not only implicates a function for brassinosteroids in this process, but the
interaction of BIM1 with DRN, involved with auxin signalling, represents a
possible point of hormonal crosstalk in embryonic patterning and the first
example of an interaction of components of the auxin and BR signalling pathways.

PMID: 18830673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Horm Metab Res. 2008 Nov;40(11):779-86. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1083780. Epub 2008
Sep 15.

Influence of sex hormones on adiponectin expression in human adipocytes.

Horenburg S(1), Fischer-Posovszky P, Debatin KM, Wabitsch M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Adiponectin is an adipokine with profound antidiabetic and antiatherogenic
effects. Circulating adiponectin concentrations are higher in women than in men. 
In order to study the molecular aspects of this sex-specific dimorphism, we
examined the expression of adiponectin in human fat cells under the influence of 
sex hormones, using SGBS cells as an in vitro model. Androgen and estradiol
receptor 1 and 2 (AR, ESR1, ESR2) mRNA expression increased dramatically during
adipogenic differentiation. Stimulation with human male and female serum led to a
downregulation of adiponectin expression, with male serum exerting significantly 
stronger inhibitory properties than female serum (p<0.05). Increasing
concentrations of testosterone or estradiol influenced neither adiponectin mRNA
expression and secretion nor intracellular protein expression of high-, middle-, 
and low-molecular-weight (HMW, MMW, LMW) adiponectin multimers. These data have
been verified in in vitro-differentiated primary human adipocytes. We conclude
that although human adipocytes express AR, ESR1, and ESR2 and respond to
testosterone treatment with a decrease in leptin expression, expression and
secretion of adiponectin is unaffected by sex steroids. We hypothesize,
therefore, the existence of a serum factor that is differently regulated by sex
steroids and subsequently causes the sex dimorphism in circulating adiponectin
levels.

PMID: 18792884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Endocrinol. 2008 Dec;199(3):445-55. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0226. Epub 2008 Sep 9.

Bone morphogenetic protein 6 (BMP6) and BMP7 inhibit estrogen-induced
proliferation of breast cancer cells by suppressing p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase activation.

Takahashi M(1), Otsuka F, Miyoshi T, Otani H, Goto J, Yamashita M, Ogura T,
Makino H, Doihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Thoracic Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama
City 700-8558, Japan.

Estrogen is involved in the development and progression of breast cancer. Here,
we investigated the effects of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) on breast
cancer cell proliferation caused by estrogen using human breast cancer MCF-7
cells. MCF-7 cells express estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2), BMP receptors, and
SMAD signaling molecules. Estradiol and membrane-impermeable estradiol stimulated
MCF-7 cell proliferation. Estradiol also reduced mRNA levels of ESR1, aromatase, 
and steroid sulfatase. Treatment with BMPs and activin had no effects on MCF-7
cell proliferation. However, BMP2, BMP4, BMP6, BMP7, and activin suppressed
estradiol-induced cell mitosis, with the effects of BMP6, BMP7, and activin being
more prominent than those of BMP2 and BMP4. Activin decreased ESR1 mRNA
expression, while BMP6 and BMP7 impaired steroid sulfatase expression in MCF-7
cells. Interestingly, SMAD1,5,8 activation elicited by BMP6 and BMP7, but not by 
BMP2 and BMP4, was preserved even under the exposure of a high concentration of
estradiol. The difference of BMP responsiveness was likely due to the
differential modulation of BMP receptor expression induced by estradiol. In this 
regard, estradiol decreased the expression levels of BMPR1A, BMPR1B, ACVR2A, and 
ACVR2B but did not affect ACVR1 and BMPRII, leading to the sustained effects of
BMP6 and BMP7 in estrogen-treated MCF-7 cells. Estradiol rapidly activated MAPK
phosphorylation including extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2, p38, and
stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase pathways and BMP6,
BMP7, and activin preferentially inhibited estradiol-induced p38 phosphorylation.
SB203580, a selective p38 MAPK inhibitor effectively suppressed estradiol-induced
cell mitosis, suggesting that p38 MAPK plays a key role in estrogen-sensitive
breast cancer cell proliferation. Thus, a novel interrelationship between
estrogen and the breast cancer BMP system was uncovered, in which inhibitory
effects of BMP6 and BMP7 on p38 signaling and steroid sulfatase expression were
functionally involved in the suppression of estrogen-induced mitosis of breast
cancer cells.

PMID: 18780779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Bone Miner Res. 2009 Feb;24(2):314-23. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.080912.

Genetic variation in sex hormone genes influences heel ultrasound parameters in
middle-aged and elderly men: results from the European Male Aging Study (EMAS).

Limer KL(1), Pye SR, Thomson W, Boonen S, Borghs H, Vanderschueren D, Huhtaniemi 
IT, Adams JE, Ward KA, Platt H, Payne D, John SL, Bartfai G, Casanueva F, Finn
JD, Forti G, Giwercman A, Han TS, Kula K, Lean ME, Pendleton N, Punab M, Silman
AJ, Wu FC, O'Neill TW; EMAS Study Group.

Collaborators: Forti G, Petrone L, Cilotti A, Vanderschueren D, Boonen S, Borghs 
H, Kula K, Slowikowska-Hilczer J, Walczak-Jedrzejowska R, Huhtaniemi I, Giwercman
A, Wu F, Silman A, O'Neill T, Finn J, Steer P, Tajar A, Lee D, Pye S, Casanueva
F, Ocampo M, Lage M, Bartfai G, Földesi I, Fejes I, Punab M, Korrovitz P, Jiang
M.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Epidemiology Unit, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom. kate.limer@manchester.ac.uk

Genes involved in sex hormone pathways are candidates for influencing bone
strength. Polymorphisms in these genes were tested for association with heel
quantitative ultrasound (QUS) parameters in middle-aged and elderly European men.
Men 40-79 yr of age were recruited from population registers in eight European
centers for the European Male Aging Study (EMAS). Polymorphisms were genotyped in
AR, ESR1, ESR2, CYP19A1, CYP17A1, SHBG, SRD5A2, LHB, and LHCGR. QUS parameters
broadband ultrasound attenuation (BUA) and speed of sound (SOS) were measured in 
the heel and used to derive BMD. The relationships between QUS parameters and
polymorphisms were assessed using linear regression adjusting for age and center.
A total of 2693 men, with a mean age of 60.1 +/- 11.1 (SD) yr were included in
the analysis. Their mean BUA was 80.0 +/- 18.9 dB/Mhz, SOS was 1550.2 +/- 34.1
m/s, and BMD was 0.542 +/- 0.141 g/cm(2). Significant associations were observed 
between multiple SNPs in a linkage disequilibrium (LD) block within CYP19A1,
peaking at the TCT indel with the deletion allele associating with reduced
ultrasound BMD in heterozygotes (beta =-0.016, p = -0.005) and homozygotes (beta 
= -0.029, p = 0.001). The results for BUA and SOS were similar. Significant
associations with QUS parameters were also observed for the CAG repeat in AR and 
SNPs in CYP17A1, LHCGR, and ESR1. Our data confirm evidence of association
between bone QUS parameters and polymorphisms in CYP19A1, as well as modest
associations with polymorphisms in CYP17A1, ESR1, LHCGR, and AR in a population
sample of European men; this supports a role for genetically determined sex
hormone actions in influencing male bone health.

PMID: 18767927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;199(2):267-73. doi: 10.1677/JOE-07-0292. Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Differential regulation of the inducible nitric oxide synthase gene by estrogen
receptors 1 and 2.

Tsutsumi S(1), Zhang X, Takata K, Takahashi K, Karas RH, Kurachi H, Mendelsohn
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yamagata University School of
Medicine, 2-2-2 Iida-Nishi, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan.

Estrogen has both rapid and longer term direct effects on cardiovascular tissues 
mediated by the two estrogen receptors, ESR1 and ESR2. Previous work identified
that estrogen regulates the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS2A)
in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). ESR2 knockout mice have vascular
dysfunction due to dysregulation of NOS2A expression and these mice are
hypertensive (Zhu et al. Science 2002 295 505-508). Here, we report studies to
examine the differential regulation of NOS2A gene expression by ESR1 and 2.
Immunoblotting and RT-PCR studies revealed that different VSMC lines expressed
different levels of ESR1 and ESR2 protein and mRNA. VSMC from different vascular 
beds were studied, including aortic VSMC expressing ESR1 and radial (Rad) VSMC
expressing ESR2. E(2) inhibited NO production and NOS2A protein expression in
aortic VSMC. Human NOS2A promoter-reporter studies revealed suppression of NOS2A 
reporter activity by E(2) in aortic VSMC, and stimulation of NOS2A reporter
activity by E(2) in Rad arterial VSMC. In heterologous expression studies of
COS-7 cells lacking endogenous ER, E(2) treatment of COS-7 cells did not alter
NOS2A reporter activity in the presence of ESR1, while reporter activity
increased 2.3-fold in the presence of ESR2. Similar experiments in COS-7 cells
using the selective estrogen receptor modulator raloxifene showed that raloxifene
caused a reduction in NOS2A reporter activity with ESR1 coexpression and an
increase with ESR2 coexpression. Rat VSMC expressing ESR2 but not ESR1 also
showed increased NOS2A reporter activity with E(2) treatment, an effect lost when
ESR1 was introduced into the cells. Taken together, these data support that
hNOS2A transcription is regulated positively by ESR2 and negatively by ESR1 in
VSMC, supporting differential actions of these two estrogen receptors on a
physiologically relevant gene in VSMC.

PMCID: PMC2773690
PMID: 18753331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2008;29(4):313-20.

Genetic polymorphisms, the metabolism of estrogens and breast cancer: a review.

Bugano DD(1), Conforti-Froes N, Yamaguchi NH, Baracat EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
diogobugano@gmail.com

Breast cancer is the most common female cancer and the second cause of cancer
death in women. Despite recent breakthroughs, much of the etiology of this
disease is unknown and the most important risk factor, i.e., exposure to
endogenous and exogenous estrogen throughout life cannot explain the
heterogeneity of prognosis nor clinical features of patients. Recently, many gene
polymorphisms in the metabolism of breast cancer have been described as possible 
neoplasm etiologic factors. This review is an attempt to summarize the current
knowledge about these polymorphisms and to determine new target genes for
diagnosis and treatment of the disease. Polymorphisms in the genes CYP17, CYP19, 
CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, UGT1A1, SULT1A1, 17-hydroxysteroid-dehydrogenase, COMT,
GST, ESR1, and ESR2 are described.

PMID: 18714561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Cancer Causes Control. 2009 Feb;20(1):47-55. doi: 10.1007/s10552-008-9216-8. Epub
2008 Aug 15.

Genetic polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) gene and the risk of
epithelial ovarian carcinoma.

Lurie G(1), Wilkens LR, Thompson PJ, McDuffie KE, Carney ME, Terada KY, Goodman
MT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epidemiology Program, Cancer Research Center of Hawaii, University of
Hawaii, 1236 Lauhala Street, Room 301C, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA.
glurie@CRCH.hawaii.edu

Ovarian cancer is influenced by exogenous and endogenous estrogens as suggested
by experimental and epidemiological evidence. Estrogen receptor beta is a
predominant estrogen receptor in the normal ovary. Polymorphisms in the estrogen 
receptor beta gene (ESR2) might influence epithelial ovarian risk through
regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis. This population-based
case-control study included 313 women with epithelial ovarian carcinoma and 574
controls, frequency-matched on age and ethnicity. Unconditional logistic
regression was used to test associations of rs1271572, rs1256030, rs1256031, and 
rs3020450 ESR2 genotypes with ovarian cancer risk. Compared to homozygous common 
allele carriers, homozygous carriers of variant alleles for rs1271572 [odds ratio
(OR) = 1.79, 95% confidence interval (CI):1.15-2.79, p global = 0.01] and
rs1256030 [OR = 1.67, CI: 1.08-2.59, p global = 0.04], and women with haplotypes,
including variant alleles of rs1271572, rs1256030, and rs1256031 SNPs [OR = 1.75,
CI: 1.17-2.63, p global = 0.007], had significantly increased risk of ovarian
carcinoma. The association of the rs1271572 genotype was strongest among women
who had never used contraceptive steroids (p for interaction = 0.04). Our data
suggest that ESR2 might be a susceptibility marker for epithelial ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC2663411
PMID: 18704709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Nov;93(11):4448-55. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-2836. Epub
2008 Aug 12.

Identification of LTBP2 on chromosome 14q as a novel candidate gene for bone
mineral density variation and fracture risk association.

Cheung CL(1), Sham PC, Chan V, Paterson AD, Luk KD, Kung AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong,
China.

CONTEXT: Low bone mineral density (BMD) is a major risk factor for osteoporotic
fracture. Chromosome 14q has previously been linked to BMD variation in several
genome-wide linkage scans in Caucasian populations.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to replicate and identify the novel candidate genes 
in the quantitative trait loci (QTL) at chromosome 14q QTL.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Eighteen microsatellite markers were genotyped for a 117-cM
interval in 306 Southern Chinese pedigrees with 1459 subjects. Successful
replication of the QTL was confirmed within this region for trochanter and total 
hip BMD. Using a gene prioritization approach as implemented in the Endeavour
program, we genotyped 65 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the top five ranking 
candidate genes within the linkage peak in 706 and 760 case-control subject pairs
with extremely high and low trochanter and total hip BMD, respectively.
RESULTS: Single-marker and haplotype analyses revealed that ESR2 and latent
TGF-beta binding protein 2 (LTBP2) had significant associations with trochanter
and total hip BMD. Multiple logistic regression revealed a strong genetic
association between LTBP2 gene locus and total hip BMD variation (P=0.0004) and
prevalent fracture (P=0.01). Preliminary in vitro study showed differential
expression of LTBP2 gene in MC3T3-E1 mouse preosteoblastic cells in culture.
CONCLUSIONS: Apart from ESR2, LTBP2 is a novel positional candidate gene in
chromosome 14q QTL for BMD variation and fracture.

PMID: 18697872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Bone. 2008 Nov;43(5):910-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.07.001. Epub 2008 Jul 15.

Polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor genes are associated with hip fractures in
Chinese.

Wang JT(1), Guo Y, Yang TL, Xu XH, Dong SS, Li M, Li TQ, Chen Y, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, PR China.

INTRODUCTION: Hip fractures (HF) are a major cause of public health burden with
strong genetic determination. However, the true causal genes remain largely
unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Based on the important biological role of estrogens in
bone homeostasis, this study aimed to investigate whether the estrogen receptor
genes, ESR1 and ESR2, affect the onset of HF in 700 elderly Chinese subjects (350
with osteoporotic HF and 350 healthy controls). We genotyped 32 SNPs in total and
examined their associations both by the single-SNP and haplotype tests.
RESULTS: We identified two novel SNPs of ESR1, rs3020314 and rs1884051, were
significantly associated with HF (rs3020314: P=0.0004, OR=1.66, 95%CI: 1.25-2.18;
rs1884051: P=0.0004, OR=1.46, 95%CI: 1.19-1.81). We firstly detected significant 
association of ESR2 with HF (rs960070: P=0.0070, OR=1.43, 95%CI: 1.10-1.86).
Haplotype analyses corroborated our single-SNP results.
CONCLUSION: Our findings have important implications for understanding the
pathology of osteoporotic fractures. Independent replication studies are needed
to validate our results and explore the most possible functional variants for
molecular studies.

PMID: 18678289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Endocrinology. 2008 Dec;149(12):6300-10. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0670. Epub 2008 Jul
17.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and evolutionary analysis of estrogen
receptors from phylogenetically ancient fish.

Katsu Y(1), Kohno S, Hyodo S, Ijiri S, Adachi S, Hara A, Guillette LJ Jr, Iguchi 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji,
Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan.

Estrogens are necessary for ovarian differentiation during a critical
developmental stage in many vertebrates, and they promote the growth and
differentiation of the adult female reproductive system. To understand the
evolution of vertebrate estrogen receptors (ESRs) and to evaluate estrogen
receptor-ligand interactions in phylogenetically ancient fish, we used PCR
techniques to isolate the cDNA encoding ESRs from lungfish, sturgeon, and gar.
Sequence analyses indicate that these fishes have two ESRs, ESR1 (ERalpha) and
ESR2 (ERbeta), as previously reported for other vertebrate species, but a second 
type of ESR2 (ERbeta2) was not found as has been reported in a number of teleost 
fishes. Phylogenetic analysis of the ESR sequences indicated that the lungfish
ESRs are classified to the tetrapod ESR group, not with the teleost fish ESRs as 
are the ESRs from gar and sturgeon. Using transient transfection assays of
mammalian cells, ESR proteins from these three ancient fishes displayed
estrogen-dependent activation of transcription from an
estrogen-responsive-element containing promoter. We also examined the estrogenic 
potential of o,p'-dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane (o,p'-DDT) and p,p'-DDT as
well as one of its common metabolites, p,p'-dichloro-diphenyl-ethylene (p,p'-DDE)
on the ESRs from these fishes. Lungfish ESR1 was less sensitive to DDT/DDE than
the ESR1 from the other two fishes. The response of lungfish ESR1 to these
pesticides is similar to the pattern obtained from salamander ESR1. These data
provide a basic tool allowing future studies examining the receptor-ligand
interactions and endocrine-disrupting mechanisms in three species of
phylogenetically ancient fish and also expands our knowledge of ESR evolution.

PMCID: PMC2734497
PMID: 18635653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Aug;45(2):217-22. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.05.016. Epub
2008 Jul 9.

Sex hormone receptor gene variation associated with phenotype in male
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients.

Lind JM(1), Chiu C, Ingles J, Yeates L, Humphries SE, Heather AK, Semsarian C.

Author information: 
(1)Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Sydney,
Australia.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a clinically heterogeneous disease, which
suggests that a number of factors exist which modify disease outcome. Gender may 
be one such factor as more males present with the disease compared with females. 
The aim of the present study was to determine if an association exists between
genetic variation in sex hormone receptors and the development of left
ventricular hypertrophy in HCM. The study population included 200 unrelated
individuals from an Australian HCM cohort. Clinical evaluation was performed.
Genetic analysis of the androgen receptor (AR), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1),
estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2), and aromatase (CYP19A1) genes, was carried out in all
patients. Fewer (CAG)n repeats within the AR gene were significantly associated
with higher maximal left ventricular wall thickness (LVWT) in males (P=0.008),
adjusting for age. Male carriers of the A allele at SNP rs6915267, located in the
promoter region of ESR1, had an 11% decrease in mean LVWT compared to male GG
homozygotes (P=0.047). We report for the first time that variation at the AR gene
is associated with left ventricular hypertrophy in males with HCM. Understanding 
the impact of sex hormones on phenotype will be helpful in the risk
stratification and clinical management of HCM patients.

PMID: 18617186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Endocrinol. 2008 Sep;198(3):625-34. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0121. Epub 2008 Jul 2.

Maternal malnutrition during lactation alters the folliculogenesis and
gonadotropins and estrogen isoforms ovarian receptors in the offspring at
puberty.

Faria Tda S(1), Brasil Fde B, Sampaio FJ, Ramos Cda F.

Author information: 
(1)Urogenital Research Unit-UERJ, State University of Rio de Janeiro, Avenue 28
de Setembro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

In this study, we aimed to evaluate whether maternal malnutrition during
lactation alters the folliculogenesis and the expression of the gonadotropins and
estrogen isoforms ovarian receptors in the offspring at puberty. At parturition, 
dams were randomly assigned to the following groups: control (C) group, with free
access to a standard laboratory diet containing 23% protein and
protein-energy-restricted (PER) group, with free access to an isoenergy and
protein-restricted diet containing 8% protein. After weaning, the female pups had
free access to standard laboratory diet. The maternal malnutrition caused a
significant increase in the number of preantral (C=13.72+/-2.87;
PER=26.36+/-3.03, P<0.01) and small antral follicles (C=9.32+/-1.35;
PER=17.64+/-2.33, P<0.01) and decrease in the number of primordial
(C=11.72+/-1.37; PER=3.92+/-0.60, P<0.01) and Graafian follicles (C=1.84+/-0.21; 
PER=0.96+/-0.11, P<0.01), and corpus luteum (C=2.00+/-0.28; PER=0.80+/-0.31,
P<0.01). The estradiol serum concentration was significantly higher
(C=67.86+/-4.39; PER=83.29+/-2.68, P<0.05) while testosterone serum concentration
did not show statistical difference (C=0.09+/-0.02; PER=0.11+/-0.01, P>0.05) in
the PER group. In relation to the receptors expression, maternal malnutrition led
to a significant increase in the amount of Fshr (C=0.89+/-0.04; PER=1.07+/-0.03, 
P<0.05) and Lhcqr (C=0.87+/-0.15; PER=1.33+/-0.08, P<0.05) transcripts and a
significant decrease in the amount of Ar (C=0.59+/-0.006; PER=0.13+/-0.080,
P<0.05), ER alpha (Esr1) (C=3.33+/-0.71; PER=0.74+/-0.50, P<0.05), ER beta 1
(Esr2) (C=1.33+/-0.06; PER=0.49+/-0.36, P<0.05), and ER beta 2 (Esr2)
(C=3.28+/-0.60; PER=0.62+/-0.34, P<0.05) transcripts. In conclusion, perinatal
maternal malnutrition can directly affect folliculogenesis at puberty probably as
a consequence of changes in the ovarian expression of gonadotropins, androgen and
estrogens isoforms receptors. Long-term sexual alterations could be expected in
this experimental model, since a reduction in the primordial follicle number is
observed, which can result in a decrease in the reproductive lifetime and an
earlier termination of breeding capacity.

PMID: 18596125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2008;28(3):285-93. doi: 10.1080/10799890802084614 
.

Estrogen receptors alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) are expressed in circulating
human lymphocytes.

Scariano JK(1), Emery-Cohen AJ, Pickett GG, Morgan M, Simons PC, Alba F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical Laboratory Sciences, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131-0001, USA. Jscariano@salud.unm.edu

Bone marrow thymocytes in part mediate the bone-preserving effects of estrogen by
decreasing their production of osteoclast growth factors such as interleukin-1
and -6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha in the presence of physiological amounts
of estradiol. Although several in vitro studies implicate the T-lymphocyte as a
candidate mediator of estrogen signaling in the skeleton, whether these cells or 
any lymphocytes ordinarily express one or both nuclear estrogen receptors was
previously unresolved. The purpose of our investigation was therefore to
ascertain, by using real-time PCR, immmunoblotting, and cytometric techniques, if
any of the nuclear estrogen receptors could be detected in normal peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMNC) collected from healthy volunteers. The results of
immunoblotting experiments revealed that both estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and 
beta (ESR2) proteins are expressed in nuclei, but not in the cytoplasm of PBMNC
harvested from all of the 15 healthy male and female volunteers (aged 23-50
years) we tested. PBMNCs contained mRNA coding for the two major full-length
isoforms of ESR2 and the expression of ESR2 protein was localized within a
lymphocyte subpopulation by cytometric analysis. Our data provide further
evidence that lymphocytes and monocytes are responsive to estrogen and underscore
its importance in modulating the immune response, as well as the vascular and
skeletal health of men and women.

PMID: 18569528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Nov;16(11):1380-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.113. Epub 2008
Jun 18.

Comprehensive association analyses of IGF1, ESR2, and CYP17 genes with adult
height in Caucasians.

Yang TL(1), Xiong DH, Guo Y, Recker RR, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering, Ministry of
Education, Institute of Molecular Genetics, School of Life Science and
Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, PR China.

Human adult height is closely related to body growth that is regulated by
multiple cytokines or hormones like growth hormone (GH) and estrogen. Our study
focused on three potential candidate genes to human height, namely IGF1
(insulin-like growth factor 1), ESR2, and CYP17. We genotyped 43 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and tested their associations in 1873 subjects
from 405 nuclear families, using both the family-based quantitative transmission 
disequilibrium test (QTDT) and population-based ANOVA methods. Both analyses
consistently detected that two novel SNPs of IGF1, rs5742694 and rs2033178, were 
significantly associated with human height, with the P-values of 0.0097 and
0.0057 in QTDT analyses, 0.0002/0.004 (sample 1/sample 2) and 8.46 x 10(-5)/1.92 
x 10(-5) in ANOVA analyses. For ESR2, significant associations were only detected
in women (rs1256061: QTDT P=0.002, ANOVA P=0.002/0.012; rs17766755: QTDT P=0.019,
ANOVA P=0.023/0.006; rs1256044: QTDT P=0.022, ANOVA P=0.002/0.034). Haplotype
analyses corroborated our single-SNP results. However, no association was
detected between CYP17 and human height. In conclusion, we identified the
important effects of IGF1 and ESR2 on adult height variation in Caucasians, and
first suggested the potential sex-specific effect of ESR2 on height variation in 
Caucasian women. It will be valuable for other independent studies to replicate
and confirm these findings.

PMID: 18560445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Biol Reprod. 2008 Sep;79(3):432-41. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.107.067413. Epub 2008
May 21.

Effects of the antiestrogen fulvestrant (ICI 182,780) on gene expression of the
rat efferent ductules.

Yasuhara F(1), Gomes GR, Siu ER, Suenaga CI, Maróstica E, Porto CS, Lazari MF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo,
Brazil.

The efferent ductules express the highest amount of estrogen receptors ESR1
(ERalpha) and ESR2 (ERbeta) within the male reproductive tract. Treatment of rats
with the antiestrogen fulvestrant (ICI 182,780) causes inhibition of fluid
reabsorption in the efferent ductules, leading to seminiferous tubule atrophy and
infertility. To provide a more comprehensive knowledge about the molecular
targets for estrogen in the rat efferent ductules, we investigated the effects of
ICI 182,780 treatment on gene expression using a microarray approach. Treatment
with ICI 182,780 increased or reduced at least 2-fold the expression of 263 and
98 genes, respectively. Not surprisingly, several genes that encode ion channels 
and macromolecule transporters were affected. Interestingly, treatment with ICI
182,780 markedly altered the expression of genes related to extracellular matrix 
organization. Matrix metalloproteinase 7 (Mmp7), osteopontin (Spp1), and neuronal
pentraxin 1 (Nptx1) were among the most altered genes in this category.
Upregulation of Mmp7 and Spp1 and downregulation of Nptx1 were validated by
Northern blot. Increase in Mmp7 expression was further confirmed by
immunohistochemistry and probably accounted for the decrease in collagen content 
observed in the efferent ductules of ICI 182,780-treated animals. Downregulation 
of Nptx1 probably contributed to the extracellular matrix changes and decreased
amyloid deposition in the efferent ductules of ICI 182,780-treated animals.
Identification of new molecular targets for estrogen action may help elucidate
the regulatory role of this hormone in the male reproductive tract.

PMID: 18495684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Clin Chem. 2008 Jul;54(7):1183-9. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2007.102400. Epub 2008
May 16.

Association between ESR2 genetic variants and risk of myocardial infarction.

Domingues-Montanari S(1), Subirana I, Tomás M, Marrugat J, Sentí M.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Lípids i Epidemiologia Cardiovascular, Institut Municipal
d'Investigació Mèdica (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Environmental and genetic factors contribute to the development of
complex diseases such as myocardial infarction (MI), the leading cause of death
in men and women. Women develop MI approximately 10 years later than men, a
difference that could be explained by the genes coding for the estrogen
receptors. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR2 gene may affect
susceptibility for MI in a sex-dependent manner.
METHODS: A nested case-control design was used to analyze 3 polymorphisms of the 
ESR2 gene and their associated haplotypes in 710 myocardial infarction cases from
the REGICOR (Registre Gironí del Corazón) study and 2379 controls randomly
selected in a representative population of a Spanish cross-sectional study.
RESULTS: The rs1271572 T allele was significantly more common in patients who
developed MI (P < 0.001). No association was observed for rs1256049 or rs4986938.
Assuming a dominant model of inheritance, the association, as determined by
logistic multivariate regression after adjustment for conventional cardiac risk
factors, remained statistically significant in men [odds ratio (OR) 1.65, 95% CI 
1.18-2.30; P = 0.003) but not in women (P = 0.754). A very common haplotype
encompassing the rs1271572 variant was also associated with the risk of MI in the
overall population (OR 1.41, 95% CI 1.06-1.87; P = 0.020) and in men (OR 1.57,
95% CI 1.12-2.21; P = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: The rs1271572 SNP T variant was associated with increased risk of MI
in a Spanish population, and this association was found to be limited to men
only. Sex differences in the genetic risk merit further investigation.

PMID: 18487282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Reproduction. 2008 Aug;136(2):175-86. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0100. Epub 2008 May 15.

Selective estrogen receptor alpha activation disrupts sex organ differentiation
and induces expression of vitellogenin II and very low-density apolipoprotein II 
in Japanese quail embryos.

Mattsson A(1), Olsson JA, Brunström B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, Centre for Reproductive Biology in
Uppsala, Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18A, SE-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

The Japanese quail (Coturnix japonica) is a widely used model species for
studying the roles of steroid hormones in avian sex differentiation. The aim of
the present study was to elucidate the significance of estrogen receptors alpha
and beta (ERalpha and ERbeta) in normal sex differentiation of the reproductive
organs in the Japanese quail and in xenoestrogen-induced disruption of
reproductive organ differentiation. Real-time PCR indicated that ERalpha (ESR1)
mRNA is expressed in both right and left gonads and Müllerian ducts (MDs) in both
sexes during early morphological differentiation. ERbeta (ESR2) transcripts were 
also detected in gonads and MDs, but at very low levels. Both receptor subtypes
were expressed in the liver and may therefore mediate the expression of
estrogen-regulated egg-yolk proteins. Aromatase mRNA was expressed at much higher
levels in female than male gonads as early as embryonic day 5, indicating early
sex differences in estrogen synthesis. Treatment with the ERalpha-selective
agonist propyl pyrazole triol showed that frequently reported xenoestrogen
effects, such as ovotestis formation, abnormal MD development, and hepatic
expression of egg-yolk proteins, were induced by selective activation of ERalpha.
Taken together, our results suggest that activation of ERalpha is crucial for
estrogen-dependent sex differentiation of the reproductive organs and that
ERalpha mediates xenoestrogen-induced toxicity during reproductive development in
birds.

PMID: 18483074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Aquat Toxicol. 2008 Jun 23;88(2):95-101. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2008.03.006. Epub
2008 Mar 20.

Gene expression patterns in juvenile American alligators (Alligator
mississippiensis) exposed to environmental contaminants.

Kohno S(1), Bermudez DS, Katsu Y, Iguchi T, Guillette LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, 223 Bartram Hall, PO Box 118525, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32611-8525, USA. kohno@zoo.ufl.edu

Reproductive and developmental abnormalities have been reported in the American
alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) population from Lake Apopka, FL, that is
chronically exposed to a complex mixture of environmental contaminants. To begin 
to understand the molecular mechanisms that could lead to the observed
abnormalities of the reproductive and endocrine system, we quantified
concentrations of the steroid hormones testosterone (T) and estradiol-17beta
(E(2)) and expression of steroid hormone receptors and genes relating to
steroidogenesis in gonadal tissue from juvenile alligators from three lakes in
Florida using enzyme immunoassay and quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Alterations of ESR2 (estrogen receptor beta) and SF1 (steroidogenic
factor 1) mRNA expression in male gonadal tissue, without an observed difference 
in plasma concentrations of T, from the different lakes, begin to provide insight
into potential mechanisms underlying the alterations of the reproductive system
previously observed. Likewise, alterations in P450 aromatase and DAX1
(dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region on
the X chromosome, gene 1) mRNA expression, with elevated plasma E(2)
concentrations in females, provide leads to the potential mechanisms modifying
folliculogenesis and ovarian development. The investigation of these genes also
helps clarify normal endocrine and reproductive system function in the American
alligator.

PMID: 18455813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Jul;93(7):2779-85. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0106. Epub 
2008 Apr 29.

Variation in estrogen-related genes associated with cardiovascular phenotypes and
circulating estradiol, testosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels.

Peter I(1), Kelley-Hedgepeth A, Fox CS, Cupples LA, Huggins GS, Housman DE, Karas
RH, Mendelsohn ME, Levy D, Murabito JM.

Author information: 
(1)Tufts Medical Center, 800 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
ipeter@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

BACKGROUND: Younger age at the onset of menopause and lower circulating levels of
estrogen are risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Several studies have
detected associations between variations in genes encoding estrogen receptors
alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2), and enzyme aromatase (CYP19A1), which regulates the
estrogen to testosterone ratio, and cardiovascular phenotypes in the Framingham
Heart Study. To explore potential mechanisms by which these gene variants may
contribute to cardiovascular disease, we tested the hypothesis that the
polymorphisms were associated with endogenous steroid hormone levels.
METHODS: Multiple regression analysis was used to assess the relation between
reported polymorphisms and total serum estradiol, testosterone, and
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels in 834 men and 687 women who attended the
third and fourth Framingham Heart Study examination cycles.
RESULTS: In men, significant associations were detected between CYP19A1
polymorphisms and estradiol and testosterone levels, and the estradiol to
testosterone ratio (P ranges 0.0005-0.01). Specifically, carriers of common
haplotype rs700518[G]-(TTTA)(n) [L]-rs726547[C] had higher estradiol levels (5%
per copy; P = 0.0004), lower testosterone levels (17% per copy; P = 0.036), and a
higher estradiol to testosterone ratio (24% per copy; P < 0.0001) compared with
the rs700518[A]-(TTTA)(n) [S]-rs726547[C] carriers. In addition, postmenopausal
carriers of the ESR2 (CA)(n) long allele and rs1256031 [C] allele had moderately 
higher estradiol levels (P < or = 0.03). No significant associations with the
ESR1 variants were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that variations in CYP19A1 correlate with
steroid hormone levels in men. Knowledge that a specific carrier status may
predispose to altered steroid hormone levels may lead to targeted intervention
strategies to reduce health risks in genetically susceptible individuals.

PMCID: PMC2453049
PMID: 18445666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Reprod Sci. 2008 Apr;15(3):305-11. doi: 10.1177/1933719107314064.

A digenic combination of polymorphisms within ESR1 and ESR2 genes are associated 
with age at menarche in the Spanish population.

Mendoza N(1), Morón FJ, Quereda F, Vázquez F, Rivero MC, Martínez-Astorquiza T,
Real LM, Sánchez-Borrego R, González-Pérez A, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las
Nieves, Granada, Spain.

In the present study, the authors look at an association of genetic variants
within estrogen synthesis and signaling pathways and age at menarche (AAM) in
Spanish women. They analyzed 9 polymorphisms in 6 different genes in 714
well-characterized postmenopausal women from Spain. They performed a quantitative
trait locus study of these markers individually or in digenic combinations in
relation to AAM. None of the studied markers, with the exception of the
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (P = .013), were significantly associated
with AAM in the Spanish population, and no marker demonstrated an association of 
statistical significance after multiple testing corrections (P > .0055). In
contrast, linear regression analysis suggests epistatic interactions including
ESR1 and ESR2 loci in relation to AAM in the series (P = .003). The results
suggest that epistatic interactions of ESR1 and ESR2 alleles could be associated 
with advancing AAM among Spanish women.

PMID: 18421025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Brain Res. 2008 May 19;1210:126-41. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.02.053. Epub
2008 Mar 4.

Distribution of estrogen receptor 2 mRNAs (Esr2a and Esr2b) in the brain and
pituitary of the sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax).

Muriach B(1), Carrillo M, Zanuy S, Cerdá-Reverter JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fish Physiology and Biotechnology, Instituto de Acuicultura de
Torre de la Sal, CSIC, Torre de la Sal, 12595 Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón,
Spain.

Three different estrogen receptors (ERs) have been characterized in teleost fish,
i.e. Esr1, Esr2a and Esr2b. In this study we carried out in situ hybridizations
in the brain and pituitary of the sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) to study the
putative involvement of Esr2 subtypes in the control of gonadotropin secretion in
fish. Our studies demonstrated that both receptors are expressed within the main 
hypophysiotrophic areas of the sea bass brain thus providing neuroanatomical
basis for the involvement of Esr2 subtypes in the long (or indirect) regulatory
feedbacks on pituitary function in the sea bass. The results revealed that
Esr2b-mRNA distribution was restricted to the preoptic area and tuberal
hypothalamus. On the contrary, Esr2a presented a widespread distribution and
transcripts were detected within the ventral telencephalon, preoptic area,
hypothalamus, thalamus, posterior tubercle, mesencephalon and rhombencephalon.
New Esr2-expressing areas were described in all of the above areas. This paper is
the first demonstration of Esr2a and Esr2b expression in the follicle-stimulating
hormone beta-subunit (betaFSH)- and luteinizing hormone beta-subunit
(betaLH)-expressing cells in the fish pituitary, thus suggesting the
participation of both receptors in the direct effect of estrogen on the control
of gonadotropin hormone synthesis.

PMID: 18407250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Sex Dev. 2007;1(3):181-96. doi: 10.1159/000102107.

Steroid signaling system responds differently to temperature and hormone
manipulation in the red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta elegans), a
reptile with temperature-dependent sex determination.

Ramsey M(1), Crews D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Integrative Biology, University of Texas, Austin, Tex. 78712, USA.

Many reptiles, including the red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta elegans),
exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD). Temperature determines
gonadal sex during the middle of embryogenesis, or the temperature-sensitive
period (TSP), when gonadal sex is labile to both temperature and
hormones--particularly estrogen. The biological actions of steroid hormones are
mediated by their receptors as defined here as the classic transcriptional
regulation of target genes. To elucidate estrogen action during sex
determination, we examined estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1, hereafter referred to
as ERalpha), estrogen receptor beta (Esr2, hereafter referred to as ERbeta), and 
androgen receptor (Ar, hereafter referred to as AR) expression in slider turtle
gonads before, during and after the TSP, as well as following sex reversal via
temperature or steroid hormone manipulation. ERalpha and AR levels spike at the
female-producing temperature while ovarian sex is determined, but none of the
receptors exhibited sexually dimorphic localization within the gonad prior to
morphological differentiation. All three receptors respond differentially to
sex-reversing treatments. When shifted to female-producing temperatures, embryos 
maintain ERalpha and AR expression while ERbeta is reduced. When shifted to
male-producing temperatures, medullary expression of all three receptors is
reduced. Feminization via estradiol (E(2)) treatment at a male-producing
temperature profoundly changed the expression patterns for all three receptors.
ERalpha and ERbeta redirected to the cortex in E(2)-created ovaries, while AR
medullary expression was transiently reduced. Although warmer incubation
temperature and estrogen result in the same endpoint (ovarian development), our
results indicate different steroid signaling patterns between temperature- and
estrogen-induced feminization.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18391529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Hum Reprod. 2008 Jun;23(6):1466-71. doi: 10.1093/humrep/den098. Epub 2008 Mar 27.

Genetic polymorphisms of ESR1 and ESR2 that may influence estrogen activity and
the risk of hypospadias.

Ban S(1), Sata F, Kurahashi N, Kasai S, Moriya K, Kakizaki H, Nonomura K, Kishi
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. sban@med.hokudai.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The etiology of hypospadias is regarded as a complex disorder with
both genetic and environmental contributions. Although alterations in androgen
activity have been associated with hypospadias, few associations with estrogen
activity have been documented. Here, we assessed genetic polymorphisms in
estrogen receptor genes and their association with hypospadias.
METHODS: Using a case-control study of 59 cases with hypospadias and 286
controls, we examined the association of hypospadias with the following
polymorphisms: PvuII and XbaI in ESR1, and 2681-4A>G in ESR2.
RESULTS: For the cases, we found a negative association with the G allele
containing variants of ESR1 XbaI (OR = 0.52, P < 0.05), and a negative
association with the G allele containing variants of ESR2 2681-4A>G (OR = 0.59, P
< 0.05). For the cases, we also identified a negative association with the CG
haplotype, and a positive association with the CA haplotype, defined by ESR1
PvuII and XbaI (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the G allele containing variants of ESR1
XbaI and the G allele containing variants of ESR2 2681-4A>G may decrease the risk
of hypospadias, whereas the ESR1 C-A haplotype may increase its risk.

PMID: 18375409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Genet. 2007 Dec;86(3):269-76.

Association study of the oestrogen signalling pathway genes in relation to age at
natural menopause.

He LN(1), Xiong DH, Liu YJ, Zhang F, Recker RR, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of
Education and Institute of Molecular Genetics, School of Life Science and
Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China.

Genetic factors play a significant role in influencing the variation of age at
natural menopause (AANM). Estrogen receptor beta (ESR2), is an important factor
in the mechanism of action of estrogen, while the aromatase gene (CYP19) and the 
17-alpha-hydroxylase gene (CYP17) are involved in the biosynthesis of estrogen.
We tested whether polymorphisms of ESR2, CYP19 and CYP17 genes are associated
with AANM in Caucasian females. A total of 52 SNPs (17 for ESR2, 28 for CYP19,
and 7 for CYP17) were successfully genotyped for 229 Caucasian women having
experienced natural menopause. Comprehensive statistical analyses focusing on the
association of these genes with AANM were conducted. The effects of age, height
and age at menarche on AANM were adjusted when conducting association analyses.
We found that six SNPs (2, 6-7, 9, 13 and 16) within ESR2 were not significantly 
associated with AANM after Bonferroni correction. However, two blocks of ESR2
were associated with AANM. For CYP19, two SNPs (24 and 27) were nominally
associated with AANM. No significant association was observed between CYP17 and
AANM. Our results suggest that genetic variation in the ESR2 and CYP19 genes may 
influence the variation in AANM in Caucasian women.

PMID: 18305346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Feb;17(2):393-6. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-07-2512.

Comprehensive evaluation of ESR2 variation and ovarian cancer risk.

Leigh Pearce C(1), Near AM, Butler JL, Van Den Berg D, Bretsky P, Conti DV, Stram
DO, Pike MC, Hirschhorn JN, Wu AH.

Author information: 
(1)USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Preventive Medicine, 
Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90089, USA. cpearce@usc.edu

Studies indicate that estrogen receptor beta, encoded by the ESR2 gene on
chromosome 14q, may play a role in ovarian carcinogenesis. Using the genetic
structure data generated by the Breast and Prostate Cohort Consortium (BPC3), we 
have comprehensively characterized the role of haplotype diversity in ESR2 and
risk of ovarian cancer. Five haplotypes with a frequency of > or =5% were
observed in White subjects and five haplotype tagging SNPs (htSNP) were selected 
to capture the locus diversity with a minimum R(h)(2) of 0.81. The htSNPs were
genotyped in 574 White controls, 417 White invasive ovarian cancer cases, and 123
White borderline ovarian cancer cases from case-control studies carried out in
Los Angeles County from 1994 through 2004. No statistically significant
association was observed between the five htSNPs and related haplotypes and risk 
of ovarian cancer overall. Haplotype D was associated with a nonstatistically
significant increased risk of invasive ovarian cancer overall (odds ratio, 1.38; 
95% confidence interval, 0.93-2.02; P = 0.11) relative to the most common
haplotype and a statistically significant increased risk of invasive clear cell
ovarian cancer (odds ratio, 3.88; 95% confidence interval, 1.28-11.73; P =
0.016). Haplotype D was also reported by the BPC3 to be associated with increased
risk of breast cancer. This haplotype warrants further investigation to rule out 
any effect with invasive ovarian cancer risk.

PMID: 18268123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Arch Ophthalmol. 2008 Jan;126(1):110-4. doi: 10.1001/archopht.126.1.110.

Estrogen receptors alpha and beta and the risk of open-angle glaucoma: the
Rotterdam Study.

de Voogd S(1), Wolfs RC, Jansonius NM, Uitterlinden AG, Pols HA, Hofman A, de
Jong PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1) and beta (ESR2) genes were a risk factor for open-angle glaucoma (OAG).
METHODS: Participants 55 years and older from the population-based Rotterdam
Study underwent, at baseline and at follow-up, the same ophthalmic examination,
including visual field screening and stereo optic disc photography. A diagnosis
of OAG was based on an algorithm using optic disc measures and visual field loss.
Haplotypes of the ESR1 and ESR2 genes were determined.
RESULTS: We diagnosed incident OAG in 87 of 3842 participants (2.3%) at risk
after a mean follow-up of 6.5 years. We could not detect any association with
ESR1 haplotypes. Haplotype 1 of ESR2 showed a 3.6-fold (95% confidence interval, 
1.4-9.2) higher risk of incident OAG in men. In women, no association was found
between ESR2 and incident OAG.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene are unrelated to OAG, but ESR2
polymorphisms seem to lead to increased risk of OAG in men.

PMID: 18195227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Schizophr Res. 2008 Mar;100(1-3):308-15. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2007.11.001. Epub 
2007 Dec 31.

Analyses of variants located in estrogen metabolism genes (ESR1, ESR2, COMT and
APOE) and schizophrenia.

Martorell L(1), Costas J, Valero J, Gutierrez-Zotes A, Phillips C, Torres M,
Brunet A, Garrido G, Carracedo A, Guillamat R, Vallès V, Guitart M, Labad A,
Vilella E.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Psiquiàtric Universitari Institut Pere Mata, Ctra. De l'Institut Pere
Mata s/n, 43206 Reus, Spain. lourdes.martorell@urv.cat

Relationships between gender, age-of-onset of schizophrenia and reproductive age 
strongly suggest a key role for gonadal hormones, and more specifically for
estrogens, in the etiology of the illness. Also, estrogens act as neural growth
and trophic factors influencing neuron and glial cells in many areas of the
central nervous system. Therefore, we investigated the association between
schizophrenia and 4 genes related to estrogen metabolism. These genes are ESR1
(estrogen receptor 1), ESR2 (estrogen receptor 2), APOE (apolipoprotein E) and
COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase). The expression of APOE and COMT, which
contain estrogen response elements, have been demonstrated to be regulated by the
estrogen receptors. In this current association study, we examined 59 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in the ESR1 (26), ESR2 (14), APOE (7) and
COMT (12) loci. Allele frequencies were evaluated in the schizophrenia
(n=585)-control (n=615) sample and no association was found with any of the four 
genes. In conclusion, our data suggest that the four analyzed genes do not play
an important role in susceptibility to schizophrenia.

PMID: 18164902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Clin Genet. 2008 Jan;73(1):55-61. Epub 2007 Nov 29.

Polymorphisms spanning the 0N exon and promoter of the estrogen receptor-beta
(ERbeta) gene ESR2 are associated with venous ulceration.

Ashworth JJ(1), Smyth JV, Pendleton N, Horan M, Payton A, Worthington J, Ollier
WE, Ashcroft GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tissue Regeneration, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Venous ulcers are characterized by excessive inflammation and raised levels of
proinflammatory cytokines. Estrogen has been shown to accelerate the rate of
wound healing in elderly subjects by dampening the inflammatory response. The
estrogen receptor (ER) proteins, ER-alpha (ERalpha) and ER-beta (ERbeta) mediate 
the actions of estrogen during wound repair through the activation or repression 
of target gene transcription. Recent evidence implicates the chromosomal region
harboring the ERbeta gene with venous ulceration in a British Caucasian
population, highlighting the need to conduct further genetic interrogation. To
address this, we conducted a case-control study to investigate whether single
nucleotide polymorphisms in the ERbeta gene are associated with venous ulceration
in elderly (age >50 years) subjects. We recruited a case group (n = 124, 56 males
and 68 females) consisting of patients with an active venous ulcer and a control 
group consisting of individuals from the general population with no evidence of
venous disease or history of venous ulceration (n = 380, 189 males and 191
females). Polymorphisms in close proximity to upstream regulatory regions of the 
ERbeta gene, including the 0N exon and promoter transcribed in inflammatory
cells, were significantly (p < 0.05) associated with venous ulceration. A major
susceptibility haplotype carried by 23% (26/112) of cases compared with only 10% 
(27/276) of controls (odds ratio = 2.8, 95% confidence interval = 1.6-5.0) was
significantly (p < 0.01) associated with elevated serum levels of tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha. In conclusion, common variation in the regulatory regions of the
ERbeta gene may pre-dispose to venous ulceration in a British Caucasian
population.

PMID: 18070128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Dec 4;8:73.

Impact of estrogen receptor gene polymorphisms and mRNA levels on obesity and
lipolysis--a cohort study.

Nilsson M(1), Dahlman I, Jiao H, Gustafsson JA, Arner P, Dahlman-Wright K.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, S-141 57
Huddinge, Sweden. ilsson_anna_maria@yahoo.se

BACKGROUND: The estrogen receptors alpha and beta (ESR1, ESR2) have been
implicated in adiposity, lipid metabolism and feeding behaviour. In this report
we analyse ESR1 and ESR2 gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for
association with obesity. We also relate adipose tissue ESR1 mRNA levels and ESR1
SNPs to adipocyte lipolysis and lipogenesis phenotypes.
METHODS: 23 ESR1 and 11 ESR2 tag-SNPs, covering most of the common haplotype
variation in each gene according to HAPMAP data, were analysed by Chi2 for
association with obesity in a cohort comprising 705 adults with severe obesity
and 402 lean individuals. Results were replicated in a cohort comprising 837
obese and 613 lean subjects. About 80% of both cohorts comprised women and 20%
men. Adipose tissue ESR1 mRNA was quantified in 122 women and related to
lipolysis and lipogenesis by multiple regression. ESR1 SNPs were analysed for
association with adipocyte lipolysis and lipogenesis phenotypes in 204 obese
women by simple regression.
RESULTS: No ESR1 SNP was associated with obesity. Five ESR2 SNPs displayed
nominal significant allelic association with obesity in women and one in men. The
two ESR2 SNPs associated with obesity with nominal P value < 0.01 were genotyped 
in a second cohort where no association with obesity was observed. There was an
inverse correlation between ESR1 mRNA levels in abdominal subcutaneous (sc)
adipose tissue and basal lipolysis, as well as responsiveness to adrenoceptor
agonists independent of age and BMI (P value 0.009-0.045). ESR1 rs532010 was
associated with lipolytic sensitivity to noradrenaline (nominal P value 0.012),
and ESR1 rs1884051 with responsiveness to the non-selective beta-adrenoceptor
agonist isoprenaline (nominal P value 0.05). These associations became
non-significant after Bonferroni correction.
CONCLUSION: ESR1 gene alleles are unlikely to be a major cause of obesity in
women. A minor importance of ESR2 on severe obesity cannot be excluded. The
inverse correlation between ESR1 mRNA levels and lipolytic responsiveness to
adrenoceptor agonists implies that low adipose tissue ESR1 levels attenuate
catecholamine resistance in sc fat cells of obese women hereby contributing to
loss of sc and gain of visceral fat. There is no evidence for a genetic impact of
ESR1 on lipolysis or lipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2238734
PMID: 18053221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Nov;16(11):2233-6.

Prostate cancer risk and ESR1 TA, ESR2 CA repeat polymorphisms.

McIntyre MH(1), Kantoff PW, Stampfer MJ, Mucci LA, Parslow D, Li H, Gaziano JM,
Abe M, Ma J.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
mmcintyr@mail.ucf.edu

BACKGROUND: Experimental evidence has suggested that estrogen receptor alpha
(coded by the gene ESR1) might increase prostate cancer risk, whereas estrogen
receptor beta (coded by the gene ESR2) might reduce prostate cancer risk.
METHODS: We investigated the relationship with prostate cancer risk of both a TA 
repeat polymorphism in the ESR1 5' region, ESR1 (TA)(n), and with a CA repeat
polymorphism in intron 5 of ESR2, ESR2 (CA)(n), in a case-control study (545
cases and 674 controls) nested in the Physicians' Health Study.
RESULTS: Prostate cancer risk was highest for carriers of ESR1 (TA)(24) and ESR1 
(TA)(25). Replacing one modal ESR1 (TA)(14) allele with one ESR1 (TA)(24) allele 
yielded an odds ratio of 1.42 (95% confidence interval, 1.00-2.00; P=0.05).
Replacing one ESR1 (TA)(14) allele with one ESR1 (TA)(25) allele yielded an odds 
ratio of 2.10 (95% confidence interval, 1.15-3.84; P=0.02). ESR2 (CA)(n) showed
no effects on prostate cancer risk.
CONCLUSIONS: The ESR1 (TA)(n) polymorphism might play a role in prostate cancer
risk.

PMID: 18006911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Genet Genomics. 2007 Oct;34(10):868-76.

Association of CA repeat polymorphism in estrogen receptor beta gene with
postmenopausal osteoporosis in Chinese.

Geng L(1), Yao Z, Yang H, Luo J, Han L, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

Postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMO) is considered a polygenic disease. The estrogen
receptor beta (ESR2) gene is a candidate mediating the genetic influence on bone 
mass and the risk of osteoporosis. The aim of this study is to investigate the
association of a cytosine-adenine (CA) repeat polymorphism in the fifth intron of
the ESR2 gene with PMO in Chinese Han population. The CA repeat polymorphism was 
genotyped in a case-control study, involving 78 femoral neck PMO patients vs. 122
controls and 108 lumbar spine (L2-4) PMO patients vs. 92 controls. The (CA)(n) < 
22 and (CA)(n) > or = 22 alleles were designated short (S) and long (L),
respectively. ESR2 genotype was categorically defined as SS (2 S alleles), SL
(having the mixed S and L alleles), and LL (2 L alleles). At both the femoral
neck and the L2-4 region, LL genotype and L allele frequencies of the PMO group
were significantly higher than those of the control group (P < 0.01). The
subjects with the SL, the LL, and the combined SL and LL genotype had a
significant increased risk of PMO when compared with those with the SS genotype
(P < 0.05). After adjustments for age, years since menopause, menopausal age, and
body mass index, logistic regression analysis showed that the subjects with the
combined SL and LL genotype had increased risk of PMO when compared with those
with the SS genotype both at the femoral neck (adjusted OR 4.923, 95%CI
1.986-12.203, P=0.001) and the L2-4 (adjusted OR 2.267, 95%CI 1.121-4.598,
P=0.023). This extensive association study has identified the ESR2 CA repeat
polymorphism to be independently associated with PMO at the femoral neck and the 
L2-4 in Chinese Han population. The data also suggested that the presence of the 
L allele may dominantly increase the risk of PMO at the two regions.

PMID: 17945165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2008 Mar;68(3):429-34. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Polymorphism of the oestrogen receptor beta gene (ESR2) is associated with
susceptibility to Graves' disease.

Kisiel B(1), Bednarczuk T, Kostrzewa G, Kosinska J, Miskiewicz P, Plazinska MT,
Bar-Andziak E, Królicki L, Krajewski P, Ploski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Diseases and Rheumatology, Military Institute of Health
Services, Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Warsaw, Poland.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether a polymorphism in the ESR2 gene (rs4986938,
previously associated with endometriosis, ovulatory dysfunction and premature
onset of coronary heart disease) increases the risk of Graves' disease (GD).
SUBJECTS AND DESIGN: A cohort of 375 GD patients (300 females and 75 males) and
1001 individuals representative of the background population of Poland (502 males
and 499 females) were genotyped for rs4986938 using allele-specific polymerase
chain reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: We found an increased frequency of the ESR2 A allele among the patients 
vs. controls (38.0%vs. 32.7%, OR = 1.26, P = 0.009) that was caused by a
co-dominant (OR = 1.25, P = 0.01, P(for model fit) = 0.127) or a recessive (OR = 
1.67, P = 0.003, P(for model fit) = 0.554) effect. The association was found in
both sexes (OR = 1.21, P = 0.046 and OR = 1.53, P = 0.029, respectively, for
co-dominant and recessive models in females, and OR = 1.44, P = 0.034 and OR =
2.29, P = 0.01, respectively, for the two models in males) and was more
pronounced among the DRB1*03-negative (OR = 1.63, P = 0.0002) than
DRB1*03-positive patients (OR = 1.04, P = 0.822). No other statistically
significant associations between the ESR2 genotype and GD subsets were found (age
of onset, smoking, clinically evident ophthalmopathy, family history of GD, and
PTPN22 and CTLA4 (CT60) genotypes were analysed).
CONCLUSIONS: In a Polish population the ESR2 A allele is associated with GD with 
a strength comparable to polymorphisms of PTPN22 and CTLA4 CT60 loci (OR
approximately 1.7). The association with ESR2 is found in both sexes and may be
particularly strong among the DRB1*03-negative individuals.

PMID: 17941906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Ann Ig. 2007 Jul-Aug;19(4):303-14.

[Identification of candidate genes and expression profiles, as doping
biomarkers].

[Article in Italian]

Paparini A(1), Impagnatiello F, Pistilli A, Rinaldi M, Gianfranceschi G, Signori 
E, Stabile AM, Fazio V, Rende M, Romano Spica V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Unità di Sanità Pubblica, Istituto
Universitario Scienze Motorie, Roma.

Administration of prohibited substances to enhance athletic performance
represents an emerging medical, social, ethical and legal issue. Traditional
controls are based on direct detection of substances or their catabolites.
However out-of-competition doping may not be easily revealed by standard
analytical methods. Alternative indirect control strategies are based on the
evaluation of mid- and long-term effects of doping in tissues. Drug-induced
long-lasting changes of gene expression may be taken as effective indicators of
doping exposure. To validate this approach, we used real-time PCR to monitor the 
expression pattern of selected genes in human haematopoietic cells exposed to
nandrolone, insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) or growth hormone (GH). Some
candidate genes were found significantly and consistently modulated by
treatments. Nandrolone up-regulated AR, ESR2 and PGR in K562 cells, and SRD5A1,
PPARA and JAK2 in Jurkat cells; IGF-I up-regulated EPOR and PGR in HL60 cells,
and SRD5A1 in Jurkat; GH up-regulated SRD5A1 and GHR in K562. GATA1 expression
was down-regulated in IGF-1-treated HL60, ESR2 was down-regulated in
nandrolone-treated Jurkat, and AR and PGR were down-regulated in GH-treated
Jurkat. This pilot study shows the potential of molecular biology-based
strategies in anti-doping controls.

PMID: 17937323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Int J Cancer. 2008 Jan 15;122(2):387-92.

Haplotypes of the estrogen receptor beta gene and breast cancer risk.

Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium(1), Cox DG, Bretsky P, Kraft P,
Pharoah P, Albanes D, Altshuler D, Amiano P, Berglund G, Boeing H, Buring J,
Burtt N, Calle EE, Canzian F, Chanock S, Clavel-Chapelon F, Colditz GA, Feigelson
HS, Haiman CA, Hankinson SE, Hirschhorn J, Henderson BE, Hoover R, Hunter DJ,
Kaaks R, Kolonel L, LeMarchand L, Lund E, Palli D, Peeters PH, Pike MC, Riboli E,
Stram DO, Thun M, Tjonneland A, Travis RC, Trichopoulos D, Yeager M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology, Epidemiology Department,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.

Exposure to exogenous (oral contraceptives, postmenopausal hormone therapy) and
endogenous (number of ovulatory cycles, adiposity) steroid hormones is associated
with breast cancer risk. Breast cancer risk associated with these exposures could
hypothetically be modified by genes in the steroid hormone synthesis, metabolism 
and signaling pathways. Estrogen receptors are the first step along the path of
signaling cell growth and development upon stimulation with estrogens. The
National Cancer Institute Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium has
systematically selected haplotype tagging SNPs in genes along the steroid hormone
synthesis, metabolism and binding pathways, including the estrogen receptor beta 
(ESR2) gene. Four htSNPs tag the 6 major (>5% frequency) haplotypes of the ESR2
gene. These polymorphisms have been genotyped in 5,789 breast cancer cases and
7,761 controls nested within the American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention Study 
II, European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition, Multiethnic
Cohort, Nurses' Health Study and Women's Health Study cohorts. None of the SNPs
were independently associated with breast cancer risk. One haplotype of the ESR2 
gene was associated with breast cancer risk before correction for multiple
testing (OR 1.17, 95% CI 1.07-1.28, p = 0.0007). This haplotype remained
associated with breast cancer risk after adjustment for multiple testing using a 
permutation procedure. There was no statistically significant heterogeneity in
SNP or haplotype odds ratios across cohorts. These data suggest that inherited
variants in ESR2 (while possibly conferring a small increased risk of breast
cancer) are not associated with appreciable (OR > 1.2) changes in breast cancer
risk among Caucasian women.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2796078
PMID: 17935138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Oct;16(10):1973-81.

Sequence variants of estrogen receptor beta and risk of prostate cancer in the
National Cancer Institute Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium.

Chen YC(1), Kraft P, Bretsky P, Ketkar S, Hunter DJ, Albanes D, Altshuler D,
Andriole G, Berg CD, Boeing H, Burtt N, Bueno-de-Mesquita B, Cann H, Canzian F,
Chanock S, Dunning A, Feigelson HS, Freedman M, Gaziano JM, Giovannucci E,
Sánchez MJ, Haiman CA, Hallmans G, Hayes RB, Henderson BE, Hirschhorn J, Kaaks R,
Key TJ, Kolonel LN, LeMarchand L, Ma J, Overvad K, Palli D, Pharaoh P, Pike M,
Riboli E, Rodriguez C, Setiawan VW, Stampfer M, Stram DO, Thomas G, Thun MJ,
Travis RC, Virtamo J, Trichopoulou A, Wacholder S, Weinstein SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
karen.chen@channing.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) may play a role in modulating prostate 
carcinogenesis through the regulation of genes related to cell proliferation and 
apoptosis.
METHODS: We conducted nested case-control studies in the Breast and Prostate
Cancer Cohort Consortium (BPC3) that pooled 8,323 prostate cancer cases and 9,412
controls from seven cohorts. Whites were the predominant ethnic group. We
characterized genetic variation in ESR2 by resequencing exons in 190 breast and
prostate cancer cases and genotyping a dense set of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) spanning the locus in a multiethnic panel of 349 cancer-free 
subjects. We selected four haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNP) to capture common ESR2 
variation in Whites; these htSNPs were then genotyped in all cohorts. Conditional
logistic regression models were used to assess the association between sequence
variants of ESR2 and the risk of prostate cancer. We also investigated the effect
modification by age, body mass index, and family history, as well as the
association between sequence variants of ESR2 and advanced-stage (>or=T3b, N1, or
M1) and high-grade (Gleason sum >or=8) prostate cancer, respectively.
RESULTS: The four tag SNPs in ESR2 were not significantly associated with
prostate cancer risk, individually. The global test for the influence of any
haplotype on the risk of prostate cancer was not significant (P = 0.31). However,
we observed that men carrying two copies of one of the variant haplotypes (TACC) 
had a 1.46-fold increased risk of prostate cancer (99% confidence interval,
1.06-2.01) compared with men carrying zero copies of this variant haplotype. No
SNPs or haplotypes were associated with advanced stage or high grade of prostate 
cancer.
CONCLUSION: In our analysis focused on genetic variation common in Whites, we
observed little evidence for any substantial association of inherited variation
in ESR2 with risk of prostate cancer. A nominally significant (P < 0.01)
association between the TACC haplotype and prostate cancer risk under the
recessive model could be a chance finding and, in any event, would seem to
contribute only slightly to the overall burden of prostate cancer.

PMID: 17932344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Biol Reprod. 2008 Jan;78(1):101-14. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

17beta-estradiol induces the translocation of the estrogen receptors ESR1 and
ESR2 to the cell membrane, MAPK3/1 phosphorylation and proliferation of cultured 
immature rat Sertoli cells.

Lucas TF(1), Siu ER, Esteves CA, Monteiro HP, Oliveira CA, Porto CS, Lazari MF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo,
Brazil.

The aim of the present study was to determine the mechanisms involved in estrogen
actions in cultured rat Sertoli cells. RT-PCR detected transcripts for the
estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 in cultured immature Sertoli cells and in the
testis of 15-, 28-, and 120-day-old rats. The expression of ESR1 and ESR2 was
confirmed in Sertoli cells by immunofluorescence and Western blot.
Immunohistochemistry with cryosections of testes from immature and adult rats
revealed that ESR1 is present in Sertoli, Leydig, and some peritubular myoid
cells, and ESR2 is present in multiple cell types, including germ cells.
Treatment of Sertoli cells with 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) induced a translocation
of ESR1 and ESR2 to the plasma membrane and a concomitant phosphorylation of
MAPK3/1. Both effects reached a maximum after 10 min and were blocked by PP2, an 
inhibitor of the SRC family of protein tyrosine kinases, and by the antiestrogen 
ICI 182,780 (ICI). MAPK3/1 phosphorylation was also decreased in the presence of 
AG 1478, an inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase, and 
in the presence of MAP2K1/2 inhibitor UO126. Treatment with E(2) for 24 h
increased the incorporation of [methyl-(3)H]thymidine, which was blocked by ICI. 
These results indicate that E(2) activates an SRC-mediated translocation of
estrogen receptors to the plasma membrane, which results in the activation of
EGFR and the mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway. In addition,
activation of ESR1 and/or ESR2 by E(2) is involved in proliferation of immature
Sertoli cells. The estrogen actions in Sertoli cells might be a key step
mediating cellular events important for spermatogenesis and fertility.

PMID: 17928626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Breast. 2008 Apr;17(2):159-66. Epub 2007 Sep 29.

Association of repeat polymorphisms in the estrogen receptors alpha, beta (ESR1, 
ESR2) and androgen receptor (AR) genes with the occurrence of breast cancer.

Tsezou A(1), Tzetis M, Gennatas C, Giannatou E, Pampanos A, Malamis G, Kanavakis 
E, Kitsiou S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Medical School, University 
of Thessalia, University Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, Greece.

Genetic variation in genes involved in estrogen biosynthesis, metabolism and
signal transduction have been suggested to play a role in breast cancer. To
determine the possible contribution of genetic variation in the ESR1 (ER-alpha), 
ESR2 (ER-beta) and AR genes in breast cancer risk the -1174(TA)(7-27), c.
1092+3607(CA)(10-26) and c. 172(CAG)(6-40) repeat variants were studied in a
case-control study of 79 women with sporadic breast cancer and 155 controls. No
significant difference was observed in the frequency distribution of
-1174(TA)(7-27) in the ESR1 gene between patients and controls, while a
significant difference was observed for repeat polymorphisms c.
1092+3607(CA)(10-26) in the ESR2 gene and c. 172(CAG)(6-40) in the AR gene
(p0.0001). A significantly decreased odds ratio (OR) for breast cancer risk was
observed in individuals having the LL and the SL genotypes for both the ESR2
(OR=0.010, 95% CI 0.003-0.036, p<0.001; OR=0.013, 95% CI 0.004-0.040, p<0.0001,
respectively) and the AR gene (OR=0.040, 95% CI 0.011-0.138, p<0.0001; OR=0.189, 
95% CI 0.10-0.359, p<0.0001, respectively), compared to SS genotype. The
protective effect of these genotypes remained evident even after adjustment for
various risk factors (BMI, age, age at menarche and menopause, family history).
In conclusion, an association for breast cancer risk between short (SS) alleles
for the repeat variants of the ESR2 and AR genes was found in women of Greek
descent.

PMID: 17904846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2008 Apr;14(2):180-5. Epub 2007 Sep 25.

Estrogen receptor alpha and beta gene polymorphisms are not risk factors for
recurrent miscarriage in a Brazilian population.

Aléssio AM(1), Siqueira LH, de Carvalho EC, Barini R, Mansur Ade P, Hoehr NF,
Annichino-Bizzacchi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Hemotherapy Center, Department of Gynecology, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, State University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of alpha (ESR1:
c.454-397T>C and c.454-351A>G) and beta (ESR2: 1082G>A and 1730G>A) estrogen
receptor gene polymorphisms in 2 Brazilian ethnic groups (Caucasian, African
Brazilian) and to investigate their association with recurrent miscarriage (RM)
in 75 women with a history of 3 or more consecutive pregnancy losses and 139
controls with at least 2 live births and no history of pregnancy loss. Polymerase
chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism were used to identify
gene polymorphisms. Coagulation methods were used to measure protein C, protein
S, and fibrinogen, and a chromogenic method was used for antithrombin
quantification. Significantly higher prevalences of 1082G>A and 1730G>A
polymorphisms were seen in African Brazilian and Caucasian controls,
respectively. There was no association between RM and ESR polymorphisms. There
was a difference in the genotype prevalence in the c.454-39T>C polymorphism
between RM and control Caucasians, but this finding was not associated with an
increased risk of miscarriage. There was no synergistic or additive effect
between ESR polymorphisms and thrombophilia in RM patients. A difference in the
prevalence of ESR polymorphisms was observed, according to ethnic origin. ESR
polymorphisms could not be considered a risk factor for RM.

PMID: 17895504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Neurobiol Aging. 2009 Apr;30(4):607-14. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

Estrogen receptor genotype and risk of cognitive impairment in elders: findings
from the Health ABC study.

Yaffe K(1), Lindquist K, Sen S, Cauley J, Ferrell R, Penninx B, Harris T, Li R,
Cummings SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA 
94121, USA. Kristine.yaffe@ucsf.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether variants in the estrogen receptors 1 (alpha) and 
2 (beta) (ESR1 and ESR2) genes are associated with cognitive impairment in
non-demented elderly men and women.
BACKGROUND: Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on ESR1 and ESR2 genes
have been associated with a range of hormone sensitive diseases such as breast
cancer and osteoporosis. Genetic variations in ESR may also influence cognitive
aging but are less studied, especially among men.
METHODS: We studied 2527 participants enrolled in an ongoing prospective study of
community-dwelling elders. Four SNPs from ESR1 and four from ESR2 were analyzed. 
We measured cognitive function with the Modified Mini-Mental Status Examination
(3MS) at baseline and biannually; cognitive impairment was defined as a decline
of five or more points over 4 years. We calculated odds of developing cognitive
impairment across SNPs using gender-stratified logistic regression and adjusted
analyses for age, education, baseline 3MS score and in addition for race.
RESULTS: One thousand three hundred and forty-three women (mean age 73.4) and
1184 men (mean age 73.7) comprised our cohort. Among women, after multivariate
adjustment, two of the ESR1 SNPs (rs8179176, rs9340799) and two of the ESR2 SNPs 
(rs1256065, rs1256030) were associated with likelihood of developing cognitive
impairment, although the association for rs8179176 was of trend level
significance. In men, one of the ESR1 SNPs (rs728524) and two of the ESR2
(rs1255998, rs1256030) were associated with cognitive impairment. Further
adjustment for race attenuated the results somewhat. There was no association
between any ESR SNP and level of bioavailable estradiol but testosterone level
did vary among two of the SNPs (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: We found that among non-demented community elders, several SNPs in
the ESR1 and ESR2 genes were associated with risk of developing cognitive
impairment. These findings suggest that estrogen receptor genetic variants may
play a role in cognitive aging.

PMCID: PMC2826192
PMID: 17889406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2008 May;83(5):702-10. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Estrogen receptor genotypes, menopausal status, and the lipid effects of
tamoxifen.

Ntukidem NI(1), Nguyen AT, Stearns V, Rehman M, Schott A, Skaar T, Jin Y, Blanche
P, Li L, Lemler S, Hayden J, Krauss RM, Desta Z, Flockhart DA, Hayes DF;
Consortium on Breast Cancer Pharmacogenomics.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Tamoxifen induces important changes in serum lipid profiles in some women;
however, little information is available to predict which women will experience
improved lipid profiles during tamoxifen therapy. As part of a multicenter
prospective observational trial in 176 breast cancer patients, we tested the
hypothesis that tamoxifen-induced lipid changes were associated with genetic
variants in candidate target genes (CYP2D6, ESR1, and ESR2). Tamoxifen lowered
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (P<0.0001) by 23.5 mg/dl (13.5-33.5 mg/dl)
and increased triglycerides (P=0.006). In postmenopausal women, the ESR1-XbaI and
ESR2-02 genotypes were associated with tamoxifen-induced changes in total
cholesterol (P=0.03; GG vs GA/AA) and triglycerides (P=0.01; gene-dose effect),
respectively. In premenopausal women, the ESR1-XbaI genotypes were associated
with tamoxifen-induced changes in triglycerides (P=0.002; gene-dose effect) and
high-density lipoprotein (P=0.004; gene-dose effect). Our results suggest that
estrogen receptor genotyping may be useful in predicting which women would
benefit more from tamoxifen.

PMCID: PMC2782693
PMID: 17713466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Fertil Steril. 2008 Feb;89(2):318-24. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms are associated with idiopathic
premature ovarian failure.

Bretherick KL(1), Hanna CW, Currie LM, Fluker MR, Hammond GL, Robinson WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the role of hormone receptor/binding protein variants in
genetic predisposition to premature ovarian failure (POF).
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Academic.
PATIENT(S): Fifty-five POF patients, 107 control women from the general
population, and 27 control women who had proven fertility after age 37.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Allele distributions in cases and controls were assessed
for genetic association.
RESULT(S): Allele distributions of polymorphisms at the androgen receptor (AR)
gene, estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) gene, sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG)
gene, and FSH receptor (FSHR) gene did not differ between patients and controls. 
At a repeat in a promoter of the estrogen receptor alpha(ESR1) gene, POF patients
had fewer (<18) short repeat alleles than did controls (P=.004 vs. combined
controls). Genotypes consisting of two short alleles were found in 36.4% of
control women but only 5.5% of POF patients (P<.0001 vs. combined controls). The 
ESR1 repeat may confer risk for POF in a simple dominant manner in which carriers
of a long repeat have a relative risk of 9.7 (95% CI = 2.6 - 35.6).
CONCLUSION(S): Polymorphisms at the ESR1 gene are associated with POF in this
patient population, while those in AR, ESR2, SHBG, and FSHR showed no
association. Further studies are necessary to confirm these findings in larger
patient samples and to identify the specific predisposing lesion.

PMID: 17706202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Clin Chem. 2007 Oct;53(10):1749-56. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Polymorphisms and haplotypes of the estrogen receptor-beta gene (ESR2) and
cardiovascular disease in men and women.

Rexrode KM(1), Ridker PM, Hegener HH, Buring JE, Manson JE, Zee RY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. krexrode@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Cohort studies suggest an association between variation in the
estrogen receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) and cardiovascular disease (CVD), but data
are lacking for the effect of variation in the estrogen receptor-beta gene
(ESR2).
METHODS: Three polymorphisms of the ESR2 gene, and their associated haplotypes,
were evaluated in 296 white women from the Women's Health Study and 566 white men
from the Physicians' Health Study who developed CVD [myocardial infarction (MI)
or ischemic stroke], each matched 1:1 to a member of the cohort study who
remained free from CVD. Blood samples and cardiovascular risk information were
collected at baseline.
RESULTS: Women, but not men, who developed CVD or MI, but not ischemic stroke,
were more likely to have the rs1271572 polymorphism variant T allele (P = 0.05
and 0.02) and less likely to have the rs1256049 polymorphism variant A allele (P 
= 0.003 and 0.004). No associations were observed for rs4986938. In conditional
logistic multivariate regression, the rs1271572 variant was associated with
increased odds of CVD [odds ratio (OR) = 1.49, 95% CI: 1.10-2.01] and MI (OR =
1.46, 95% CI: 0.96-2.23), whereas the rs1256049 variant was associated with
decreased odds of CVD (OR = 0.37, 95% CI: 0.17-0.79) and MI (OR = 0.25, 95% CI:
0.09-0.73) in women. A common haplotype that included the rs1271572 variant was
associated with a 7-fold increased risk of MI in women.
CONCLUSIONS: Two tightly linked polymorphisms of ESR2 were associated with risk
of CVD, particularly MI, in women but not men. Additional studies of ESR2 genetic
variation and risk of CVD are warranted.

PMCID: PMC2085372
PMID: 17702854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Plant Mol Biol. 2007 Oct;65(3):219-32. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

DORNROSCHEN-LIKE, an AP2 gene, is necessary for stamen emergence in Arabidopsis.

Nag A(1), Yang Y, Jack T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

To identify novel genes in petal and stamen development, a genetic screen was
carried out for enhancers of the unusual B class mutant pistillata-5 (pi-5). In
pi-5 flowers, second whorl organs develop as sepals rather than petals, but third
whorl stamens are normal. One pi-5 enhancer, dornröschen-like-2 (drnl-2), results
in third whorl positions developing as filamentous organs. In addition to
enhancing the pi-5 phenotype, drnl-2 mutants also exhibit a phenotype in a
wild-type PI background. Although stamen primordia are morphologically visible
during early stages of flower development, they fail to enlarge in drnl-2
mutants. DRNL, which encodes a single AP2 domain protein, is expressed in a
dynamic pattern in the embryo, seedling, and flower. Analysis of both the drnl-2 
mutant phenotype and the DRNL expression pattern in flowers suggests that DRNL
plays a critical role in stamen emergence in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 17682829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Biol Reprod. 2007 Oct;77(4):681-7. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

Promoter methylation regulates estrogen receptor 2 in human endometrium and
endometriosis.

Xue Q(1), Lin Z, Cheng YH, Huang CC, Marsh E, Yin P, Milad MP, Confino E,
Reierstad S, Innes J, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obsterics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Steroid receptors in the stromal cells of endometrium and its disease counterpart
tissue endometriosis play critical physiologic roles. We found that mRNA and
protein levels of estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2) were strikingly higher, whereas
levels of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), total progesterone receptor (PGR), and
progesterone receptor B (PGR B) were significantly lower in endometriotic versus 
endometrial stromal cells. Because ESR2 displayed the most striking levels of
differential expression between endometriotic and endometrial cells, and the
mechanisms for this difference are unknown, we tested the hypothesis that
alteration in DNA methylation is a mechanism responsible for severely increased
ESR2 mRNA levels in endometriotic cells. We identified a CpG island occupying the
promoter region (-197/+359) of the ESR2 gene. Bisulfite sequencing of this region
showed significantly higher methylation in primary endometrial cells (n = 8
subjects) versus endometriotic cells (n = 8 subjects). The demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine significantly increased ESR2 mRNA levels in endometrial
cells. Mechanistically, we employed serial deletion mutants of the ESR2 promoter 
fused to the luciferase reporter gene and transiently transfected into both
endometriotic and endometrial cells. We demonstrated that the critical region
(-197/+372) that confers promoter activity also bears the CpG island, and the
activity of the ESR2 promoter was strongly inactivated by in vitro methylation.
Taken together, methylation of a CpG island at the ESR2 promoter region is a
primary mechanism responsible for differential expression of ESR2 in
endometriosis and endometrium. These findings may be applied to a number of areas
ranging from diagnosis to the treatment of endometriosis.

PMID: 17625110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Biol Psychiatry. 2007 Oct 15;62(8):925-33. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Risk for premenstrual dysphoric disorder is associated with genetic variation in 
ESR1, the estrogen receptor alpha gene.

Huo L(1), Straub RE, Roca C, Schmidt PJ, Shi K, Vakkalanka R, Weinberger DR,
Rubinow DR.

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a heritable mood disorder
that is triggered by gonadal steroids during the luteal phase in susceptible
women.
METHODS: We performed haplotype analyses of estrogen receptors alpha and beta
(ESR1 and ESR2) in 91 women with prospectively confirmed PMDD and 56 control
subjects to investigate possible sources of the genetic susceptibility to
affective dysregulation induced by normal levels of gonadal steroids. We also
examined associations with the valine (Val)158methionine (Met) single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) of the gene for catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), an enzyme
involved in estrogen metabolism and prefrontal cortical activation.
RESULTS: Four SNPs in intron 4 of ESR1 showed significantly different genotype
and allele distributions between patients and control subjects. Significant
case-control differences were seen in sliding-window analyses of two-, three-,
and four-marker haplotypes but only in those haplotypes containing SNPs in intron
4 that were positive in the single-locus analysis. No significant associations
were observed with ESR2 or with the COMT Val158Met polymorphism, although the
significant associations with ESR1 were observed only in those with the Val/Val
genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These are the first positive (albeit preliminary) genetic findings
in this reproductive endocrine-related mood disorder and involve the receptor for
a hormone that is pathogenically relevant.

PMCID: PMC2762203
PMID: 17599809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Sep;92(9):3712-8. Epub 2007 Jun 19.

Risk factors for hypospadias in the estrogen receptor 2 gene.

Beleza-Meireles A(1), Kockum I, Lundberg F, Söderhäll C, Nordenskjöld A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Building CMM 00, Karolinska
University Hospital, Solna, SE 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden. Ana.Beleza@ki.se

CONTEXT: Hypospadias is a common inborn error of the male genitalia of complex,
and still elusive, etiology. The presence of active estrogen receptors (ESRs) in 
the developing male urethra, predominantly the ESR2, has suggested a role of
estrogens in the otherwise androgen-dependent male genital differetiation.
Moreover, imbalances between these two steroid hormones have been suggested to
disturb the external genital development. This has been supported by the
association between longer (CA)n variants in the ESR2 gene with lower androgen
levels as well as with hypospadias.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to analyze the effect of ESR2 gene variants 
on the risk to hypospadias.
DESIGN, PARTICIPANTS, AND METHODS: Four haplotype-tagging single nucleotide
polymorphisms (rs2987983, rs1887994, rs1256040, and rs1256062), the (CA)n
polymorphism, and two additional promoter single nucleotide polymorphisms
(rs10483774 and rs1271572), mapping to a transcription factor binding region,
were typed and analyzed in a Swedish cohort of 354 boys with nonsyndromic
hypospadias and 380 healthy controls.
RESULTS: Association was identified with longer variants of the (CA)n
polymorphism in intron 6 and with a region of intense transcription factor
binding, in the putative promoter region, mapping to rs2987983 and rs10483774.
The two regions are in low-linkage disequilibrium, meaning that they are not
necessarily inherited together as a haplotype; logistic regression analysis
indicates that these two risk effects are not independent.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study evidences two nonindependent risk factors for
hypospadias in the ESR2 gene. We discuss possible mechanisms that explain how
these variants may affect male urethral development.

PMID: 17579196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Hum Reprod. 2007 Aug;13(8):521-6. Epub 2007 May 30.

Allelic estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene variants predict the outcome of ovarian
stimulation in in vitro fertilization.

Altmäe S(1), Haller K, Peters M, Hovatta O, Stavreus-Evers A, Karro H, Metspalu
A, Salumets A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Estonian
Genome Project, University of Tartu, Estonia, and Department of Clinical Science,
Intervention and Technology, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

The outcome of in vitro fertilization (IVF) depends substantially on the
effectiveness of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) induced by
administration of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). In COH, endogenously
produced estrogens extend the action of FSH in stimulating folliculogenesis. We
determined the associations between genetic variations in estrogen receptor ESR1 
and ESR2 genes and etiology of female infertility, and analysed the influence of 
these variations on COH outcome-the quantity and quality of oocytes retrieved.
ESR1 PvuII T/C (rs2234693) and XbaI A/G (rs9340799) single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and (TA)n microsatellite polymorphism, as well as ESR2 RsaI 
G/A (rs1256049) SNP and (CA)n microsatellite polymorphism were genotyped in 159
IVF patients. The ovarian response to FSH was diminished in patients with
endometriosis when compared to tubal factor infertility. ESR1 PvuII and XbaI as
well as ESR2 RsaI SNPs were associated with the microsatellite length of the
respective genes. Shorter ESR1 (TA)n was linked with a higher risk for
unexplained infertility, whereas longer ESR1 (TA)n associated with PvuII*C allele
were predictive of a better COH, but not clinical pregnancy outcome in an
age-independent manner. These data suggest the variations in ESR1 gene, in
addition to the age of a woman, may predict the COH outcome in IVF.

PMID: 17540666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Biol Reprod. 2007 Oct;77(4):614-25. Epub 2007 May 16.

Induction of three vitellogenins by 17beta-estradiol with concurrent inhibition
of the growth hormone-insulin-like growth factor 1 axis in a euryhaline teleost, 
the tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus).

Davis LK(1), Hiramatsu N, Hiramatsu K, Reading BJ, Matsubara T, Hara A, Sullivan 
CV, Pierce AL, Hirano T, Grau EG.

Author information: 
(1)Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, University of Hawaii, Kaneohe, Hawaii
96744, USA.

The objective of the present study was to utilize the male Mozambique tilapia
(Oreochromis mossambicus) as a model for examining the molecular mechanisms that 
mediate the physiological transition between somatic and gonadal growth in female
teleost fish, and in vertebrates in general. Partial cDNAs that encode multiple
forms of vitellogenin (Vtg), which is the major precursor of yolk proteins, were 
cloned from estrogen-treated males and utilized to develop real-time quantitative
RT-PCR assays, which were supplemented by an assay for Vtg immunoreactivity in
the plasma. Alignment analyses of the amino acid sequences deduced from the vtg
cDNAs revealed three distinct tilapia Vtgs, which were categorized as Aa-, Ab-,
and C-type Vtgs. A single injection of male tilapias with 17beta-estradiol (E(2))
at 5 microg/g body weight significantly increased the plasma E(2) and hepatic
levels of all three vtg transcripts within 1 day. Plasma E(2) levels declined
after 3 days, whereas the plasma Vtg immunoreactivity and hepatic levels of the
three vtg transcripts continued to increase. Hepatic expression of the estrogen
receptor (esr) 1 gene, but not the esr2 gene, also increased markedly 1 day after
E(2) injection and remained elevated for 5 days. While plasma growth hormone (Gh)
levels were unaffected, hepatic expression of transcripts that encoded the Gh
receptor and insulin-like growth factor 1 (Igf1) was suppressed by E(2), as were 
the plasma Igf1 levels. These results clearly suggest a distinct negative
interplay between the growth and reproductive axes at the molecular level of key 
hepatic regulatory pathways involved in the control of energy utilization by
gonadal and somatic growth processes.

PMID: 17507692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 May;16(5):1009-16.

Phytoestrogen exposure is associated with circulating sex hormone levels in
postmenopausal women and interact with ESR1 and NR1I2 gene variants.

Low YL(1), Dunning AM, Dowsett M, Folkerd E, Doody D, Taylor J, Bhaniani A, Luben
R, Khaw KT, Wareham NJ, Bingham SA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Dunn Human Nutrition Unit, Wellcome Trust/Medical
Research Council Dunn Human Nutrition Unit Building, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2
2XY, United Kingdom.

In this large cross-sectional study, we investigated the relationship between
phytoestrogen exposure and circulating sex hormones and sex hormone-binding
globulin (SHBG) levels in 1988 healthy postmenopausal women and their
interactions with polymorphisms in genes involved in estrogen signaling. Plasma
estradiol, testosterone, androstenedione, estrone, and SHBG were measured.
Urinary levels of five isoflavones (daidzein, genistein, glycitein,
O-desmethylangolensin, and equol) and two lignans (enterodiol and enterolactone) 
were measured and used as biomarkers for dietary intakes. Eighteen polymorphisms 
in ESR1, ESR2, and NR1I2 genes were genotyped. Results showed that lignans were
positively associated with plasma SHBG levels (eta(p)(2) = 1.2%; P < 0.001) and
negatively associated with plasma testosterone (eta(p)(2) = 0.2%; P = 0.042).
Equol was negatively associated with plasma estradiol levels (eta(p)(2) = 0.3%; P
= 0.028), whereas O-desmethylangolensin was positively associated with plasma
estradiol level (eta(p)(2) = 0.3%; P = 0.010). There were significant
phytoestrogen interactions with polymorphisms in ESR1 and NR1I2 genes in
affecting estrone levels. We conclude that phytoestrogens modulate sex hormone
and SHBG levels in postmenopausal women and interact with gene variants involved 
in estrogen signaling. Such phytoestrogen-gene interactions may explain the
conflicting literature on the hormonal effects of phytoestrogens.

PMID: 17507630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 May;16(5):969-78.

Evaluation of genetic variations in the androgen and estrogen metabolic pathways 
as risk factors for sporadic and familial prostate cancer.

Cunningham JM(1), Hebbring SJ, McDonnell SK, Cicek MS, Christensen GB, Wang L,
Jacobsen SJ, Cerhan JR, Blute ML, Schaid DJ, Thibodeau SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Previous studies suggest that enzymes involved in the androgen metabolic pathway 
are susceptibility factors for prostate cancer. Estrogen metabolites functioning 
as genotoxins have also been proposed as risk factors. In this study, we
systematically tested the hypothesis that common genetic variations for those
enzymes involved in the androgen and estrogen metabolic pathways increase risk
for sporadic and familial prostate cancer. From these two pathways, 46
polymorphisms (34 single nucleotide polymorphisms, 10 short tandem repeat
polymorphisms, and 2 null alleles) in 25 genes were tested for possible
associations. Those genes tested included PRL, LHB, CYP11A1, HSD3B1, HSD3B2,
HSD17B2, CYP17, SRD5A2, AKR1C3, UGT2B15, AR, SHBG, and KLK3 from the androgen
pathway and CYP19, HSD17B1, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, COMT, GSTP1, GSTT1, GSTM1,
NQO1, ESR1, and ESR2 from the estrogen pathway. A case-control study design was
used with two sets of cases: familial cases with a strong prostate cancer family 
history (n = 438 from 178 families) and sporadic cases with a negative prostate
cancer family history (n = 499). The controls (n = 493) were derived from a
population-based collection. Our results provide suggestive findings for an
association with either familial or sporadic prostate cancer with polymorphisms
in four genes: AKR1C3, HSD17B1, NQO1, and GSTT1. Additional suggestive findings
for an association with clinical variables (disease stage, grade, and/or node
status) were observed for single nucleotide polymorphisms in eight genes: HSD3B2,
SRD5A2, SHBG, ESR1, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, GSTT1, and NQO1. However, none of the
findings were statistically significant after appropriate corrections for
multiple comparisons. Given that the point estimates for the odds ratio for each 
of these polymorphisms are <2.0, much larger sample sizes will be required for
confirmation.

PMID: 17507624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Epidemiology. 2007 May;18(3):402-8.

Effect of soy isoflavones on endometriosis: interaction with estrogen receptor 2 
gene polymorphism.

Tsuchiya M(1), Miura T, Hanaoka T, Iwasaki M, Sasaki H, Tanaka T, Nakao H, Katoh 
T, Ikenoue T, Kabuto M, Tsugane S.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Prevention Division, Research Center for Cancer Prevention
and Screening, National Cancer Center, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Progression of endometriosis is considered estrogen-dependent.
Dietary soy isoflavones may affect the risk of endometriosis, and polymorphisms
in estrogen receptor genes may modify this association. We examined associations 
among soy isoflavone intake, estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2) gene polymorphisms and
risk of endometriosis.
METHODS: We recruited women age 20-45 years old who had consulted a university
hospital for infertility in Tokyo, Japan in 1999 or 2000. A total of 138 eligible
women were diagnosed laparoscopically and classified into 3 subgroups: control
(no endometriosis), early endometriosis (stage I-II) and advanced endometriosis
(stage III-IV). We measured urinary levels of genistein and daidzein as markers
for dietary intake of soy isoflavones, and genotyped ESR2 gene RsaI
polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Higher levels of urinary genistein and daidzein were associated with
decreased risk of advanced endometriosis (P for trend = 0.01 and 0.06,
respectively) but not early endometriosis. For advanced endometriosis, the
adjusted odds ratio for the highest quartile group was 0.21 (95% confidence
interval = 0.06-0.76) for genistein and 0.29 (0.08-1.03) for daidzein, when
compared with the lowest group. Inverse associations were also noted between
urinary isoflavones and the severity of endometriosis (P for trend = 0.01 for
genistein and 0.07 for daidzein). For advanced endometriosis, ESR2 gene RsaI
polymorphism appeared to modify the effects of genistein (P for interaction =
0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Dietary isoflavones may reduce the risk of endometriosis among
Japanese women.

PMID: 17474167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Biol Reprod. 2007 Aug;77(2):320-8. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Differential modulation of gonadotropin secretion by selective estrogen receptor 
1 and estrogen receptor 2 agonists in ovariectomized ewes.

Arreguin-Arevalo JA(1), Davis TL, Nett TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado 80523, USA.

The objectives of this study were to determine whether activation of estrogen
receptor 1 (ESR1; also known as ERalpha), or estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2; also
known as ERbeta), or both are required to: 1) acutely inhibit secretion of LH, 2)
induce the preovulatory-like surge of LH, and 3) inhibit secretion of FSH in
ovariectomized (OVX) ewes. OVX ewes (n = 6) were administered intramuscularly 25 
micrograms estradiol (E2), 12 mg propylpyrazoletriol (PPT; a subtype-selective
ESR1 agonist), 21 mg diaprylpropionitrile (DPN; a subtype-selective ESR2
agonist), or PPT + DPN. Like E2, administration of PPT, DPN, or combination of
the two rapidly decreased (P < 0.05) secretion of LH. Each agonist induced a
gradual, prolonged rise in secretion of LH after the initial inhibition, but
neither agonist alone nor the combined agonists was able to induce a "normal"
preovulatory-like surge of LH similar to that induced by E2. Compared with
E2-treated ewes, the beginning of the increase in secretion of LH occurred
earlier (P < 0.01) in DPN-treated ewes, later (P < 0.05) in PPT-treated ewes, and
at a similar interval in ewes receiving the combined agonist treatment. Like E2, 
PPT decreased (P < 0.05) secretion of FSH, but the duration of suppression was
much longer in PPT-treated ewes. DPN did not alter secretion of FSH in this
study. Modulation of the number of GnRH receptors by PPT and DPN was examined in 
primary cultures of ovine pituitary cells. In our hands, both PPT and DPN
increased the number of GnRH receptors, but the dose of DPN required to stimulate
synthesis of GnRH receptors was 10 times higher than that of PPT. We conclude
that in OVX ewes: 1) ESR1 and ESR2 mediate the negative feedback of E2 on
secretion of LH at the level of the pituitary gland, 2) ESR1 and ESR2 do not
synergize or antagonize the effects of each other; however, they do interact to
synchronize the beginning of the stimulatory effect of E2 on secretion of LH, 3) 
ESR1 and ESR2 may mediate at least partially the positive feedback of E2 on LH
secretion by increasing the number of GnRH receptors, and 4) only ESR1 appears to
be involved in the negative feedback of E2 on secretion of FSH.

PMID: 17429013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1653-62. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

The AP2 transcription factors DORNROSCHEN and DORNROSCHEN-LIKE redundantly
control Arabidopsis embryo patterning via interaction with PHAVOLUTA.

Chandler JW(1), Cole M, Flier A, Grewe B, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Gyrhofstrasse 17,
Cologne, Germany. john.chandler@uni-koeln.de

DORNROSCHEN (DRN) (also known as ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION1; ESR1) and
DRN-LIKE (DRNL; also known as ESR2) are two linked paralogues encoding AP2
domain-containing proteins. drn mutants show embryo cell patterning defects and, 
similarly to drnl mutants, disrupt cotyledon development at incomplete
penetrance. drn drnl double mutants with weak or strong drnl alleles show more
highly penetrant and extreme phenotypes, including a pin-like embryo without
cotyledons, confirming a high degree of functional redundancy for the two genes
in embryo patterning. Altered expression of PIN1::PIN1-GFP and DR5::GFP in drn
mutant embryos places DRN upstream of auxin transport and response. A yeast
two-hybrid screen with DRN followed by co-immunoprecipitation and bimolecular
fluorescence complementation revealed PHAVOLUTA (PHV) to be a protein interaction
partner in planta. drn phv double mutants show an increased penetrance of embryo 
cell division defects. DRNL can also interact with PHV and both DRN and DRNL can 
heterodimerise with additional members of the class III HD-ZIP family, PHABULOSA,
REVOLUTA, CORONA and ATHB8. Interactions involve the PAS-like C-terminal regions 
of these proteins and the DRN/DRNL AP2 domain.

PMID: 17376809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Apr;19(4):675-83.

Association of gene polymorphisms with blood pressure and the prevalence of
hypertension in community-dwelling Japanese individuals.

Yamada Y(1), Ando F, Shimokata H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Functional Genomics, Life Science Research Center, Mie
University, Mie 514-8507, Japan. yamada@gene.mie-u.ac.jp

Hypertension is a complex multifactorial disorder that is thought to result from 
an interaction between genetic background and environmental factors. Although
various loci and genes have been implicated in predisposition to hypertension by 
genetic linkage analyses and candidate gene association studies, the genes that
confer susceptibility to this condition remain to be identified definitively. We 
examined the relations of nine candidate gene polymorphisms to blood pressure
(BP) and the prevalence of hypertension in a population-based study. The 2238
subjects (1110 women, 1128 men) were aged 40 to 79 years and were randomly
recruited for a population-based prospective cohort study of aging and
age-related diseases in Japan. BP was measured with subjects having rested in a
sitting position for at least 15 min. Genotypes for the 160C-->T (Arg54Trp)
polymorphism of QPCT, the C-->T (Pro198Leu) polymorphism of GPX1, the
137,346T-->C polymorphism of FYN, the -344C-->T polymorphism of CYP11B2, and the 
A-->G (Ser49Gly) polymorphism of ADRB1 were determined with a fluorescence-based 
allele-specific DNA primer assay system; those for the A-->G polymorphism of
CNR2, the I/D (22,375delAC) polymorphism of CAV1, and the -1213T-->C polymorphism
of ESR2 by melting curve analysis, and that for the (GT)n polymorphism of COL1A2 
were determined by DNA fragment analysis. The polymorphism of FYN was associated 
with systolic and diastolic BP in women. In men, polymorphisms of CNR2, QPCT,
GPX1, COL1A2, CYP11B2, and ESR2 were associated with systolic and diastolic BP,
those of CAV1 and FYN with systolic BP, and that of ADRB1 with diastolic BP. The 
polymorphisms of QPCT and CYP11B2 were also associated with the prevalence of
hypertension in men. These results suggest that polymorphisms of QPCT and CYP11B2
are determinants of BP and the development of hypertension in Japanese men.

PMID: 17334644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Biol Reprod. 2007 Jun;76(6):1062-70. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor affects mouse ovarian follicle growth via
mechanisms involving estradiol regulation and responsiveness.

Barnett KR(1), Tomic D, Gupta RK, Miller KP, Meachum S, Paulose T, Flaws JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a known transcription factor. Although
studies indicate that Ahr-deficient (AhRKO) mice have defects in female
reproduction, only a few studies have examined the role of AHR in the ovary.
Previous studies have suggested, without directly testing, that AhRKO mice have
slower follicular growth than wild-type (WT) mice. Therefore, the first objective
of the present study was to examine whether AhRKO follicles grow slower than WT
follicles and if so, to determine whether the mechanism by which Ahr affects
follicular growth is through effects on antrum size, granulosa cell
proliferation, and regulators of cell cycle progression. Since estradiol (E(2))
is critical for the normal growth of ovarian follicles, the second objective of
the present study was to determine the role of Ahr in regulating E(2) production 
and responsiveness. The third objective of the present study was to determine
whether E(2) replacement restores follicular growth of AhRKO follicles to WT
levels in vitro. We found that AhRKO follicles grew slower than WT follicles in
vitro. While AhRKO and WT follicles had similar antrum sizes, AhRKO follicles
showed decreased granulosa cell proliferation and reduced mRNA and protein levels
of cell cycle regulators, as compared to WT follicles. Furthermore, the AhRKO
mice had lower serum and follicle-produced E(2) levels and showed decreased Esr1 
and Esr2 mRNA levels compared to WT mice. Finally, E(2) treatment of AhRKO
follicles restored follicular growth to WT levels in vitro. Collectively, these
findings suggest that the AHR affects follicular growth via mechanisms that
involve E(2) regulation and responsiveness.

PMID: 17329597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Genet Sel Evol. 2007 Mar-Apr;39(2):195-206. Epub 2007 Feb 17.

Association with litter size of new polymorphisms on ESR1 and ESR2 genes in a
Chinese-European pig line.

Muñoz G(1), Ovilo C, Estellé J, Silió L, Fernández A, Rodriguez C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Mejora Genética Animal, SGIT-INIA, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

The objective of this study was to search for polymorphisms in the coding region 
of the estrogen receptors 1 and 2 (ESR1 and ESR2) and to analyze the effects of
these variants and the well known intronic ESR1 PvuII polymorphism on litter size
in a Chinese-European pig line. We identified five silent single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) in the ESR1 cDNA: c.669T > C (exon 3), c.1227C > T (exon 5), 
c.1452C > T (exon 7), c.1665T > C and c.1755A > G (exon 8). One pair of these SNP
(c.1665T > C and c.1755A > G) co-segregated in the analyzed line, and the SNP
c.669T > C showed the same segregation pattern as the PvuII polymorphism. These
polymorphisms were tested in this study, although the c.1452C > T SNP within exon
7 was not analyzed due to its low informativeness. In the ESR2 cDNA, one missense
SNP was found within exon 5, which caused an amino acid substitution in the coded
protein: "c.949G > A (p.Val317Met)" and was tested on sow litter size.
Information on 1622 litter records from 408 genotyped sows was analyzed to
determine whether these SNP influenced the total number of piglets born (TNB) or 
the number of born alive (NBA). The polymorphisms ESR1: [ PvuII; c.669T > C] ,
ESR1: [ c.1665T > C; c.1755A > G] and ESR2: c.949G > A showed no statistically
significant association with litter size. However, the ESR1: c.1227T allele was
significantly associated with TNB. The additive substitution effect was estimated
to be 0.40 piglets born per litter (P < 0.03), and no dominance effects were
observed. This SNP could be useful in assisted selection for litter size in some 
pig lines, as a new genetic marker in linkage disequilibrium with the causative
mutation.

PMCID: PMC2682837
PMID: 17306201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Thromb Res. 2007;120(5):639-45. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Association between estrogen receptor alpha and beta gene polymorphisms and deep 
vein thrombosis.

Aléssio AM(1), Höehr NF, Siqueira LH, Ozelo MC, de Pádua Mansur A,
Annichino-Bizzacchi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Hemotherapy Center, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP),
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. joyce@unicamp.br

BACKGROUND: Estrogen and the estrogen receptors alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) play
a role in regulating genes, including coagulation and fibrinolysis genes.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the association between ESR1 c.454-397T>C and
c.454-351A>G and ESR2 1082A>G and 1730A>G polymorphisms and the risk of deep vein
thrombosis (DVT), in 134 patients and 134 controls with acquired risk factors for
thrombosis associated with estrogen alterations, such as pregnancy, puerperium,
oral contraceptives (OC), and hormone replacement therapy (HRT). We also analysed
134 men with DVT. We investigated the relationship of these polymorphisms and the
levels of fibrinogen, protein C (PC), protein S (PS), and antithrombin (AT)
activity.
METHODS: Gene polymorphisms were identified by using PCR and RFLP. Coagulation
methods were used to measure PC, PS, and fibrinogen. Chromogenic methods were
used to quantify AT.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The presence of the AA genotype of the 1730G>A
polymorphism (OR=0.18; 95%CI=0.05-0.62) suggests a protective effect for DVT in
women using OC. As the GG genotype of the 1730G>A polymorphism is associated with
increased PS activity in all control women and women using OC, this suggested
that a protective effect must occur by another pathway not related to PS. The AA 
and AG genotypes of the c.454-351A>G and GG genotype of the 1082G>A polymorphisms
are associated with increased fibrinogen concentration in pregnant women. The GG 
haplotype in the ESR2 gene (P<0.001) was related to factor V Leiden or G20210A
mutation in the prothrombin gene, or both, as predictive factors of DVT.

PMID: 17184825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Anim Reprod Sci. 2007 Dec;102(3-4):286-99. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Ontogeny of androgen and estrogen receptor expression in porcine testis: effect
of reducing testicular estrogen synthesis.

Ramesh R(1), Pearl CA, At-Taras E, Roser JF, Berger T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616,
USA.

Reducing endogenous estrogen leads to increased proliferation of porcine Sertoli 
cells during the first 2 months of life. The resulting increase in porcine
Sertoli cell numbers is maintained through puberty. The reduced estrogen appears 
to be the direct hormonal mediator because essentially no changes are observed in
other hormones. However, the mechanism for this effect on Sertoli cell
proliferation is unknown. The objective of these studies was to evaluate estrogen
receptors alpha and beta (ESR1 and ESR2) in conjunction with androgen receptor
(AR) on Sertoli cells and other testicular cell types, as an initial step toward 
understanding how reduced estrogen leads to increased Sertoli cell numbers.
Testis sections from treated animals (aromatase inhibition to decrease endogenous
estrogen beginning at 1 week of age) and from littermate controls treated with
vehicle were subjected to immunocytochemical labeling for ESR1, ESR2, and AR.
Three observers scored Sertoli cells, interstitial cells, peritubular myoid
cells, and germ cells for intensity of labeling (0: absent; 1+: weak; 2+:
moderate; or 3+: strong labeling). AR in Sertoli cells was readily detected at 1 
week of age, was very faint in 2-month vehicle controls, and labeling appeared to
increase in 3-month vehicle controls. AR in Sertoli cells, interstitial cells,
and apparently germ cells was increased in treated animals at 2 months of age
compared with the vehicle controls. This increase was confirmed in western blots.
ESR1 and ESR 2 were clearly present in Sertoli cells from 1-week-old animals; ESR
in Sertoli cells generally decreased with age with the decrease more apparent for
ESR2. ESR1 in Sertoli cells and peritubular myoid cells exhibited some
treatment-related effects but reduction of endogenous estrogen did not appear to 
affect ESR2 in the boar testis. The observed alterations in AR and ESR1 may
mediate the increases in Sertoli cell proliferation following inhibition of
endogenous estrogen production or may reflect the altered function of the Sertoli
cells and peritubular myoid cells.

PMID: 17157457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Plant Cell Physiol. 2006 Nov;47(11):1443-56. Epub 2006 Oct 20.

The ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION 2 gene in Arabidopsis regulates CUP-SHAPED
COTYLEDON 1 at the transcriptional level and controls cotyledon development.

Ikeda Y(1), Banno H, Niu QW, Howell SH, Chua NH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021-6399, USA.

Cytokinins stimulate shoot regeneration in tissue culture but the genes required 
for this developmental process are not well understood. Here we show that the
Arabidopsis gene, ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION 2 (ESR2), encoding an AP2-domain
transcriptional factor, functions in the regeneration of shoots in tissue
culture. ESR2 overexpression conferred cytokinin-independent shoot regeneration
from cre1/ahk4 mutant explants, suggesting that CRE1 is not required for
ESR2-mediated shoot regeneration. ESR2 directly targeted CYCLIN D1;1, ARABIDOPSIS
PHOSPHOTRANSMITTER 6 (AHP6) and CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON 1 (CUC1) in assays involving
the translocation of ESR2-ER (estradiol receptor) fusions to the nucleus.
Knock-down of ESR2 expression by RNA interference (RNAi) reduced CUC1 expression 
and resulted in altered cotyledon phenotypes at a low frequency, including
partially fused cotyledons and triple cotyledons. Phenotypes of induced ESR2
expression in a cuc1-1 mutant background were suppressed. Our results suggest
that ESR2 plays a role in shoot regeneration through transcriptional regulation
of CUC1.

PMID: 17056621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Reproduction. 2006 Oct;132(4):637-48.

A bovine oviduct epithelial cell suspension culture system suitable for studying 
embryo-maternal interactions: morphological and functional characterization.

Rottmayer R(1), Ulbrich SE, Kölle S, Prelle K, Neumueller C, Sinowatz F, Meyer
HH, Wolf E, Hiendleder S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, Gene Center of the
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.

We established a short-term (24 h) culture system for bovine oviduct epithelial
cells (BOECs), obtained on day 3.5 of the estrous cycle and evaluated the cells
with respect to morphological criteria, marker gene expression, and hormone
responsiveness. BOEC sheets were isolated mechanically from the ampulla with
similar yields from oviducts ipsi- and contralateral to the ovulation site (57.9 
+/- 4.6 and 56.4 +/- 8.0 x 10(6) cells). BOECs showed > 95% purity and cells
cultured for 24 h maintained morphological characteristics present in vivo, as
determined by light microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and transmission
electron microscopy. Both secretory cells with numerous secretory granules and
ciliated cells with long, well-developed, and vigorously beating kinocilia were
visible. Quantitative real-time PCR failed to detect significant differences in
transcript levels between ipsi-and contralateral BOECs for the majority of marker
genes (estrogen receptors alpha and beta (ESR1 and ESR2),
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), oviductal glycoprotein 1
(OVGP1), progesterone receptor (PGR), and tumor rejection antigen 1 (TRA1))
throughout the 24 h culture period. However, the combined data of all time points
for glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), a gene previously shown to be expressed at
higher levels in the ipsilateral oviduct in vivo, also indicated significantly
different mRNA levels in vitro. The expression of marker genes remained stable
after 6 h cell culture, indicating only a short adaptation period. Western blot
analysis confirmed ESR1 and PGR protein expression throughout the culture period.
In agreement with cyclic differences in vivo, estradiol-17beta stimulation
increased PGR transcript abundance in BOECs. Our novel culture system provides
functional BOECs in sufficient quantities for holistic transcriptome and proteome
studies, e.g. for deciphering early embryo-maternal communication.

PMID: 17008475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Bone Miner Res. 2006 Nov;21(11):1678-95.

Robust and comprehensive analysis of 20 osteoporosis candidate genes by very
high-density single-nucleotide polymorphism screen among 405 white nuclear
families identified significant association and gene-gene interaction.

Xiong DH(1), Shen H, Zhao LJ, Xiao P, Yang TL, Guo Y, Wang W, Guo YF, Liu YJ,
Recker RR, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)Osteoporosis Research Center and Department of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton 
University, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

Many "novel" osteoporosis candidate genes have been proposed in recent years. To 
advance our knowledge of their roles in osteoporosis, we screened 20 such genes
using a set of high-density SNPs in a large family-based study. Our efforts led
to the prioritization of those osteoporosis genes and the detection of gene-gene 
interactions.INTRODUCTION: We performed large-scale family-based association
analyses of 20 novel osteoporosis candidate genes using 277 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) for the quantitative trait BMD variation and the qualitative
trait osteoporosis (OP) at three clinically important skeletal sites: spine, hip,
and ultradistal radius (UD).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: One thousand eight hundred seventy-three subjects from 405
white nuclear families were genotyped and analyzed with an average density of one
SNP per 4 kb across the 20 genes. We conducted association analyses by SNP- and
haplotype-based family-based association test (FBAT) and performed gene-gene
interaction analyses using multianalytic approaches such as
multifactor-dimensionality reduction (MDR) and conditional logistic regression.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We detected four genes (DBP, LRP5, CYP17, and RANK) that
showed highly suggestive associations (10,000-permutation derived empirical
global p < or = 0.01) with spine BMD/OP; four genes (CYP19, RANK, RANKL, and
CYP17) highly suggestive for hip BMD/OP; and four genes (CYP19, BMP2, RANK, and
TNFR2) highly suggestive for UD BMD/OP. The associations between BMP2 with UD BMD
and those between RANK with OP at the spine, hip, and UD also met the
experiment-wide stringent criterion (empirical global p < or = 0.0007).
Sex-stratified analyses further showed that some of the significant associations 
in the total sample were driven by either male or female subjects. In addition,
we identified and validated a two-locus gene-gene interaction model involving GCR
and ESR2, for which prior biological evidence exists. Our results suggested the
prioritization of osteoporosis candidate genes from among the many proposed in
recent years and revealed the significant gene-gene interaction effects
influencing osteoporosis risk.

PMCID: PMC1829486
PMID: 17002564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Anim Breed Genet. 2006 Oct;123(5):343-8.

Detection of novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CYP21 gene and
association analysis of two SNPs for CYP21 and ESR2 with litter size in a
commercial sow population.

Buske B(1), Sternstein I, Reissmann M, Brockmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breeding Biology and Molecular Genetics, Agricultural and
Horticultural Faculty, Institute of Animal Sciences, Humboldt-University of
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. bernd.buske@staff.hu-berlin.de

Altogether 129 F1 sows from a commercial sow farm with at least four litters were
genotyped for the oestrogen receptor 2 gene (ESR2) and cytochrome P450
hydroxylase 21 gene (CYP21) and investigated for associations on the litter-size 
parameters: total number born and number born alive. Five novel polymorphisms
were found in the 3'-untranslated region for the CYP21 gene. Genotype and allele 
frequencies for the CYP21 (position 3462G > A) single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) were 0.434 (GG), 0.504 (AG), 0.062 (AA) and 0.69 (G):0.31 (A),
respectively. No association was found between this polymorphism and litter-size 
parameters. For the ESR2 gene, the SNP in exon 5 associated with an amino acid
substitution MET (allele A) > VAL (allele G) was investigated. Only two genotypes
were found leading to allele frequencies of 0.34 (A):0.66 (G). Only number born
alive piglets were significantly increased for the AG genotype (p = 0.034) with
11.64 piglets per sow and litter in comparison with the GG genotype, leading to
only 10.96 piglets per sow and litter. From these data, it can be concluded that 
the investigated SNP of the ESR2 gene is associated with the number of liveborn
piglets in the commercial population considered, and hence could be useful in
selection for litter size. Therefore, this gene should be investigated in
additional populations.

PMID: 16965408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Anim Breed Genet. 2006 Oct;123(5):337-42.

FISH mapping of 10 canine BAC clones harbouring genes and microsatellites in the 
arctic fox and the Chinese raccoon dog genomes.

Szczerbal I(1), Klukowska-Roetzler J, Dolf G, Schelling C, Switonski M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, August Cieszkowski Agricultural
University of Poznan, Poznan, Poland.

Cytogenetic mapping of the arctic fox and the Chinese raccoon dog were performed 
using a set of canine probes derived from the Bacterial Artificial Chromosome
(BAC) library. Altogether, 10 BAC clones containing sequences of selected genes
(PAX3, HBB, ATP2A2, TECTA, PIT1, ABCA4, ESR2, TPH1, HTR2A, MAOA) and
microsatellites were mapped by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
experiments to chromosomes of the canids studied. At present, the cytogenetic map
on the arctic fox and Chinese raccoon dog consists of 45 loci each. Chromosomal
localization of the BAC clones was in agreement with data obtained by earlier
independent comparative chromosome painting. However, two events of
telomere-to-centromere inversions were tentatively identified while compared with
assignments in the dog karyotype.

PMID: 16965407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S94-S102.

Cognitive functioning and sex steroid hormone gene polymorphisms in women at
midlife.

Kravitz HM(1), Meyer PM, Seeman TE, Greendale GA, Sowers MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA. hkravitz@rush.edu

Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotype frequencies were examined to
determine whether variation in 6 estrogen-related genes was associated with
differences in cognitive functioning in women at midlife. DNA from a
multiracial/multiethnic sample of 875 African American, Caucasian, Chinese, and
Japanese women aged 45 to 56 years participating in the Study of Women's Health
Across the Nation (SWAN) was genotyped. Gene markers from the sex steroid hormone
pathway were linked to measures of cognitive functioning including the Digit Span
Backward Test (DSB), a measure of working memory; the Symbol Digit Modalities
Test (SDMT), a measure of perceptual speed; and the East Boston Memory Test
(EBMT), a measure of episodic memory. Statistical models were fit using logistic 
regression and general linear models to estimate the strength of association of
estrogen-related polymorphisms with DSB, SDMT, and EBMT scores. On the EBMT,
African American women and Caucasian women with ESR1 rs9340799 GG genotypes had
about 1.5 to 2.0 times greater odds of remembering story elements on the
EBMT-immediate recall test. Caucasian women with ESR1 rs2234693 CC genotypes had 
1.3 to 1.5 times greater odds of remembering story elements on the EBMT-delayed
recall test. Chinese women with 17HSD rs615942 GG genotypes, 17HSD rs592389 TT
genotypes, and 17HSD rs2830 GG genotypes had about 1.7 times greater odds of
remembering story elements on the EBMT-immediate recall test. African American
women with CYP 19 rs936306 CC genotypes had about 0.25 to 0.40 lower odds of
remembering story elements on the EBMT-immediate recall test, whereas Chinese
women with CYP 19 rs936306 CC genotypes had about 2.3 times greater odds of
remembering story elements on both the EBMT-immediate and -delayed recall tests. 
On the DSB, African American women with CYP 19 rs749292 GG genotype had a higher 
mean score. On the SDMT, Japanese women with ESR1 rs728524 GG genotypes had a
higher mean score. On the 3 tests of cognitive functioning, there was 1
significant finding for CYP1A1 and none for the CYP1B1 or ESR2 SNPs. We conclude 
that selected genes involved in estrogen synthesis and metabolism may be
associated with performance differences on cognitive function tests. Also, the
relevant estrogen-related polymorphisms may vary by race/ethnicity.

PMID: 16949394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S79-86.

The association of bone mineral density with estrogen receptor gene
polymorphisms.

Greendale GA(1), Chu J, Ferrell R, Randolph JF Jr, Johnston JM, Sowers MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of
California-Los Angeles, California 90095-1687, USA. ggreenda@mednet.ucla.edu

The purpose of this investigation was to evaluate single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) variants of the estrogen receptor genes ESR1 and ESR2 and bone mineral
density (BMD) of the lumbar spine (LS-BMD) or total hip (hip BMD) in women of 4
races/ethnicities who were premenopausal or in early perimenopause. The sample
consisted of 1,301 participants from the Study of Women's Health Across the
Nation (SWAN) with measures of BMD and genotyping; of these, 295 were African
American, 693 were Caucasian, 151 were Chinese, and 162 were Japanese. We
evaluated the potential association of LS-BMD or hip BMD with 4 SNPs from the
ESR1 gene (ESR1 rs9340799, ESR1 rs2234693, ESR1 rs728524, and ESR1 rs3798577),
and 3 SNPs from the ESR2 gene (ESR2 rs1255998, ESR2 rs1256030, and ESR2
rs1256065). Unadjusted mean LS-BMD values ranged from 1.141+/-0.14 g/cm(2) in
African American women to 1.031+/-0.11 g/cm2 in Japanese women; unadjusted mean
hip BMD values ranged from 1.053+/-0.14 g/cm2 in African American women to
0.862+/-0.10 g/cm2 in Chinese women. African American and Japanese women with the
ESR1 rs2234693 (PvuII) CC genotype had higher LS-BMDs than did their peers with
the TT genotype (P=0.009 and P=0.04, respectively). Japanese women with the ESR1 
rs3798577 CC or TC genotypes had lower LS-BMD than did Japanese women with the TT
genotype (P=0.02 and P=0.01, respectively). Caucasian women with the TC genotype 
for ESR2 rs1256030 had lower LS-BMDs than did those with the CC genotype
(P=0.02). Chinese women who were heterozygous for ESR2 rs1256030 or ESR2
rs1256065 had significantly higher LS-BMDs and hip BMDs than did the referent
groups for each of these SNPs (CC and AA, respectively). Associations between BMD
and ESR1 and ESR2 genotypes varied by race/ethnicity and by bone site. Our
results differ from those previously reported for 2 ESR1 genotypes (ESR1
rs2234693 [PvuII] and ESR1 rs9340799 [XbaI]). Moreover, 2 ESR1 and 3 ESR2 SNPs we
studied have not previously been examined with respect to BMD. Among these, ESR2 
rs1256030 and ESR2 rs1256065 appear to have an effect at both the lumbar spine
and hip in Chinese women and may warrant further study.

PMID: 16949392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S69-78.

The association of genetic polymorphisms in sex hormone biosynthesis and action
with insulin sensitivity and diabetes mellitus in women at midlife.

Lo JC(1), Zhao X, Scuteri A, Brockwell S, Sowers MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland,
California, USA.

We evaluated associations of insulin sensitivity, metabolic syndrome, and
diabetes mellitus with single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variants from sex
hormone biosynthesis and action in women of 4 races/ethnicities. DNA was
extracted from transformed cell samples of 1,538 women in the Study of Women's
Health Across the Nation (SWAN). African American, Caucasian, Chinese, and
Japanese women in SWAN enrolled in the Sex Steroid Hormone Genetics Protocol from
whom fasting glucose and insulin measures (for estimating insulin sensitivity),
diabetes status, and metabolic syndrome classification were obtained. SNPs from
the genes encoding aromatase (CYP 19), 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
(17HSD) type 1, and the estrogen receptors-alpha (ESR1) and -beta (ESR2) were
measured. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome was 20% in Chinese women, 22% in
Japanese women, 28% in Caucasian women, and 43% in African American women. The
prevalence of diabetes was 3% in Chinese women, 4% in Japanese women, 7% in
Caucasian women, and 19% in African American women. Significant associations of
CYP 19 genotypes and insulin sensitivity were observed in African American,
Caucasian, and Japanese women. Selected ESR1 and ESR2 genotypes were associated
with insulin sensitivity and metabolic syndrome only in Japanese and Chinese
women. The strongest associations related 17HSD genotypes to diabetes in
Caucasian women, with odds ratios ranging from 4.4 to 7.5 and confidence
intervals that excluded the null value. We observed strong associations between
variations in sex hormone biosynthesis and function genes with insulin
sensitivity, the metabolic syndrome, and diabetes that varied by race/ethnicity. 
The strong association of 17HSD and diabetes in Caucasian women has not been
previously reported and should be further investigated.

PMID: 16949391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S61-8.

Sex steroid hormone polymorphisms, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and
apolipoprotein A-1 from the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN).

Sowers MR(1), Symons JP, Jannausch ML, Chu J, Kardia SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104, USA. mfsowers@umich.edu

We evaluated potential associations between single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
variants in estrogen receptor (ERalpha and ERbeta) genes, high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, and apolipoprotein A-1 (apoA-1) concentrations in 
women of 4 races/ethnicities. Participants included 1,520 African American,
Caucasian, Chinese, and Japanese women from the Study of Women's Health Across
the Nation (SWAN) who were premenopausal or perimenopausal and who were also
enrolled in the SWAN Genetics Study, which collected blood for lipid analyses and
carried out lymphocyte transformation from which DNA was extracted and genotyped.
We evaluated SNPs from ERalpha and ERbeta genes (ESR1 and ESR2, respectively),
including ESR1 rs9340799, ESR1 rs2234693, ESR1 rs728524, ESR1 rs3798577, ESR2
rs1255998, ESR2 rs1256065, and ESR2 rs1256030. The mean HDL cholesterol and
apoA-1 values for these women were 1.47 mmol/L and 1.51 g/L, respectively.
Japanese women with the ESR1 rs3798577 TC genotype had significantly lower apoA-1
(P=0.02) and HDL cholesterol levels (P=0.03) than did those with the TT genotype.
African American women with the ESR1 rs728524 GG genotype had higher HDL
cholesterol levels than did women with the AA or AG genotypes (P=0.05). ESR2
rs1256030 and ESR2 rs1256065 genotypes were associated with HDL cholesterol
concentrations in Chinese women (P=0.05). Although associations were identified
between the ESR1 and ESR2 SNP variants and lipids in these women, these
associations were not consistently observed across the 4 racial/ethnic groups,
nor were the associations consistently inclusive of both HDL cholesterol and
apoA-1. These genetic variants provide limited evidence of associations with
lipids that may help explain the cardioprotective effect of premenopausal status 
in women.

PMID: 16949390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S16-22.

Endogenous estradiol and its association with estrogen receptor gene
polymorphisms.

Sowers MR(1), Jannausch ML, McConnell DS, Kardia SR, Randolph JF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104, USA. mfsowers@umich.edu

We evaluated potential associations between single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
variants of the estrogen receptor genes ESR1 and ESR2 and circulating estradiol
(E2) concentrations in women of 4 races/ethnicities. The study population was
drawn from participants in the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN). 
A total of 1,538 African American, Caucasian, Chinese, and Japanese women from
SWAN participated in the Sex Steroid Hormone Genetics Protocol by providing blood
for sex steroid hormone analyses and consenting to lymphocyte transformation from
which DNA was extracted and genotyped. We evaluated 4 ESR1 SNPs (ESR1 rs9340799, 
ESR1 rs2234693, ESR1 rs728524, and ESR1 rs3798577), and 3 ESR2 SNPs (ESR2
rs1255998, ESR2 rs1256030, and ESR2 rs1256065). Mean E2 level was 196.0 +/- 4.0
pmol/L in women who were premenopausal and perimenopausal (with blood drawn on
days 2 through 5 of the menstrual cycle follicular phase); however, mean E2
levels in Chinese and Japanese women were lower (155.7 +/- 10.6 pmol/L and 170.0 
+/- 10.3 pmol/L, respectively) than in African American (196.4 +/- 8.1 pmol/L, P 
<0.05) or Caucasian women (210.7 +/- 5.9 pmol/L, P <0.002). The ESR1 rs3798577 CC
genotype was associated with lower circulating E2 concentrations in African
American women (P <0.07) and explained about 1% of the variation in circulating
E2 concentrations. In Japanese women, the GC genotype of ESR2 rs1255998 was
associated with significantly lower circulating E2 concentrations that explained 
about 4% of the variation. Circulating E2 concentrations were not strongly or
consistently associated with selected polymorphisms for the estrogen receptor
genes. The 2 strongest associations explained <4% of the total variation in the
circulating E2 concentrations.

PMID: 16949384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S103-10.

Sex steroid hormone pathway genes and health-related measures in women of 4
races/ethnicities: the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN).

Sowers MR(1), Wilson AL, Karvonen-Gutierrez CA, Kardia SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104, USA. mfsowers@umich.edu

We synthesized findings relating health outcomes and genetic variants of the sex 
steroid hormone pathway in women from the Study of Women's Health Across the
Nation (SWAN) Genetics Study. The SWAN Genetics Study, a component of the
longitudinal SWAN study, describes selected genetics characteristics of
health-related attributes during the menopausal transition in African American,
Caucasian, Chinese, and Japanese women. At baseline, SWAN recruited menstruating 
women aged 42 to 52 years, who were not using exogenous hormones. Immortalized
cell lines were developed and genotyped in 1,538 specimens from 1,757
participants in the genetics study. Genotypes and haplotypes from 6 genes (27
single nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs]) in the sex steroid hormone pathway were
related to circulating hormone concentrations, menstrual cycle profiles, and
health-related outcomes, including lipids, diabetes mellitus, depressive
symptoms, measures of cognition, bone mineral density (BMD), and vasomotor
symptoms. Allele frequencies and distances differed substantially in the 4
race/ethnicity-specific groups evaluated, leading to variable patterns of
association with health-related measures. For example, 17HSD genotypes were
highly associated with diabetes risk in Caucasian women, whereas its haplotypes
were associated with diabetes risk in both African American and Caucasian women. 
Several SNPs were associated with multiple outcomes. ESR1 rs3798577 was
significantly associated with circulating estradiol concentrations, indicators of
ovarian aging, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, apolipoprotein A-1,
insulin sensitivity, and lumbar spine BMD. CYP1A1 rs2606345 was related to
estrogen metabolite concentrations, vasomotor symptoms, and depressive symptoms. 
Some associations were much more prominent in specific races/ethnicities; Chinese
women had statistically significant relations between ESR2 rs1256030 and HDL
cholesterol, lumbar spine BMD, hip BMD, and metabolic syndrome. Importantly,
women in the SWAN Genetics Study were typical of women in the community-based
SWAN sample. This community-based sample of women from the SWAN Genetics Study
identified important genetic sex steroid hormone pathway variants in relation to 
measures of health status. The magnitude and breadth of these relationships
should motivate further research to verify and extend the findings.

PMID: 16949383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Bone Miner Res. 2006 Sep;21(9):1443-56.

Estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) polymorphisms in interaction with estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1) variants influence the risk 
of fracture in postmenopausal women.

Rivadeneira F(1), van Meurs JB, Kant J, Zillikens MC, Stolk L, Beck TJ, Arp P,
Schuit SC, Hofman A, Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, van Duijn CM, van Leeuwen JP, Pols
HA, Uitterlinden AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. f.rivadeneira@erasmusmc.nl

In this large population-based cohort study, variants in ESR2 were associated
with increased risk of vertebral and incident fragility fracture in
postmenopausal women. Interaction of ESR2 with ESR1 and IGF1 was determined and
revealed a deleterious genetic combination that enhances the risk of osteoporotic
fracture.INTRODUCTION: Osteoporosis is a complex disease with strong genetic
influence, but the genes involved are ill-defined. We examined estrogen receptor 
beta (ESR2) polymorphisms in interaction with estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and 
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1) variants in relation to the risk of
osteoporotic fracture, BMD, and bone geometry.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the Rotterdam study, a prospective population-based
cohort of elderly white individuals, we studied six single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in ESR2 (n = 6343, 60% women). We analyzed the genetic
variants in the form of haplotypes reconstructed by a statistical method. Results
refer to the most frequent ESR2 haplotype 1 estimated from two SNPs in intron 2
and the 3'-untranslated region (UTR). Outcomes included vertebral and incident
nonvertebral fractures, BMD, and hip structural analysis (HSA). We also studied
the interaction with (the most frequent) ESR1 haplotype 1 estimated from the
PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms and an IGF1 promoter CA-repeat.
RESULTS: Compared with ESR2 haplotype 1 noncarriers, female homozygous carriers
had a 1.8- and 1.4-fold increased risk of vertebral and fragility fractures. HSA 
showed that ESR2 haplotype 1 homozygote women had 2.6% thinner cortices, 1.0%
increased neck width, and 4.3% higher bone instability (buckling ratios). For
testing the gene interaction, we assumed a recessive model of ESR2 haplotype 1.
Female homozygous carriers of ESR2 haplotype 1 and noncarriers of ESR1 haplotype 
1 had a 3.5- and 1.8-fold increased risk of vertebral and fragility fractures
(p(interaction) = 0.10). Such effects and interactions were stronger in women
homozygous for the IGF1 192-bp allele, with 9.3-fold increased risk
(p(interaction) = 0.002) for vertebral and 4.0-fold increased risk
(p(interaction) = 0.01) for fragility fractures. Multilocus interaction analyses 
of fracture endured correction for multiple testing using Monte-Carlo simulations
(p(interaction) = 0.02 for vertebral and p(interaction) = 0.03 for fragility
fractures). Similar patterns of interaction were observed for BMD, cortical
thickness, bone strength (section modulus), and instability (buckling ratio). In 
men, no such effects were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants of ESR2 alone and in interaction with ESR1 and IGF1
influence the risk of fracture in postmenopausal women. These findings reinforce 
the polygenic and complex character of osteoporosis.

PMID: 16939403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Reprod Dev. 2006 Dec;73(12):1481-90.

Temperature effects on sex determination and ontogenetic gene expression of the
aromatases cyp19a and cyp19b, and the estrogen receptors esr1 and esr2 in
atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus).

van Nes S(1), Andersen Ø.

Author information: 
(1)AKVAFORSK Institute of Aquaculture Research, Norwegian University of Life
Sciences, As, Norway. solveig.van-nes@akvaforsk.no

The aromatase (CYP19) and estrogen receptor (ESR) play important roles in the
molecular mechanism of sex determination and differentiation of lower
vertebrates. Several studies have proven these mechanisms to be temperature
sensitive, which can influence the direction of phenotypic gender development. A 
temperature study was conducted to examine the effect of temperature on the sex
differentiation in farmed Atlantic halibut. Sexually undifferentiated larvae were
exposed to 7 degrees C, 10 degrees C, or 13 degrees C during gonadal
differentiation. Temperature effects on the transcription rate of the aromatase
genes cyp19a (ovary type) and cyp19b (brain type) and the ESR genes esr1 and esr2
were examined by quantitative real-time PCR. With increasing temperatures, both
cyp19a mRNA levels and the female incidence showed a decreasing trend, thus
strongly indicating a relation between the expression of cyp19a and morphological
ovary differentiation. In contrast to cyp19a, the levels of cyp19b, esr1, and
esr2 mRNA strongly increased in all temperature groups throughout the study
period, and did not show obvious temperature-related expression patterns. The
present data provide evidence that posthatching temperature exposure
significantly affects the expression of cyp19a mRNA during the developmental
period and that high temperature possibly influences genetic sex determination in
Atlantic halibut. Though, the female incidence never exceeded 50%, suggesting
that only the homogametic (XX) female is thermolabile. So whereas temperature
treatment is not likely suitable for direct feminization in halibut, the
possibility for high-temperature production of XX neomales for broodstock to
obtain all-female offspring by crossing with XX females is suggested.

PMID: 16929526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Aug;23(4):434-6.

[An associated analysis of estrogen receptor 2 gene polymorphism linked with
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang L(1), Liu SY, Chen Q, Zou H, Zuo YQ, Xu XH, Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041 P. R. China. zhanglilxz@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relation ship of estrogen receptor 2 gene (ESR2)
polymorphism associated with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) in
Chengdu of China.
METHODS: By polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP) method, the Rsa I polymorphism in exon 5 and the Alu I polymorphism in
exon 8 of ESR2 were detected in 100 pregnant women with ICP (ICP group) and 100
normal pregnant women (control group) in Chengdu.
RESULTS: (1) The frequency of the allele A of Alu I polymorphism in exon 8 was
significantly higher in ICP group than in control group (P=0.031, OR=1.975), so
did the frequency of the Aa+AA genotypes (P=0.028, OR=2.144). (2) The genotype
distributions (rr, Rr and RR) and allele frequencies (r and R) of Rsa I
polymorphism in exon 5 were not significantly different between the two groups
(P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: The Alu I polymorphism in exon 8 of ESR2 may be associated with the
susceptibility of ICP in Chengdu. The Aa+AA genotype significantly elevated the
risk suffering from the ICP. The Rsa I polymorphism in exon 5 of ESR2 is not
associated with the risk getting the ICP in Chengdu.

PMID: 16883534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. BMC Cancer. 2006 Jun 29;6:173.

Polymorphisms in estrogen-metabolizing and estrogen receptor genes and the risk
of developing breast cancer among a cohort of women with benign breast disease.

Gallicchio L(1), Berndt SI, McSorley MA, Newschaffer CJ, Thuita LW, Argani P,
Hoffman SC, Helzlsouer KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. lgallic@mdmercy.com

BACKGROUND: A cohort study was conducted to examine the role of genetic
polymorphisms in three estrogen metabolizing enzymes (COMT, CYP1A1, CYP1B1) and
the two estrogen receptors (ESR1, ESR2) in the progression of benign breast
disease (BBD) to breast cancer.
METHODS: Among participants in an ongoing cohort study, 1438 Caucasian women had 
a breast biopsy for BBD and were successfully genotyped for at least one of the
polymorphisms examined in this study. Genotypes were determined using DNA
extracted from blood specimens collected in 1989. Incident cases of breast cancer
occurring subsequent to BBD diagnosis up to 2003 were identified through cancer
registries.
RESULTS: Among all participants, the ESR2 *5772G allele was associated with a
significant decrease in the risk of breast cancer among women with BBD (Odds
Ratio (OR) 0.38; 95% Confidence Interval (CI) 0.15, 0.96). Compared to the
reference wild-type genotypes, marginally significant associations with the
development of breast cancer were observed between carriers of the variant ESR1 -
104062T allele (OR 0.70, 95% CI 0.45, 1.09), the variant ESR2 *38A allele (OR
1.40; 95% CI 0.88, 2.25), and the variant CYP1B1 453Ser allele (OR 1.48, 95% CI
0.95, 2.32).
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that specific polymorphisms in the CYP1B1, ESR1,
and ESR2 genes may play a role in progression of BBD to breast cancer among
Caucasian women. Although additional studies are needed to confirm or refute our 
findings, these results suggest that genetic markers may aid in the
identification of women who are at risk for progression of BBD to cancer.

PMCID: PMC1534058
PMID: 16808847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Bone. 2006 Nov;39(5):1097-106. Epub 2006 Jun 13.

T-1213C polymorphism of estrogen receptor beta is associated with low bone
mineral density and osteoporotic fractures.

Kung AW(1), Lai BM, Ng MY, Chan V, Sham PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong
Kong, China. awckung@hkucc.hku.hk

Osteoporosis is a complex disease with a strong genetic component, but the genes 
involved are poorly defined. To determine whether estrogen receptor beta (ESR2)
gene is an osteoporosis risk gene, we examined its association with bone mineral 
density (BMD) and fracture risk. Using a gene-based approach, a set of 12
polymorphisms of ESR2 was studied in 752 case-control pairs of southern Chinese
in ethnicity. Among all polymorphisms, the most significant relation with BMD and
fracture risk was observed with T-1213C. Subjects with low BMD had a higher
frequency of the variant C allele of T-1213C (cases 11.4%, control 8.4%, P =
0.02). The C allele was associated with 4% reduction in BMD at both the spine and
hip in women, and 11% reduction in spine BMD and 9% reduction in hip BMD in men. 
Similar results were seen with SNP haplotype analysis. Subjects with the C allele
of T-1213C were associated with higher risks of osteoporosis and BMD T scores <
or = -2.5 (odds ratios: 2.2 at spine and 3.5 at femoral neck for women; 3.5 at
lumbar spine for men). Postmenopausal women carrying this C allele were
associated with 2.22-fold increased risk of osteoporotic fractures (95%
confidence interval 1.26-4.25) even after adjusting for BMD. In conclusion, ESR2 
is involved in BMD determination in both sexes. The T-1213C polymorphism
influences the risk of fracture in postmenopausal women independent of BMD.

PMID: 16777502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biol Reprod. 2006 Sep;75(3):387-94. Epub 2006 May 17.

ECC-1 cells: a well-differentiated steroid-responsive endometrial cell line with 
characteristics of luminal epithelium.

Mo B(1), Vendrov AE, Palomino WA, DuPont BR, Apparao KB, Lessey BA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Women's Medicine, Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and
Infertility, Greenville Hospital System, Greenville, South Carolina 29605, USA.

Endometrial cancer cell lines have provided a valuable model to study endometrial
epithelial cells in vitro. Since the first development of HEC1B over 35 yr ago,
many different cell lines have been isolated and described. One valuable cell
line that maintains hormone responsiveness and unique stability over time is the 
ECC-1 cell line, developed originally by the late P.G. Satyaswaroop. In this
study, we investigated some of the properties of these cells and present their
salient characteristics. Like Ishikawa cells, ECC-1 cells maintain both estrogen 
receptors (ESR1 [ER alpha] and ESR2 [ER beta]), progesterone receptors (PR A and 
B; PGRs), and androgen receptors (ARs), along with the p160 steroid receptor
coactivators NCOA1 (formerly SRC1), NCOA2 (formerly TIF2), and NCOA3 (formerly
AIB1). The karyotype of these cells is abnormal, with multiple structural
rearrangements in all cells analyzed. Unlike Ishikawa cells that express
glandular epithelial antigens, ECC-1 cells maintain a luminal phenotype, with
expression of KRT13 (cytokeratin 13) and KRT18 (cytokeratin 18). Apparent
differences in the regulation of ESR2 also were evident in ECC-1 cells compared
to Ishikawa cells. Like other endometrial cell lines, ECC-1 cells express the
steroid receptor coactivators and exhibit epidermal growth factor-stimulated
expression of known luminal proteins thought to be involved in implantation,
including the hyaluronate receptor CD44 and SPP1 (formerly osteopontin) and CD55 
(decay-accelerating factor). These characteristics appear to be stable and
persistent over multiple cell passages, making this well-differentiated cell line
an excellent choice to study endocrine and paracrine regulation of endometrial
epithelium in vitro.

PMID: 16707768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;23(2):129-33.

Association of bone metabolism related genes polymorphisms with the effect of
raloxifene hydrochloride on bone mineral density and bone turnover markers in
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.

Zhang ZL(1), He JW, Qin YJ, Huang QR, Liu YJ, Hu YQ, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Preventing and Treating Osteoporosis, Osteoporosis Research Unit,
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200233
P.R.China. ZZL2002@medmail.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of bone metabolism related genes
polymorphisms with the effect of raloxifene hydrochloride(RLX) on bone mineral
density (BMD) and bone turnover markers in postmenopausal women with
osteoporosis.
METHODS: A total of 68 unrelated postmenopausal women with osteoporosis of Han
ethnicity aged 47-74 years were randomly divided into 2 groups of 34 women: RLX
group (60 mg were given daily for 12 months) and placebo group. BMD and bone
turnover markers were measured at baseline, 6 and 12 months after treatment. The 
polymorphisms of Xba I and Pvu II sites in estrogen receptor 1 gene(ESR1), Ras I 
site in ESR2 gene, and start codon (Fok I) and CDX2 binding sites in vitamin D
receptor gene (VDR) were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 58 patients completed 12 months of study period. By the end
of study, the increased percentage of BMD in lumbar spine 2-4 (L2-4), total hip, 
and trochanter were found significantly different between RLX group and placebo
group(P<0.05), and the decreased percentage of C-telopeptide and osteocalcin were
significantly different between the two groups (P<0.01). The BMD of total hip and
trochanter of women with FF genotypes of VDR Fok I site were decreased by
1.98%+/-4.86% and 2.26%+/-4.73% respectively in the RLX group, but those of women
with Ff/ff genotypes were increased by 2.52%+/-2.75% and 2.74 %+/-2.97%,
respectively(P<0.05). Moreover, the total hip BMD of women with PP/Pp genotypes
of ESR1 Pvu II site was increased by 2.12%+/-2.78%, and of women with pp genotype
it was decreased by 1.34%+/-3.73%(P<0.05). However, no significant association
was observed of the polymorphisms of five sites with the changes of BMD and bone 
turnover markers in the placebo group.
CONCLUSION: The effect of RLX on BMD in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis is
regulated by the polymorphisms of Fok I of VDR gene and Pvu II of ESR1 gene. The 
study is valuable to select this drug according to genotype of patients in
clinical.

PMID: 16604479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Androl. 2006 Jul-Aug;27(4):552-9. Epub 2006 Apr 1.

Reducing estrogen synthesis in developing boars increases testis size and total
sperm production.

At-Taras EE(1), Berger T, McCarthy MJ, Conley AJ, Nitta-Oda BJ, Roser JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
California, One Shields Ave, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

The abundant production of testicular estrogens and the presence of both ESR1 and
ESR2 within boar testes are consistent with a role for estrogen in testicular
development and/or function in this species. This study was aimed at determining 
the role of endogenous estrogen in the regulation of testicular development and
function, including the effects on testis weight, histology, sperm production
(detergent-resistant spermatid numbers), Sertoli cell numbers, and Leydig cell
volume in the boar. Twenty-eight littermate pairs of boars were assigned to
groups as follows: 1 boar from each pair was assigned to the control group
(vehicle) and the other was assigned to treatment and received 0.1 mg/kg body
weight of an aromatase enzyme inhibitor (letrozole) orally each week beginning at
1 week of age until castration at 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 months of age. Testes
were weighed and testicular parenchyma was recovered for determination of
histology and detergent-resistant spermatid numbers, and for determination of
Sertoli cell number and Leydig cell volume by staining for GATA-4 and 17-alpha
hydroxylase/17-20 lyase respectively. Testes of aromatase-inhibited boars
initially exhibited delayed lumen formation, lower testicular weight, fewer
detergent-resistant spermatids, and fewer Sertoli cells, but by 7 to 8 months,
these boars had recovered and had larger testes, more detergent-resistant
spermatids per testis, and more Sertoli cells. Total Leydig cell volume increased
in proportion to testis size. Reducing endogenous estrogen is consistent with a
delay in testicular maturation/puberty that allows for a longer window for the
proliferation of Sertoli cells and maturation of Leydig cells, resulting in
larger testes and higher spermatid production.

PMID: 16582410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Endocrinol Invest. 2006 Jan;29(1):5-10.

Polymorphisms of estrogen receptor beta gene are associated with hypospadias.

Beleza-Meireles A(1), Omrani D, Kockum I, Frisén L, Lagerstedt K, Nordenskjöld A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Hypospadias is a common male congenital urethral malformation,
defined as the displacement of the urethral meatus ventrally from the tip of the 
glans penis. The importance of androgen receptor in male external genitalia
development has been well recognized. Recently, the presence of active estrogen
receptors (ER) in the developing male external genitalia has also been
demonstrated. There are two isoforms of the human estrogen receptor, ESR1 and
ESR2, which occur, with distinct tissue and cell patterns of expression. We
hypothesized that modifications in these nuclear receptors' genes could lead to
hypospadias.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We screened 60 boys with hypospadias for mutations in the 
coding regions of ESR1 and ESR2 genes, by denaturing high-performance liquid
chromatography and automated sequence analysis. We also genotyped the CA repeat
polymorphism in ESR2 and the TA repeat polymorphism in ESR1.
RESULTS: The CA repeat polymorphism in ESR2 is prolonged in hypospadias patients 
compared to controls (p < 0.05). Prolongation of this CA repeat polymorphism has 
previously been associated with lower levels of testosterone. Six patients
presented the genetic variant 2681-4A > G (rs944050) in the heterozygous form in 
ESR2, which was a significantly higher frequency than in the control population
(p < 0.05). One of these patients also presented a 266_267insC in exon 1 of ESR2,
which is also a known single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP; rs3832949). In ESR1,
no significant gene alteration was found to be associated with hypospadias.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that variations in the ESR2 might influence
susceptibility to hypospadias.

PMID: 16553027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Bone. 2006 Jul;39(1):213-21. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Multilocus analysis of estrogen-related genes in Spanish postmenopausal women
suggests an interactive role of ESR1, ESR2 and NRIP1 genes in the pathogenesis of
osteoporosis.

Morón FJ(1), Mendoza N, Vázquez F, Molero E, Quereda F, Salinas A, Fontes J,
Martínez-Astorquiza T, Sánchez-Borrego R, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genómica Estructural, Neocodex, Avda, Charles Darwin sn,
Parque Tecnológico Isla de la Cartuja, 41092-Sevilla, and Servicio de Ginecología
y Obsetricia, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.

Osteoporosis is a common disease with multiple environmental and genetic risk
factors involved. Using a marker-by-marker approach, the role of different
estrogen-related genes has been analyzed in different populations, but most of
these studies ignore the complex multigenic nature of human osteoporosis. Looking
for markers related to osteoporosis, we have analyzed five single nucleotide
polymorphisms located in genes related to the estrogen pathway, Follicle
Stimulating Hormone Receptor (FSHR) gene, the CYP19 aromatase (CYP19A1) gene, the
Estrogen Receptor alpha (ESR1) gene, the Estrogen Receptor beta (ESR2) gene and
the Nuclear Receptor Interacting Protein 1 (NRIP1) gene in 265 unrelated
postmenopausal women. We have obtained nominal P values for the NRIP1 Gly75Gly
and ESR2 *39A>G markers (P=0.013 and P=0.02 respectively), but no gene seems to
be associated after multiple test corrections. Reanalysis of this study using 437
postmenopausal women confirmed our results and only detect marginal effects for
ESR2 marker (P=0.045). By contrast, multilocus analysis predicted epistatic
interactions between ESR1, ESR2 and NRIP1 loci and its involvement in
postmenopausal osteoporosis (P=0.003). We detected two digenic genotypes
involving ESR2-NRIP1 and ESR2-ESR1 genes strongly associated with osteoporosis
(P=0.007). Replication of multilocus studies using 437 patients confirmed the
detected interactions (P<0.01). We proposed a non-additive non-multiplicative
oligogenic model including ESR2 AG genotype modulated by NRIP1 A+ or ESR1 TT
genotypes involved in osteoporosis. Our results reaffirm the polygenic nature and
the genetic complexity of osteoporosis trait adding a new candidate gene (NRIP1) 
for association studies of bone-related traits.

PMID: 16530497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Am J Hypertens. 2005 Nov;18(11):1388-95.

Association of estrogen receptor beta gene polymorphisms with left ventricular
mass and wall thickness in women.

Peter I(1), Shearman AM, Vasan RS, Zucker DR, Schmid CH, Demissie S, Cupples LA, 
Kuvin JT, Karas RH, Mendelsohn ME, Housman DE, Benjamin EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Research Center, Institute for Clinical Research and Health
Policy Studies, Tufts-New England Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02111,
USA. ipeter@tufts-nemc.org

BACKGROUND: Left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy is a significant risk factor for
cardiovascular disease. Given sex-based differences in cardiac structure and
remodeling, we hypothesized that variation in estrogen pathway genes might be
associated with alteration of LV structure.
METHODS: We studied 1249 unrelated individuals, 547 men and 702 women (mean age
59 years) from the Framingham Heart Study. Eight single nucleotide polymorphisms 
in the genes for estrogen receptor alpha and estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) were
tested for association with 5 LV measures: LV mass (LVM), LV wall thickness
(LVWT), LV internal diameter at end-diastole and end-systole, and fractional
shortening. Sex-specific multiple regression analyses were performed adjusting
for age, weight, height, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, hypertension
treatment, diabetes, and in women, menopausal status.
RESULTS: In men, there was no evidence of association between the estrogen
pathway polymorphisms tested and LV structure or function. In women, however, two
polymorphisms, ESR2 rs1256031 and ESR2 rs1256059, in linkage disequilibrium with 
one another, were associated with LVM and LVWT (P = .0007 to .03); the
association was most pronounced in those women with hypertension (P = .0006 to
.01). The association did not appear to be explained by variation in blood
pressure, plasma lipoprotein levels, or hyperglycemia.
CONCLUSIONS: The ESR2 polymorphisms are associated with LV structural differences
in women with hypertension in a community-based population. These data are
consistent with the hypothesis that genetic factors may mediate part of the
observed sex-based differences in LV structure and remodeling.

PMID: 16280269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Hypertens. 2005 Dec;23(12):2193-200.

Variation in estrogen-related genes and cross-sectional and longitudinal blood
pressure in the Framingham Heart Study.

Peter I(1), Shearman AM, Zucker DR, Schmid CH, Demissie S, Cupples LA, Larson MG,
Vasan RS, D'Agostino RB, Karas RH, Mendelsohn ME, Housman DE, Levy D.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Research Center, Institute for Clinical Research and Health
Policy Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
ipeter@tufts-nemc.org

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2005 Dec;23(12):2147-9.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between variation in estrogen-related genes
and cross-sectional and longitudinal blood pressure in men and women.
DESIGN: In 1780 unrelated members of the community-based Framingham Heart Study
offspring cohort, systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure were
measured over a total of six examination cycles encompassing 24 years of
follow-up. Multivariate regression analyses were used to assess the relation
between untreated cross-sectional and longitudinal blood pressure and
polymorphisms at the estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1), estrogen receptor-beta
(ESR2), aromatase (CYP19A1), and nuclear receptor coactivator 1 (NCOA1) genes
after adjustment for common risk factors.
RESULTS: In men, systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure (systolic blood
pressure minus diastolic blood pressure) were associated with two polymorphisms
in ESR1, while pulse pressure was also associated with variations in NCOA1 and
CYP19A1. Polymorphisms in ESR1, CYP19A1, and NCOA1 were associated with diastolic
blood pressure in women.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the underlying relations between genes involved in estrogen
action and hypertension remain to be completely understood, our findings provide 
suggestive evidence of gender-specific contributions of estrogen-related genes to
blood pressure variation. As no correction for multiple testing was performed in 
the analyses, we view these results as suggestive and not definitive. Further
studies are warranted to confirm these results using a comprehensive set of
polymorphisms in order to shed more light on the involvement of estrogen in blood
pressure regulation.

PMID: 16269961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Nov;94(2):145-52.

Estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) polymorphisms in familial and sporadic breast
cancer.

Maguire P(1), Margolin S, Skoglund J, Sun XF, Gustafsson JA, Børresen-Dale AL,
Lindblom A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Estrogen is involved in both normal mammary development and in breast
carcinogenesis. A family history of disease and exposure to estrogen are major
risk factors for developing breast cancer. Estrogen exerts its biological effects
through binding to the estrogen receptors, estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and the
more recently discovered estrogen receptor beta (ESR2). Genetic variation in
genes involved in estrogen biosynthesis, metabolism and signal transduction have 
been suggested to play a role in breast cancer risk. We therefore tested the
hypothesis that common genetic variants of the ESR2 gene may be associated with
increased risk for breast cancer and this risk may vary between breast cancer
groups. We investigated three common ESR2 polymorphisms, rs1256049 (G1082A),
rs4986938 (G1730A) and rs928554 (Cx+56 A-->G) for association to breast cancer
risk. A total of 723 breast cancer cases and 480 controls were included in the
study. Of the breast cancer cases, 323 were sporadic and 400 were familial, the
familial cases were further divided into familial high-risk and familial low-risk
breast cancer cases. We found no overall statistically significant association
for any of the single polymorphisms studied. Haplotype analysis suggested one
haplotype associated with increased risk in sporadic breast cancer patients (OR =
3.0, p = 0.03). Further analysis is needed to elucidate the role of estrogen
receptor beta in breast cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 16261413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Fertil Steril. 2005 Oct;84(4):910-8.

Multilocus analyses of estrogen-related genes reveal involvement of the ESR1 gene
in male infertility and the polygenic nature of the pathology.

Galan JJ(1), Buch B, Cruz N, Segura A, Moron FJ, Bassas L, Martinez-Pineiro L,
Real LM, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Genomics, Neocodex, Seville, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To examine whether polymorphisms within the ESR1, FSHR, ESR2, CYP19A1,
and NRIP1 genes are susceptibility factors for human male idiopathic infertility 
and to test the joint effects of these genes on male reproductive function.
DESIGN: Genetic association study of male infertility with polymorphisms, using
both single-gene and multilocus approaches.
SETTING: Private and public fertility units and a private center for biomedical
research.
PATIENT(S): One hundred four Spanish men with azoospermia or severe
oligozoospermia and 95 unselected race-matched healthy controls from the same
geographic region.
INTERVENTION(S): Peripheral blood extraction, DNA purification, and ESR1
g.938T>C, FSHR Ser680Asn, ESR2 *39A>G, CYP19A1 *19C>T, and NRIP1 Gly75Gly
polymorphism analyses.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Single-gene statistical analyses and multilocus
statistical analyses with Sumstat, Permutation and Model-free analysis, and
Estimating Haplotypes software.
RESULT(S): We observed an excess of homozygous infertile men for the ESR1
g.938T>C marker. Multilocus analyses detected genetic interaction between the
five candidate gene markers that are influential over male infertility. In
addition, we detected a five-loci protector genetic pattern with a frequency of
9.4% in controls but absent in infertile men.
CONCLUSION(S): Our results support a relevant role for the estrogenic pathway,
notably the ESR1 gene, in human male reproductive function and advocate a complex
trait model for male infertility.

PMID: 16213843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Biol Reprod. 2006 Jan;74(1):161-8. Epub 2005 Sep 28.

Neonatal genistein treatment alters ovarian differentiation in the mouse:
inhibition of oocyte nest breakdown and increased oocyte survival.

Jefferson W(1), Newbold R, Padilla-Banks E, Pepling M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrinology and Endocrine Disruptor Section, Laboratory of
Molecular Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
NIH/DHHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. jeffers1@niehs.nih.gov

Early in ovarian differentiation, female mouse germ cells develop in clusters
called oocyte nests or germline cysts. After birth, mouse germ cell nests break
down into individual oocytes that are surrounded by somatic pregranulosa cells to
form primordial follicles. Previously, we have shown that mice treated neonatally
with genistein, the primary soy phytoestrogen, have multi-oocyte follicles
(MOFs), an effect apparently mediated by estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2, more commonly
known as ERbeta). To determine if genistein treatment leads to MOFs by inhibiting
breakdown of oocyte nests, mice were treated neonatally with genistein (50 mg/kg 
per day) on Days 1-5, and the differentiation of the ovary was compared with
untreated controls. Mice treated with genistein had fewer single oocytes and a
higher percentage of oocytes not enclosed in follicles. Oocytes from
genistein-treated mice exhibited intercellular bridges at 4 days of age, long
after disappearing in controls by 2 days of age. There was also an increase in
the number of oocytes that survived during the nest breakdown period and fewer
oocytes undergoing apoptosis on Neonatal Day 3 in genistein-treated mice as
determined by poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP1) and deoxynucleotidyl
transferase mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end-labeling (TUNEL). These
data taken together suggest that genistein exposure during development alters
ovarian differentiation by inhibiting oocyte nest breakdown and attenuating
oocyte cell death.

PMID: 16192398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Anim Breed Genet. 2005 Jun;122(3):210-3.

The FUT1 and ESR genes--their variability and associations with reproduction in
Prestice Black-Pied sows.

Horák P(1), Urban T, Dvorák J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Mendel University of Agriculture and Forestry Brno,
Czech Republic. xhorak02@node.mendelu.cz

The determination of genetic variability by means of molecular genetic markers
FUT1 and ESR2, and the evaluation of their associations with reproduction traits 
in population of Prestice Black-Pied sows have been implemented. A lower
frequency of the allele FUT1A than the frequency of the allele FUT1G in the FUT1 
gene was ascertained. In the ESR2 polymorphism, a higher frequency of the allele 
ESR2A compared with the allele ESR2B was determined. In the second to sixth
litters as well as in the first to sixth litters, a significantly lower number of
piglets born alive and number of weaned piglets from sows of the FUT1/IFUT1A
genotype was found. Moreover, the homozygotes FUT1G /FUT1G significantly exceeded
sows of the FUT1A/FUT1A genotype in the total number of born piglets in the first
to sixth litters. No significant effect of the ESR2 polymorphism on reproduction 
was observed.

PMID: 16130473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Nov;90(11):5921-7. Epub 2005 Aug 23.

Polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) gene are associated with bone 
mineral density in Caucasian men and women.

Ichikawa S(1), Koller DL, Peacock M, Johnson ML, Lai D, Hui SL, Johnston CC,
Foroud TM, Econs MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, 541 North
Clinical Drive, Clinical Building 459, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5121, USA.

CONTEXT: A major determinant of osteoporotic fractures is peak bone mineral
density (BMD), which is a highly heritable trait. Recently, we identified
significant linkage for hip BMD in premenopausal sister pairs at chromosome 14q
(LOD score = 3.5), where the estrogen receptor beta gene (ESR2) is located.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to determine whether ESR2 polymorphisms
are associated with normal BMD variation.
DESIGN: This was a population-based genetic association study, using 11 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed across the ESR2 gene.
SETTING: The study was conducted at an academic research laboratory and medical
center.
PATIENTS AND OTHER PARTICIPANTS: A total of 411 healthy men (aged 18-61 yr) and
1291 healthy premenopausal women (aged 20-50 yr) living in Indiana participated
in the study.
INTERVENTION(S): There were no interventions.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The main outcome measures were SNP genotype
distributions and their association with BMD at the femoral neck and lumbar
spine.
RESULTS: Significant association of spine BMD was found with three SNPs in men
and one SNP in women (P < or = 0.05). The conditional linkage analysis using the 
ESR2 haplotypes showed that the ESR2 gene accounts for, at most, 18% of the
original linkage.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR2 polymorphisms are significantly associated with bone mass in
both men and women. However, the ESR2 gene is not entirely responsible for our
original linkage, and an additional gene(s) in chromosome 14q contributes to the 
determination of BMD.

PMCID: PMC1948071
PMID: 16118344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Arch Med Res. 2005 Sep-Oct;36(5):511-7.

Genetic polymorphisms of estrogen receptors in patients with premature coronary
artery disease.

Mansur Ade P(1), Nogueira CC, Strunz CM, Aldrighi JM, Ramires JA.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo,
Brazil. corantonio@incor.usp.br

BACKGROUND: Estrogen protects against atherosclerosis through its
genomic/nongenomic effects. Estrogen receptors (ESR) alpha (1) and beta (2)
mediate much estrogen action. Both receptors exist in the arterial wall, but the 
extent of their distribution in arterial layers is unknown. Allelic variants of
the gene encoding ESR1 and ESR2 may alter their expression and function,
resulting in genetic variability.
METHODS: In the present age-adjusted, case-control study, the prevalence of four 
mutations in estrogen receptors was analyzed in patients with premature CAD and
controls.
RESULTS: Mutation in the ESR1 (PvuII) was more prevalent in the controls (18 vs. 
11%; p=0.062) than in CAD patients, and the mutation identified by the XbaI
enzyme in the same receptor was associated with reduced apolipoprotein B levels
and low body mass index. Mutation of the ESR2 (AluI) was more prevalent in CAD
patients (0.6 vs. 18%; p=0.008). Homozygosis for this mutation involved increased
body mass index, elevated serum triglycerides and apolipoprotein B, and reduced
HDL-cholesterol. Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed dyslipidemia,
low serum HDL levels, and ESR2 polymorphism (AluI) [OR=1.89 (95% CI: 1.08-3.34); 
p=0.034] to be independent risk factors for CAD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that mutation of the ESR2 is an independent risk
marker for premature CAD.

PMID: 16099331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biol Reprod. 2005 Nov;73(5):866-71. Epub 2005 Jul 20.

Estrogen receptor beta in health and disease.

Imamov O(1), Shim GJ, Warner M, Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Medical Nutrition, Novum, Karolinska Institute, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, SE-141 86 Sweden.

Estrogens, acting through its two receptors, ESR1 (hereafter designated ER alpha)
and ESR2 (hereafter designated ER beta), have diverse physiological effects in
the reproductive system, bone, cardiovascular system, hematopoiesis, and central 
and peripheral nervous systems. Mice with inactivated ER alpha, ER beta, or both 
show a number of interesting phenotypes, including incompletely differentiated
epithelium in tissues under steroidal control (prostate, ovary, mammary, and
salivary glands) and defective ovulation reminiscent of polycystic ovarian
syndrome in humans (in ER beta-/- mice), and obesity, insulin resistance, and
complete infertility (both in male and female ER alpha-/- mice). Estrogen
agonists and antagonists are frequently prescribed drugs with indications that
include postmenopausal syndrome (agonists) and breast cancer (antagonists).
Because the two estrogen receptors (ERs) have different physiological functions
and have ligand binding pockets that differ enough to be selective in their
ligand binding, opportunities now exist for development of novel ER
subtype-specific selective-ER modulators.

PMID: 16033996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Anat Histol Embryol. 2005 Aug;34(4):265-72.

Cell-specific localization of oestrogen receptor beta (ESR2) mRNA within various 
bovine ovarian cell types using in situ hybridization.

D'Haeseleer M(1), Van Poucke M, Van den Broeck W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University,
Salisburylaan 133, 9820 Merelbeke, Belgium.

The localization of oestrogen receptor beta (ESR2) mRNA, in this article
denominated as (ERbeta) mRNA, was examined using in situ hybridization in the
ovaries of randomly selected cows, irrespective of the cycle stage of the
animals. A 602-bp fragment of ERbeta mRNA was cloned, sequenced and digoxigenin
(DIG)-labelled. Semi-quantitative evaluation showed that the scores for ERbeta
mRNA were moderate to high in the follicle cells of both primordial and primary
follicles, but lower in granulosa cells of secondary follicles. In vital tertiary
follicles, the total ERbeta mRNA expression was low but varied between the
different animals. In both obliterative and cystic atretic follicles, high to
moderate ERbeta mRNA scores were noticed in the granulosa cells. The stroma cells
surrounding primordial and primary follicles and the theca cells of secondary
follicles showed moderate ERbeta mRNA levels, whereas the ERbeta mRNA score in
theca interna and theca externa cells of vital tertiary follicles was distinctly 
higher. In the theca cells of atretic follicles the score was even higher. Cells 
of corpora hemorrhagica and corpora lutea had moderate ERbeta mRNA scores, while 
higher scores were seen in cells of corpora albicantia. Cells of the surface
epithelium had a moderate score for ERbeta mRNA, whereas cells of the tunica
albuginea and deep stroma showed high ERbeta mRNA scores. The present findings
have clearly established a cell-specific localization of ERbeta mRNA in several
cell types in the bovine ovary.

PMID: 15996129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Sep;13(9):1000-6.

Estrogen receptor beta gene variants are associated with increased risk of
Alzheimer's disease in women.

Pirskanen M(1), Hiltunen M, Mannermaa A, Helisalmi S, Lehtovirta M, Hänninen T,
Soininen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Neurology, University of Kuopio, Finland.

We investigated the association of five intronic single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) at the estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) gene locus and the susceptibility of
developing Alzheimer's disease (AD) in 387 subjects with clinically diagnosed
probable AD and 467 cognitively normal individuals derived from eastern Finland. 
According to our results, variation in the ESR2 gene is associated with an
increased risk of AD in women, whereas it does not contribute to the disease
susceptibility in men. More specifically, in women, the allele T and the genotype
T/T of two of the studied ESR2 gene SNPs (SNP2 and SNP3) were more frequent in AD
women than in cognitively normal control women (P=0.012 and P=0.016,
respectively). The ESR2 SNP2 T/T genotype and the SNP3 T/T genotype were
associated with a significant, nearly two-fold increase in the risk of AD in
women (OR=1.87, 95% CI=1.21-2.90), and remained significant after adjustment with
the APOE genotype and age (OR=1.63, 95% CI, 1.00-1.68). The combined effect of
the ESR2 SNP2 T/T or SNP3 T/T genotype and female gender increases the risk of
the disease (OR=3.2, 95% CI=1.3-7.7). Consistent with these results, also the
frequency of the haplotype containing the two above ESR2 gene risk alleles was
elevated in AD women (P=0.027, OR=1.3, 95% CI=1.02-1.65). Results show that
variation in ESR2 gene may be linked with increased AD susceptibility and
furthermore, this association is gender specific.

PMID: 15944651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biol Reprod. 2005 Oct;73(4):703-12. Epub 2005 Jun 8.

Expression of estrogen receptor ESR1 and its 46-kDa variant in the gubernaculum
testis.

Staub C(1), Rauch M, Ferrière F, Trépos M, Dorval-Coiffec I, Saunders PT,
Cobellis G, Flouriot G, Saligaut C, Jégou B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U625, GERHM, IFR 140, Campus de Beaulieu, Univ Rennes I, Bretagne,
France.

Testicular descent corresponds to migration of the testis from the abdominal
cavity to the scrotum and is essential for proper functioning of the testis.
Recent advances in the characterization of estrogen receptor (ESR) subtypes and
isoforms in various tissues prompted us to study ESRs within the gubernaculum
testis, a structure involved in testicular descent. In the rat gubernaculum, we
searched for ESR alpha (Esr1) and beta (Esr2) and for the androgen receptor (Ar),
androgens being known to regulate testicular descent. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) revealed that Esr1, Esr2, and Ar
mRNAs were all expressed in the gubernaculum. Using PEETA (Primer extension,
Electrophoresis, Elution, Tailing, and Amplification), we established that all
Esr1 leader exons, previously identified in other organs, such as the uterus and 
pituitary, were transcribed in the gubernaculum, with the major form being O/B.
The RNA protection assays, RT-PCR, and Western blot experiments revealed that
isoform-specific mRNA transcripts generated by alternative splicing of the
C-leader sequence on coding exons 1 and 2 of the Esr1 gene gave the 46- and
66-kDa ESR1 proteins. The ESR1 and AR proteins were found to colocalize in the
parenchymal cells of the gubernaculum early in development, whereas AR also was
strongly expressed in the muscular cells, both during fetal and postnatal life.
The ESR2 protein was weakly expressed, principally in the muscular cells, but
only once testicular descent had occurred. The levels of the 46-kDa ESR1 variant 
(ER46) exceeded those of the 66-kDa ESR1 form (ER66) at periods when the
gubernaculum developed. Conversely, the 66-kDa form appears to predominate
clearly when the gubernaculum growth was low or completed. The possible role of
estrogens on the modulation of the androgen-dependent growth of the gubernaculum 
and, more widely, on testicular descent is discussed.

PMID: 15944240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biol Reprod. 2005 Oct;73(4):648-62. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Molecular characterization of estrogen receptors 1, 2a, and 2b and their tissue
and ontogenic expression profiles in fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas).

Filby AL(1), Tyler CR.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Molecular Fish Biology Group, Department of Biological
Sciences, Hatherly Laboratories, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.
a.l.filby@exeter.ac.uk

There are two estrogen receptor (ER) subtypes in fish, Esr1 and Esr2 (formerly
ERalpha and ERbeta), and in some species the Esr2 subtype has two forms, Esr2b
(formerly ERbeta1) and Esr2a (formerly ERbeta2 or ERgamma). There is little
information, however, on the different characteristics and functional
significance of the two receptor subtypes in fish, and this is especially
relevant for understanding the disruption of ER signaling by chemicals with
estrogenic activity. In this study, the full-length cDNAs for esr1 (3167 base
pairs [bp]) and esr2b (2318 bp), and a partial-length (267 bp) cDNA for esr2a,
were cloned and characterized in fathead minnow (fhm; Pimephales promelas), and
their patterns of expression established during development and in adults.
Real-time polymerase chain reaction revealed some clear distinctions in the
ontogenic and tissue expression of fhm esr1, esr2b, and esr2a, suggesting
different functions for each ER subtype. Fhm ERs were expressed in brain,
pituitary, liver, gonad, intestine, and gill of male and female fish, esr2b and
esr2a were also expressed in muscle. Fhm esr1 and esr2b were expressed
predominantly in the liver, whereas fhm esr2a was expressed predominantly in
intestine and was lowest expressed in liver. Responses of the different hepatic
ERs in male fathead minnow exposed to 100 ng estradiol/L differed, with a
significant induction (5-fold) of fhm esr1 but no effect on esr2b or esr2a
expression, suggesting different mechanisms of regulation for the different ERs. 
The detailed characterization of ERs in fathead minnow provides the foundation
for understanding the molecular basis of estrogenic disruption in fish.

PMID: 15930325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Hypertens Res. 2004 Dec;27(12):903-9.

Association study using single nucleotide polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor 
beta (ESR2) gene for preeclampsia.

Maruyama A(1), Nakayama T, Sato N, Mizutani Y, Furuya K, Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nihon University School of Medicine, 
Ooyaguchi-kamimachi, Tokyo, Japan.

The pathophysiology of preeclampsia (PE) remains uncertain despite many research 
efforts. Actual hypotheses seek to explain the vascular damage that characterizes
the disease. Recently, it was reported that the mouse disrupted estrogen receptor
beta (ESR2) gene was associated with abnormal vascular function and hypertension.
Moreover, some investigators have reported that subjects with a family history of
hypertension have a statistically significant increased risk for PE. Thus, it is 
thought that the pathophysiology of PE overlaps that for hypertension. The aim of
the present study was to investigate the relationships between single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human ESR2 gene and PE in Japanese subjects, and to
assess the involvement of a family history of hypertension in these
relationships. Based on a database search on the web site of the National Center 
of Biotechnology Information (NCBI), we chose four SNPs in the human ESR2 gene,
and performed an association study in 84 PE patients and 160 age-matched non-PE
subjects. The overall distribution in each SNP did not differ significantly
between the two groups. However, after dividing the groups into subjects with and
without a family history of hypertension, the allelic distribution of one of the 
SNPs (rs928554) revealed a positive association. Thus, a possible mutation linked
to a SNP may prescribe a genetic predisposition for patients with a family
history of hypertension in PE.

PMID: 15894829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Bone. 2005 Apr;36(4):700-9.

Genetic and environmental determinants of bone mineral density in Chinese women.

Lau HH(1), Ng MY, Ho AY, Luk KD, Kung AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
China.

BMD is a complex trait determined by genetic and lifestyle factors. To assess the
genetic and environmental determinants of BMD in southern Chinese women, we
studied a community-based cohort of 531 pre- and postmenopausal southern Chinese 
women and assessed the influence of 12 candidate gene loci and lifestyle risk
factors on spine and hip BMD. The candidate genes studied include estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2), calcium sensing receptor (CASR), vitamin D
receptor (VDR), collagen type Ialpha1 (COLIA1), and LDL receptor-related protein 
5 (LRP5). Social, medical, reproductive history, dietary habits and lifestyle
factors were determined using a structured questionnaire. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of the COLIA1 and LRP5 gene in Chinese were determined by
direct sequencing. Nucleotide (nt) -1363C/G and -1997 G/T of COLIA1, nt 266A/G,
2220C/T and 3989C/T of LRP5 gene were analyzed. Using stepwise multiple linear
regression analyses, body weight was the strongest predictor for BMD in
premenopausal women (n = 262), which accounted for 15.9% of the variance at the
spine, 20% at femoral neck, 17.1% at trochanter, 24.3% at total hip and 10.9% at 
the Ward's triangle. Other significant predictors were ESR1 Ivs1-397T/C genotype 
(2.2% at the spine); LRP5 2220C/T genotype (1.3% at the spine, 1.6% at the
trochanter); LRP5 266A/G genotype (1.1% at Ward's triangle); age at menarche
(1.3% at trochanter) and age (2.0% at Ward's triangle). As for postmenopausal
women (n = 269), body weight ( approximately 25% at various sites) and age
(approximately 16% at femoral neck, trochanter, total hip and Ward's triangle
sites) were the strongest predictors of BMD. Other significant predictors were
age at menarche (4.4% at spine, 0.7% at femoral neck, 1.4% at trochanter, and
1.4% at Ward's triangle); weight bearing physical activity (2.1% at trochanter
and 1% at total hip); calcium intake (1.1% at femoral neck, 0.9% at trochanter,
and 1.7% at total hip) ; height (0.7% at trochanter); and ESR2 1082A/G genotype
(0.8% at trochanter). We conclude that BMD at various sites and at different time
span of a woman is modified by different genetic and lifestyle factors,
suggesting that BMD is highly dependent on gene-environmental interactions.

PMID: 15781005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biol Reprod. 2005 Jul;73(1):115-22. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

A nongenomic action of 17beta-estradiol as the mechanism underlying the acute
suppression of secretion of luteinizing hormone.

Arreguin-Arevalo JA(1), Nett TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado 80523, USA.

The objective of the present study was to determine the ability of
17beta-estradiol (E(2)) and conjugated forms of E(2) (E(2) conjugated to BSA
[E(2)-BSA] and a novel conjugate, E(2) conjugated to a small peptide [E(2)-PEP]) 
to prevent the GnRH-induced secretion of LH and to determine the role of
estradiol receptors (ERs) and ER subtypes (ERalpha, also known as ESR1, and
ERbeta, also known as ESR2) in the mediation of the acute action of E(2) in
primary cultures of ovine pituitary cells. Preincubation of cells for 15 min with
E(2), E(2)-BSA, or E(2)-PEP prevented the GnRH-induced secretion of LH (P <
0.01). Treatment of cells with nonestrogenic steroid hormones did not affect
secretion of LH when given alone, nor did these steroids impair the E(2)-induced 
inhibition of LH secretion (P > 0.1). Likewise, treatment of cells with the
ER-antagonists tamoxifen, hydroxytamoxifen, or ICI 182 780 did not affect (P >
0.1) secretion of LH when given alone but did prevent (P < 0.01) the inhibition
by E(2) and the E(2)-conjugates on GnRH-induced secretion of LH. When cells were 
treated with subtype-selective ER agonists, the ERalpha agonist
(propylpyrazole-triol), but not the ERbeta agonist (diarylpropionitrile),
decreased (P < 0.01) the GnRH-induced secretion of LH. In conclusion, the
rapidity by which E(2) prevented GnRH-induced release of LH in ovine pituitary
cells suggests that this inhibition is mediated via a nongenomic action of E(2). 
The inhibition of GnRH-induced secretion of LH proved to be steroid specific and 
mediated by ERs. It may occur specifically through ERalpha. The fact that
E(2)-BSA or E(2)-PEP mimicked the action of E(2) suggests that this effect was
mediated by an ER associated with the plasma membrane.

PMID: 15772257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 15;64(24):8891-900.

Estrogen receptor genotypes and haplotypes associated with breast cancer risk.

Gold B(1), Kalush F, Bergeron J, Scott K, Mitra N, Wilson K, Ellis N, Huang H,
Chen M, Lippert R, Halldorsson BV, Woodworth B, White T, Clark AG, Parl FF,
Broder S, Dean M, Offit K.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Section, Laboratory of Genomic Diversity, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, Frederick, Maryland, USA. goldb@ncifcrf.gov

Nearly one in eight US women will develop breast cancer in their lifetime. Most
breast cancer is not associated with a hereditary syndrome, occurs in
postmenopausal women, and is estrogen and progesterone receptor-positive.
Estrogen exposure is an epidemiologic risk factor for breast cancer and estrogen 
is a potent mammary mitogen. We studied single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
estrogen receptors in 615 healthy subjects and 1011 individuals with
histologically confirmed breast cancer, all from New York City. We analyzed 13
SNPs in the progesterone receptor gene (PGR), 17 SNPs in estrogen receptor 1 gene
(ESR1), and 8 SNPs in the estrogen receptor 2 gene (ESR2). We observed three
common haplotypes in ESR1 that were associated with a decreased risk for breast
cancer [odds ratio (OR), approximately O.4; 95% confidence interval (CI),
0.2-0.8; P < 0.01]. Another haplotype was associated with an increased risk of
breast cancer (OR, 2.1; 95% CI, 1.2-3.8; P < 0.05). A unique risk haplotype was
present in approximately 7% of older Ashkenazi Jewish study subjects (OR, 1.7;
95% CI, 1.2-2.4; P < 0.003). We narrowed the ESR1 risk haplotypes to the promoter
region and first exon. We define several other haplotypes in Ashkenazi Jews in
both ESR1 and ESR2 that may elevate susceptibility to breast cancer. In contrast,
we found no association between any PGR variant or haplotype and breast cancer.
Genetic epidemiology study replication and functional assays of the haplotypes
should permit a better understanding of the role of steroid receptor genetic
variants and breast cancer risk.

PMID: 15604249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Neurosci Res. 2004 Dec 1;78(5):603-24.

Neuroimmunoprotective effects of estrogen and derivatives in experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis: therapeutic implications for multiple sclerosis.

Offner H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Neuroimmunology
Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon, USA.
offnerva@ohsu.edu

The extensive literature and the work from our laboratory illustrate the large
number of complex processes affected by estrogen that might contribute to the
striking ability of 17beta-estradiol (E2) and its derivatives to inhibit clinical
and histological signs of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in
mice. These effects require sustained exposure to relatively low doses of
exogenous hormone and offer better protection when initiated prior to induction
of EAE. However, oral ethinyl estradiol (EE) and fluasterone, which lacks
estrogenic side effects, could partially reverse clinical EAE when given after
the onset of disease. The three main areas discussed in this review include
E2-mediated inhibition of encephalitogenic T cells, inhibition of cell migration 
into central nervous system tissue, and neuroprotective effects that promote axon
and myelin survival. E2 effects on EAE were mediated through Esr1 (alpha receptor
for E2) but not Esr2 (beta receptor for E2), as were its antiinflammatory and
neuroprotective effects. A novel finding is that E2 up-regulated the expression
of Foxp3 and CTLA-4 that contribute to the activity of CD4+CD25+ Treg cells. The 
protective effects of E2 in EAE suggest its use as therapy for MS, although the
risk of cardiovascular disease may complicate treatment in postmenopausal women. 
This risk could be minimized by using subpregnancy levels of exogenous E2 that
produced synergistic effects when used in combination another immunoregulatory
therapy. Alternatively, one might envision using EE or fluasterone metabolites
alone or in combination therapies in both male and female MS patients.

PMID: 15515048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Pharmacogenomics J. 2005;5(1):30-4.

Estrogen receptor 2 and progesterone receptor gene polymorphisms and lipid levels
in women with different hormonal status.

Almeida S(1), Franken N, Zandoná MR, Osório-Wender MC, Hutz MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

Sex steroid hormones have multiple effects on lipid metabolism. We investigated
the association between two common single nucleotide polymorphisms of the
estrogen receptor 2 gene (ESR2), 1082G>A and 1730A>G, and PROGINS polymorphism of
the progesterone receptor gene (PGR) with lipoprotein levels in a cross-sectional
study with 472 women of European descent. The women were classified into three
subgroups according to hormonal status, premenopausal women (n=187; mean
age=34+/-9.7 years), postmenopausal women exposed to hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT) (n=118; 56+/-6.7 years) and postmenopausal women unexposed to HRT (n=167;
58+/-9.8 years). The premenopausal and postmenopausal women exposed to HRT, both 
carriers of G/A genotype, exhibited LDL-C (P=0.027 and 0.001, respectively) and
T-chol levels (P=0.035 and 0.001, respectively) lower than carriers of G/G
genotype. This association was not observed in postmenopausal women unexposed to 
HRT. These results suggest that ESR2 1082G>A genotype may influence LDL-C levels 
in women with abundant estrogen levels, due to either endogenous or exogenous
sources.

PMID: 15381922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Anim Genet. 2004 Oct;35(5):404-7.

Characterization and mapping of canine microsatellites isolated from BAC clones
harbouring DNA sequences homologous to seven human genes.

Klukowska J(1), Szczerbal I, Wengi-Piasecka A, Switonski M, Schelling C, Gmür A, 
Dolf G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Genetics, Nutrition and Housing, University of Berne,
Vetsuisse-Faculty Bern, Switzerland. jolanta.klukowska@itz.unibe.ch

Human primers specific for the genes LEP, HBB, PAX3, ESR2, TPH1, ABCA4 and ATP2A2
were used to identify clones in a canine BAC library. Subcloning of the positive 
BACs in plasmids, screening with microsatellite motifs and subsequent sequencing 
allowed for the identification of eight novel microsatellites. The presence of
the gene of interest was confirmed by sequencing the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) products amplified in the positive BACs. Fluorescent in situ hybridization 
(FISH) using the positive BACs as probes allowed for the chromosomal localization
of the insert DNAs in two canid species, dog (Canis familiaris) and red fox
(Vulpes vulpes). The use of gene-associated microsatellites may accelerate the
identification of candidate genes for phenotypic traits in linkage studies.

PMID: 15373746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Calcif Tissue Int. 2004 Jun;74(6):501-8.

Estrogen receptor beta dinucleotide (CA) repeat polymorphism is significantly
associated with bone mineral density in postmenopausal women.

Scariano JK(1), Simplicio SG, Montoya GD, Garry PJ, Baumgartner RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical Laboratory Sciences, MSC09 5250, 1 University
of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA. Jscariano@salud.unm.edu

Significant associations between the lengths of a highly polymorphic dinucleotide
(CA) repeat located within the human estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) gene on
chromosome 14, bone mineral density (BMD) and androgen levels have been reported 
previously in premenopausal women. We measured the size of this microsatellite
repeat in 226 healthy women (60-98 years). After adjustment for age, body mass
index, hormone replacement status, and other variables known to influence BMD,
women with < 25 CA repeats had significantly higher BMD measured in the total
skeleton, lumbar spine, and femoral neck when compared with women having longer
alleles. Women with shorter alleles also had higher circulating estrone and
estradiol levels that approached statistical significance as compared with women 
harboring longer alleles after appropriate adjustments were performed in linear
regression models. Women having both short and long CA repeats had BMD values in 
all regions of the skeleton that were midway between those found in women
homozygous for longer or shorter repeat sizes. Because the ESR2 CA repeat size
was neither associated with change in BMD nor serum levels of biochemical markers
of bone turnover, it is likely that ESR2 CA repeat genotype is significantly
linked to the attainment of peak bone mass in women.

PMID: 15354857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Causes Control. 2004 Aug;15(6):627-33.

Estrogen receptor beta (ESR2 ) polymorphisms and endometrial cancer (United
States).

Setiawan VW(1), Hankinson SE, Colditz GA, Hunter DJ, De Vivo I.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public
Health 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that variations in the ESR2 gene may influence
estrogen exposure in the uterus and thus influence endometrial cancer risk. We
validated and screened for variants in the ESR2 gene and examined whether they
are associated with endometrial cancer risk.
METHODS: We resequenced the promoter and coding regions of the ESR2 gene in 24
endometrial cancer cases, and genotyped the validated/discovered SNPs and
intronic dinucleotide CA repeat in a nested case-control study of endometrial
cancer (cases = 222, controls = 666) in the Nurses' Health Study (NHS). We also
explored statistical interaction between ESR2 genotypes and body mass index (BMI)
or hormone replacement therapy (HRT) use among postmenopausal women and cancer
risk.
RESULTS: Two SNPs were validated [rs1256049 in exon 5 (allelic frequencies = 98% 
G, 2% A) and rs1271572 in the promoter region (allelic frequencies = 60% G, 40%
T)]. After adjusting for potential confounders, we observed no association
between ESR2 gene polymorphisms and endometrial cancer risk [rs1256049 (OR = 1.2;
95%CI: 0.7-2.3), rs1271572 (OR = 0.8; 95%CI: 0.5-1.1) and CA repeat (22 repeat
allele versus > or = 22 repeat allele, OR = 1.1; 95%CI: 0.7-1.7)]. We also did
not observe any significant effect modification of the ESR2 polymorphisms by BMI 
or HRT use among postmenopausal women.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that ESR2 polymorphisms may not be associated
with endometrial cancer risk.

Copyright 2004 Kluwer Academic Publishers

PMID: 15280642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Hypertens. 2004 Jun;22(6):1119-26.

Genetic analysis of 22 candidate genes for hypertension in the Japanese
population.

Iwai N(1), Tago N, Yasui N, Kokubo Y, Inamoto N, Tomoike H, Shioji K.

Author information: 
(1)National Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Osaka, Japan. iwai@ri.ncvc.go.jp

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2004 Jun;22(6):1081-3.

OBJECTIVE: We performed association studies between 118 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of 22 candidate genes (or gene family) and hypertension in a
Japanese population.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: The study population consisted of 1880 subjects
representing the general population in Japan, recruited from the Suita study. The
candidate genes were selected based on their functions, including insulin
resistance (APM1, CD36, HSD11B1), oxidative stress (CYBA, GPX1, GSTMs), steroid
hormone (ESR1, ESR2, HSD11B2), renal functions (PTGS2, KLK1, NPHS1, NPHS2, SGK,
SLC12A1, PTGES), and others related to cardiovascular physiology (GJA4, NOS1,
NTRK3, P2RX4, SPP1, ALDH2).
RESULTS: Multiple logistic analyses, with age and body mass index as covariates, 
indicated that 13 SNPs (eight genes), six SNPs (four genes) and 11 SNPs (four
genes) were associated with hypertension (P < 0.05) in the total, male, and
female populations, respectively. PTGS2 seems to be a promising candidate gene
for hypertension in men. GSTM3 and SLC12A1 seem to be promising candidate genes
for hypertension in women. Especially, a polymorphism in SLC12A1 was
significantly associated with hypertension in women even after correction by the 
Bonferroni method (corrected P = 0.0236). Multiple logistic analyses, with age
and body mass index as covariates, indicated that the prevalence of hypertension 
in females was significantly higher in subjects with the CC genotype than in
those with the TT + TC genotypes (P < 0.0001, odds ratio = 1.967, 95% confidence 
interval = 1.430-2.712).
CONCLUSION: Although the present results should be replicated in other study
populations for confirmation, the present results suggest that SLC12A1 may
contribute to hypertension in Japanese women.

PMID: 15167446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Am J Pathol. 2004 Jun;164(6):1915-24.

Estrogen receptor-1 (Esr1) and -2 (Esr2) regulate the severity of clinical
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis in male mice.

Polanczyk M(1), Yellayi S, Zamora A, Subramanian S, Tovey M, Vandenbark AA,
Offner H, Zachary JF, Fillmore PD, Blankenhorn EP, Gustafsson JA, Teuscher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon, USA.

Estrogens and estrogen-receptor signaling function in establishing and regulating
the female immune system and it is becoming increasingly evident that they may
play a similar role in males. We report that B10.PL/SnJ male mice with a
disrupted estrogen receptor-1 (alpha) gene (Esr1(-/-)) develop less severe
clinical experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) compared to either
Esr1(+/-) or wild-type (Esr1(+/+)) controls when immunized with myelin basic
protein peptide Ac1-11 (MBP(Ac1-11)). In contrast, the disease course in
B10.PL/SnJ male mice with a disrupted estrogen receptor-2 (beta) gene (Esr2(-/-))
does not differ from that of wild-type (Esr2(+/+)) mice. However, Esr2(+/-) mice 
do develop more severe clinical disease with an earlier onset indicating that
heterosis at Esr2 plays a significant role in regulating EAE in males. No
significant differences in central nervous system histopathology or
MBP(Ac1-11)-specific T-cell responses as assessed by proliferation and
interleukin-2 production were observed as a function of either Esr1 or Esr2
genotype. An analysis of cytokine/chemokine secretion by MBP(Ac1-11)-specific T
cells revealed unique Esr1 and Esr2 genotype-dependent regulation.
Interferon-gamma secretion was found to be negatively regulated by Esr1 whereas
interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha secretion exhibited classical Esr2 
gene dose responses. Interestingly, MCP-1 displayed distinctively unique patterns
of genotype-dependent regulation by Esr1 and Esr2. The contribution of the
hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cellular compartments associated with the
heterotic effect at Esr2 in regulating the severity of clinical EAE was
identified using reciprocal hematopoietic radiation bone marrow chimeras
generated between male wild-type and Esr2(+/-) mice. Wild-type --> Esr2(+/-) mice
exhibited EAE equivalent in severity to that seen in Esr2(+/-) --> Esr2(+/-)
control constructs; both of which were more severe than the clinical signs
observed in Esr2(+/-) --> wild-type and wild-type --> wild-type mice. These
results indicate that the heterotic effect at Esr2 is a function of the
nonhematopoietic compartment.

PMCID: PMC1615766
PMID: 15161628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Anim Genet. 2004 Jun;35(3):242-4.

Mapping of the porcine oestrogen receptor 2 gene and association study with
litter size in Iberian pigs.

Muñoz G(1), Ovilo C, Amills M, Rodríguez C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Mejora Genética Animal, SGIT-INIA, Madrid, Spain.
gloriamm@inia.es

Genes encoding the oestrogen receptors (ESR) are considered candidate genes for
prolificacy traits due to the key role these molecules play in the regulation of 
reproductive physiology. In this paper, we report the assignment of the pig ESR2 
gene to porcine chromosome 1 by radiation hybrid mapping. Most of the ESR2 cDNA
was sequenced from Iberian pig ovarian RNA samples and one A/G single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) was found at exon 5, being associated with a Met/Val
substitution at position 949. This SNP was genotyped using a PCR-RFLP (Hsp92II)
protocol and its potential effect on litter size was evaluated in two Iberian pig
populations. However, no statistically significant association between the ESR2
polymorphism and litter size was found.

PMID: 15147399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Pharmacogenetics. 2004 May;14(5):285-93.

Human controlled ovarian hyperstimulation outcome is a polygenic trait.

de Castro F(1), Morón FJ, Montoro L, Galán JJ, Hernández DP, Padilla ES,
Ramírez-Lorca R, Real LM, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Reproducción Humana Asistida, Hospital Universitario Príncipe de
Asturias, Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Allat Médica, Madrid and Departamento de
Genómica Estructural. Neocodex, Sevilla, Spain.

This study aimed to evaluate the association between follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) hormone efficacy and FSHR, CYP19, ESR1 and ESR2 genes using single
nucleotide polymorphism analyses. One hundred and seventy women with conserved
ovarian function undergoing controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) with daily
exogenous recombinant FSH administration. Women were categorized as poor
responders to FSH (three or less ovarian follicles observed at the end of cycle) 
or normal responders (more than three follicles). The outcome is the number of
normal/poor responders as defined by the number of follicles obtained during COS.
The DNA markers studied are located in genes related to the FSH mechanism of
action (FSH receptor, CYP19 aromatase and oestrogen receptors alpha and beta
genes). We conducted an association study between the COS outcome and selected
DNA markers using two-point and multi-locus genetic association studies. Genotype
pattern tracking in extreme phenotypes and multi-locus analysis using Sumstat and
PM algorithms provided significant evidences of genetic interaction between FSHR,
ESR1 and ESR2 markers in relation to COS outcome (P = 0.0015). Our results
support the hypothesis that a discrete set of genes, related to the FSH hormone
mechanism of action, controls the ovarian response to FSH in humans. An
oligogenic model including specific FSHR, ESR1 and ESR2 genotype patterns may
partially explain the poor response to FSH hormone during controlled ovarian
stimulation treatments. The existence of genetic heterogeneity is also suspected.

Copyright 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

PMID: 15115914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 May;19(5):773-81. Epub 2003 Dec 22.

Estrogen receptor beta polymorphisms are associated with bone mass in women and
men: the Framingham Study.

Shearman AM(1), Karasik D, Gruenthal KM, Demissie S, Cupples LA, Housman DE, Kiel
DP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA.

ESR2 is expressed in bone cells, yet few studies have tested its variation for
association with BMD, an important determinant of osteoporotic fractures. This
was investigated in 723 men and 795 women from the Framingham study. Results show
association of variation in this gene with BMD in both women and
men.INTRODUCTION: Osteoporotic fracture risk is highly dependent on bone density,
a quantitative multifactorial trait with a substantial genetic component. In
contrast to the growing body of evidence that estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1)
plays a role in bone metabolism, few studies have examined the estrogen receptor 
beta (ESR2) gene for association with BMD. An ESR2 CA repeat polymorphism,
D14S1026, was associated with BMD in two small studies, each with <200 women.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The objective of this investigation was to assess whether 
D14S1026 or four other intronic polymorphisms were associated with BMD in 723 men
and 795 women (mean age, 60 years) from the offspring cohort of the
population-based Framingham Study. BMD was measured at the femur (neck,
trochanter, and Ward's area) and the lumbar spine (L(2)-L(4)).
RESULTS: In both women and men, there was significant association of D14S1026
genotype with measures of femoral but not spinal BMD. In addition, genotypes of
two common single nucleotide polymorphisms, rs1256031 and rs1256059, in strong
linkage disequilibrium with one another but not with D14S1026, were associated
with measures of femoral BMD in men. The rs1256031 genotypes had up to a 4.0%
difference in mean femoral BMD. An inferred rs1256031-D14S1026-rs1256059
haplotype C-23CA-T was significantly associated with reduced femoral BMD in women
(p = 0.03, 0.003, and 0.01 for neck, trochanter, and Ward's area, respectively). 
Haplotype-based BMD differences ranged from 3.0% to 4.3%.
CONCLUSIONS: We have observed significant association of common ESR2 variants
with measures of femoral BMD in both men and women.

PMID: 15068501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Hum Genet. 2003;48(12):654-8. Epub 2003 Nov 21.

Allele frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 40 candidate
genes for gene-environment studies on cancer: data from population-based Japanese
random samples.

Yoshimura K(1), Hanaoka T, Ohnami S, Ohnami S, Kohno T, Liu Y, Yoshida T,
Sakamoto H, Tsugane S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Information and Epidemiology Division, National Cancer Center Research 
Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. kyoshimu@ncc.go.jp

Knowledge of genetic polymorphisms in gene-environment studies may contribute to 
more accurate identification of avoidable risks and to developing tailor-made
preventative measures. The aim of this study was to describe the allele
frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of select genes, which may 
be included in future gene-environment studies on cancer in Japan. SNP typing was
performed on middle-aged Japanese men randomly selected from the general
population in five areas of Japan. We genotyped and calculated allele frequencies
of 153 SNPs located on 40 genes: CYP1A1, CYP1B1, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1,
CYP17A1, CYP19A1, AHR, ESR1, ESR2, ERRRG, PGR, EPHX1, EPHX2, HSD17B2, HSD17B3,
GSTM2, GSTM3, GSTT2, GSTP1, NAT1, NAT2, COMT, ADH1A, ADH1B, ADH1C, ALDH2, NOS2A, 
NOS3, IL1A, IL1B, OGG1, NUDT1 [MTH1], DRD2, DRD3, DRD4, SLC6A4, NR3C1 [GCCR],
MTHFR, and NQO1. In the present study, the Japanese allele frequencies were
verified by using nationwide population samples.

PMID: 14634838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cancer Res. 2003 Nov 15;63(22):7624-9.

Joint effect of estrogen receptor beta sequence variants and endogenous estrogen 
exposure on breast cancer risk in Chinese women.

Zheng SL(1), Zheng W, Chang BL, Shu XO, Cai Q, Yu H, Dai Q, Xu J, Gao YT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Medical 
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Long-term estrogen exposure and family history of breast cancer are the two
factors that are most consistently found to be associated with breast cancer
risk. Sequence variants in genes involved in estrogen synthesis, metabolism, and 
signal transduction may account, in part, for this observation. Using data and
DNA samples from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study, we tested the hypothesis that 
sequence variants of the estrogen receptor beta gene (ESR2) may be associated
with increased risk for breast cancer, particularly among women who have a high
level and long-term endogenous estrogen exposure. Direct sequencing of the ESR2
gene among 30 Chinese women revealed eight sequence variants. Association
analysis of six common sequence variants in 1134 cases and 1235 controls provided
evidence for positive associations between breast cancer risk and two single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), [C(14206)T and C(33390)G], among postmenopausal 
women. Evidence of a stronger association was found for SNP [C(33390)G] among
women with a long duration (> or =34 years) of menstruation (odds ratio, 2.37;
95% confidence interval, 1.18-4.77). A potential synergistic effect between SNP
[C(33390)G] and several steroid sex hormones was observed, and a 3-4-fold
elevated risk of breast cancer was found among women with a CG or GG genotype in 
SNP [C(33390)G] combined with a high level of steroid sex hormone or a low level 
of sex hormone binding globulin. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis
of a joint effect of estrogen receptor beta sequence variants and endogenous
estrogen exposure on breast cancer risk.

PMID: 14633679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Pathol. 2003 Oct;163(4):1599-605.

The protective effect of 17beta-estradiol on experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis is mediated through estrogen receptor-alpha.

Polanczyk M(1), Zamora A, Subramanian S, Matejuk A, Hess DL, Blankenhorn EP,
Teuscher C, Vandenbark AA, Offner H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon 97201, USA.

Low-dose estrogen (E2) treatment significantly inhibits the clinical signs and
histopathological lesions of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), and
is being used in clinical trials to treat multiple sclerosis. To assess the role 
of intracytoplasmic estrogen receptors in mediating suppression of EAE, we
studied mice with disrupted estrogen receptor-alpha (Esr1) and -beta (Esr2)
genes. We demonstrate that the protective effect of E2 is abrogated in
B6.129-Esr1(tm1Unc) mice (Esr1-/-) but not in B6.129-Esr2(tm1Unc) mice (Esr2-/-).
The loss of E2-mediated protection from EAE in Esr1-/- mice immunized with the
encephalitogenic MOG-35-55 peptide was manifested phenotypically by the
development of severe acute clinical signs and histopathological lesions even in 
the presence of moderately high serum E2 levels. This is in contrast to C57BL/6
wild-type (WT) mice and Esr2-/- mice in which E2 treatment resulted in comparable
serum levels and markedly suppressed clinical signs of EAE and abolished
inflammatory lesions in the CNS. This pattern showing a lack of E2-dependent
inhibition of EAE in Esr1-/- mice was mirrored by an enhanced rather than a
reduced secretion of TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, and interleukin (IL)-6 in MOG-specific
splenocytes and a lack of inhibition of message for inflammatory cytokines,
chemokines and chemokine receptors in CNS tissue. These results indicate that the
immunomodulatory effects of E2 in EAE are dependent on Esr1 and not Esr2
signaling.

PMCID: PMC1868300
PMID: 14507666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Apr;14(3):118-23.

Prolactin regulation of estrogen receptor expression.

Frasor J(1), Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612,
USA.

The ability of the rat corpus luteum to respond to estrogen requires prolactin
(PRL), which can stimulate the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER). This
review will focus on the signaling mechanisms by which this occurs. Transcription
of the genes encoding both ERalpha (Esr1) and ERbeta (Esr2) is stimulated by PRL 
through the Jak2-Stat5 pathway and Stat5-response elements that are located in
each of the Esr promoters. A single nucleotide difference between these two
response elements is responsible for the observation that either Stat5a or Stat5b
can stimulate Esr1 transcription, whereas only Stat5b can activate transcription 
of Esr2. The tyrosine kinase Jak2 is required for PRL activation of Esr1 promoter
activity; however, additional pathways are involved in PRL-induced Stat5b
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation and DNA binding. In addition to the corpus
luteum, PRL-induced ER expression might provide a mechanism for fine-tuning the
responsiveness of other target tissues, such as the decidua and mammary gland, to
these two hormones.

PMID: 12670737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Med Sci Monit. 2002 Mar;8(3):CR180-4.

Further studies of genetic susceptibility to Graves' disease in a Russian
population.

Chistiakov DA(1), Savost'anov KV, Turakulov RI, Petunina N, Balabolkin MI,
Nosikov VV.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U36, College de France, 121 rue Saint-Jacques, 75231 Paris Cedex 05,
France. dimitry.chistiakov@eudoramail.com

BACKGROUND: Graves' disease (GD) is a polygenic autoimmune thyroid syndrome. Some
of the genes implicated in its pathogenesis may encode thyroid-stimulating
hormone receptor (TSHR) and estrogen receptors 1 (ESR1) and 2 (ESR2). We examined
dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms in the ESR1 and ESR2 genes and D727E amino acid
substitution in the TSHR gene for possible association with GD in a Russian
population.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The polymorphic regions of the target genes were amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on the basis of genomic DNA isolated from blood
of 78 unrelated Russian patients with GD and 93 control subjects. To detect the
D727E TSHR polymorphism, the PCR product was additionally digested with Eco72I
restriction endonuclease. The genotype and allele frequencies in the groups
studied were compared by c2 test. The odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals
(CI) were calculated to assess the strength of the relationship between the
polymorphisms tested and GD.
RESULTS: For polymorphic dinucleotide microsatellites at ESR1 and ESR2, no
significant difference was observed in allele frequencies between affected and
nonaffected patients. For the D727E TSHR polymorphism, the E allele and the DE
genotype were significantly more frequent (p<0.0001) in patients with GD than in 
control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The D727E variant of the TSHR gene is associated with Graves'
disease in a Russian population. The E727 allele and the heterozygous D727E
genotype are related to higher risk of the disease. No association with GD was
found for polymorphic microsatellites of the ESR1 and ESR2 gene.

PMID: 11887032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Psychiatry. 2002;7(1):86-9.

Variation in the ESR1 and ESR2 genes and genetic susceptibility to anorexia
nervosa.

Eastwood H(1), Brown KM, Markovic D, Pieri LF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, University of Leeds, St James's University Hospital, 
Leeds LS9 7TF, UK. medhg@stjames.leeds.ac.uk

There is significant evidence for genetic factors in the susceptibility to
anorexia nervosa (AN). Previously genetic variation in the estrogen receptor 2
gene (ESR2) has been studied, however no strong evidence of association with AN
has been found. In the present study variation in the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) 
and ESR2 genes was examined. Estrogen receptors have been localised to areas of
the brain involved in behaviour and regulation of food intake. The anorexic
effects of estrogen are accentuated by stress and thus it is postulated that
variation in the estrogen receptors may contribute to the genetic susceptibility 
to AN in females. A cohort of 170 female, Caucasian AN sufferers and 152 female
controls were typed for dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms in both ESR1 and ESR2
and two further SNPs at each locus. Variation at ESR1 was not associated with AN.
However an association was found at the ESR2 locus with the heterozygous genotype
of the G1082A polymorphism and AN but not with any of the other ESR2
polymorphisms analysed. Analysis of haplotypes at ESR1 and ESR2 showed no
significant evidence of association with AN suggesting that the variability in
ESR2 alone may contribute to the genetic susceptibility to AN.

PMID: 11803451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Hum Genet. 2000;45(6):327-30.

Association of estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) gene polymorphism with blood
pressure.

Ogawa S(1), Emi M, Shiraki M, Hosoi T, Ouchi Y, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Japan.

We investigated the association between a dinucleotide (cytosine-adenine; CA)
repeat polymorphism located in the flanking region of the human estrogen receptor
beta (ESR2) gene and systemic blood pressure in 187 healthy postmenopausal
Japanese women. The genotype was classified as "A" through "O" according to the
number of these repeats from 18 to 32. When we separated the subjects into two
groups-- bearing at least one "I" allele (26 CA repeats) and those who did
not--we found that the former subjects had significantly higher systolic blood
pressure than the latter (mean +/- SD, 146.0 +/- 25.0 vs 136.6 +/- 23.4; P =
0.032). These data suggest that genetic variation at the ESR2 locus may be
associated with some determinants of blood pressure, and that there is a possible
involvement of this polymorphism in causing hypertension in Japanese women.

PMID: 11185739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Gene. 2000 Apr 4;246(1-2):219-27.

Esr genes show different levels of expression in the same region of maize
endosperm.

Bonello JF(1), Opsahl-Ferstad HG, Perez P, Dumas C, Rogowsky PM.

Author information: 
(1)RDP, UMR 5667 INRA-CNRS-ENSL-Lyon1, ENS-Lyon, 46 Allée d'Italie, F-69364,
Lyon, France.

Esr genes share high homology among each other, code for small hydrophilic
proteins, and are expressed in a restricted region of maize endosperm surrounding
the embryo. We show here that not only Esr2 but also Esr1 and Esr3 are expressed 
in maize, and that the relative contribution of Esr1, Esr2 and Esr3 to total Esr 
mRNA is 17%, 55% and 28%, respectively. DNA sequence analysis of putative
promoter fragments ranging from 0.53 kb to 3.54 kb revealed the presence of
retrotransposons related to the Zeon and Cinful families in the distal parts of
the promoters. The proximal parts show high homology that extended over 504bp
between Esr2 and Esr3, and 265bp between Esr1 and the other two genes. The most
conspicuous potential cis element is a fully conserved tandem repeat of the
sequence CTACACCA close to the respective open reading frames (ORFs). By the
analysis of transgenic maize plants carrying promoter-Gus fusions, it was shown
that all three cloned upstream fragments contain functional promoters, that the
spatial activity of all three Esr promoters is identical, and that the cis
element(s) responsible for the expression in the embryo surrounding region reside
in the 265 bp upstream of the respective ORFs.

PMID: 10767543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1999;86(3-4):233-4.

Assignment of estrogen receptor beta (Esr2) to rat chromosome band 6q24 and
(Estrb) to mouse chromosome band 12D1-D3 by in situ hybridization.

Taguchi T(1), Gustafsson J, Yuri K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kochi Medical School, Kochi, Japan.

PMID: 10575212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 Dec;23(4):361-6.

Localization and expression of the human estrogen receptor beta gene in uterine
leiomyomata.

Pedeutour F(1), Quade BJ, Weremowicz S, Dal Cin P, Ali S, Morton CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Estrogens have an important function in the natural history of uterine
leiomyomata. The human estrogen receptor beta gene (ESR2) has been identified
recently and mapped to 14q22-24, a region frequently rearranged in uterine
leiomyomata and other benign tumors, including pulmonary chondroid hamartomas and
endometrial polyps. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization and radiation hybrid
mapping, we map ESR2 within 14q23-24.1, to a region approximately 2 Mb
centromeric to the t(12;14) breakpoint in uterine leiomyomata, between markers
D14S63 and WI-7536. Two YAC clones, 948B6 and 741H4, contain ESR2. Using RT-PCR, 
we show that ESR2 is expressed in uterine leiomyomata and pulmonary chondroid
hamartomas as well as in normal myometrium. Lack of a direct relationship between
rearrangement of 14q23-24 and ESR2 expression suggests that ESR2 is not involved 
with HMGIC or HMGIY in t(12;14) or t(6;14). However, because of its relatively
close physical distance from the characteristic site of rearrangements in
14q23-24, a role for ESR2 in the pathobiology of these tumors warrants future
consideration.

PMID: 9824210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;81(3-4):217-21.

Cytogenetic localization of cancer-related genes in the rat and comparative
mapping studies in human and mouse.

Johansson A(1), Helou K, Levan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology-Genetics, Gothenburg University,
Gothenburg, Sweden. Asa.Johansson@gen.gu.se

The rat is an important model organism in biomedical research, and several
well-characterized rat cancer model systems exist. To facilitate detailed
analysis of these models, it is useful to know the regional location of known
cancer-related genes. In this report, 14 cancer-related genes have been
sublocalized by fluorescence in situ hybridization. The mapped genes include
three oncogenes (Fyn, Mas1, and Vav1), a tyrosine kinase gene (Syk), a
tumor-associated antigen gene (Cd24), a growth factor receptor gene (Igf2r), the 
gene for an activator of c-fos/c-jun transcription factors (Apex), a
transcription factor gene (Egr3), and several genes involved in steroid hormone
metabolism and signaling (Esr2, Pgr, Cbg, Cyp17, and Cyp19). The remaining gene
(Map1a) is involved in microtubule assembly.

PMID: 9730607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


