
1. Vet J. 2016 Feb;208:22-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2015.11.002. Epub 2015 Nov 10.

Physical training and weight loss in dogs lead to transcriptional changes in
genes involved in the glucose-transport pathway in muscle and adipose tissues.

Herrera Uribe J(1), Vitger AD(2), Ritz C(3), Fredholm M(2), Bjørnvad CR(2),
Cirera S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genética y Mejora Animal, Cordoba University, Edificio C5 Gregor Mendel 1st
Floor, Campus Universitario Rabanales, 14071 Córdoba, Spain. (2)Department of
Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Department of Nutrition,
Exercise and Sports, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark. (4)Department of Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Electronic address: scs@sund.ku.dk.

Obesity is a worldwide problem in humans and domestic animals. Interventions,
including a combination of dietary management and exercise, have proven to be
effective for inducing weight loss in humans. In companion animals, the role of
exercise in the management of obesity has received relatively little attention.
The aim of the present study was to investigate changes in the transcriptome of
key energy metabolism genes in muscle and adipose tissues in response to
diet-induced weight loss alone, or combined with exercise in dogs. Overweight pet
dogs were enrolled on a weight loss programme, based on calorie restriction and
physical training (FD group, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5) or calorie restriction alone (DO group,
n<U+2009>=<U+2009>7). mRNA expression of 12 genes and six microRNAs were investigated using
quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). In the FD group, FOXO1 and RAC1 were expressed
at lower levels in adipose tissue, whereas ESRRA and AKT2 were more highly
expressed in muscle, when compared with the DO group. Comparing expression before
and after the intervention, in the DO group, nine genes and three microRNAs
showed significant altered expression in adipose tissue (PPARG, ADIPOQ and FOXO1;
P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and seven genes and two microRNAs were significantly downregulated
(NRF2, RAC1, ESRRA, AKT2, PGC1a and mir-23; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) in muscle. Thus, calorie
restriction causes regulation of several metabolic genes in both tissues. The
mild exercise, incorporated into this study design, was sufficient to elicit
transcriptional changes in adipose and muscle tissues, suggesting a positive
effect on glucose metabolism. The study findings support inclusion of exercise in
management of canine obesity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26701817  [PubMed - in process]


2. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 10;5:18011. doi: 10.1038/srep18011.

Cartilage development requires the function of Estrogen-related receptor alpha
that directly regulates sox9 expression in zebrafish.

Kim YI(1), No Lee J(1), Bhandari S(1), Nam IK(1), Yoo KW(1), Kim SJ(1), Oh GS(1),
Kim HJ(1), So HS(1), Choe SK(1,)(2), Park R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Center for Metabolic Function Regulation,
Iksan, Jeonbuk, 570-749, South Korea. (2)Integrated Omics Institute, Wonkwang
University School of Medicine, Iksan, Jeonbuk, 570-749, South Korea.

Estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRa) regulates a number of cellular processes 
including development of bone and muscles. However, direct evidence regarding its
involvement in cartilage development remains elusive. In this report, we
establish an in vivo role of Esrra in cartilage development during embryogenesis 
in zebrafish. Gene expression analysis indicates that esrra is expressed in
developing pharyngeal arches where genes necessary for cartilage development are 
also expressed. Loss of function analysis shows that knockdown of esrra impairs
expression of genes including sox9, col2a1, sox5, sox6, runx2 and col10a1 thus
induces abnormally formed cartilage in pharyngeal arches. Importantly, we
identify putative ESRRa binding elements in upstream regions of sox9 to which
ESRRa can directly bind, indicating that Esrra may directly regulate sox9
expression. Accordingly, ectopic expression of sox9 rescues defective formation
of cartilage induced by the knockdown of esrra. Taken together, our results
indicate for the first time that ESRRa is essential for cartilage development by 
regulating sox9 expression during vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC4675082
PMID: 26657540  [PubMed - in process]


3. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 7;5:17621. doi: 10.1038/srep17621.

Genomic amplification upregulates estrogen-related receptor alpha and its
depletion inhibits oral squamous cell carcinoma tumors in vivo.

Tiwari A(1), Swamy S(2), Gopinath KS(2), Kumar A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India. (2)Department of Surgery,
Bangalore Institute of Oncology, Bangalore 560027, India.

The ESRRA gene encodes a transcription factor and regulates several genes, such
as WNT11 and OPN, involved in tumorigenesis. It is upregulated in several
cancers, including OSCC. We have previously shown that the tumor suppressor
miR-125a targets ESRRA, and its downregulation causes upregulation of ESRRA in
OSCC. Upregulation of ESRRA in the absence of downregulation of miR-125a in a
subset of OSCC samples suggests the involvement of an alternative mechanism.
Using TaqMan(®) copy number assay, here we report for the first time that the
genomic amplification of ESRRA causes its upregulation in a subset of OSCC
samples. Ectopic overexpression of ESRRA led to accelerated cell proliferation,
anchorage-independent cell growth and invasion, and inhibited apoptosis. Whereas,
knockdown of ESRRA expression by siRNA led to reduced cell proliferation,
anchorage-independent cell growth and invasion, and accelerated apoptosis.
Furthermore, the delivery of a synthetic biostable ESRRA siRNA to OSCC cells
resulted in regression of xenografts in nude mice. Thus, the genomic
amplification of ESRRA is another novel mechanism for its upregulation in OSCC.
Based on our in vitro and in vivo experiments, we suggest that targeting ESRRA by
siRNA could be a novel therapeutic strategy for OSCC and other cancers.

PMCID: PMC4671026
PMID: 26639757  [PubMed - in process]


4. Immunity. 2015 Jul 21;43(1):80-91. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.07.003.

Orphan Nuclear Receptor ERRa Controls Macrophage Metabolic Signaling and A20
Expression to Negatively Regulate TLR-Induced Inflammation.

Yuk JM(1), Kim TS(2), Kim SY(2), Lee HM(2), Han J(3), Dufour CR(4), Kim JK(2),
Jin HS(2), Yang CS(5), Park KS(6), Lee CH(7), Kim JM(8), Kweon GR(3), Choi HS(9),
Vanacker JM(10), Moore DD(11), Giguère V(4), Jo EK(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Chungnam National University School of Medicine,
Daejeon 301-747, South Korea; Department of Infection Biology, Chungnam National 
University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea; Infection Signaling 
Network Research Center, Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon
301-747, South Korea. (2)Department of Microbiology, Chungnam National University
School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea; Infection Signaling Network
Research Center, Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon
301-747, South Korea. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Chungnam National University
School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea; Infection Signaling Network
Research Center, Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon
301-747, South Korea. (4)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, 1160 
Pine Avenue West, Montréal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada. (5)Department of Molecular and
Life Sciences, College of Science and Technology, Hanyang University, Ansan
426-791, South Korea. (6)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (7)Laboratory Animal
Resource Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Daejeon 305-806, South Korea. (8)Department of Pathology, Chungnam National
University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea; Infection Signaling 
Network Research Center, Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon
301-747, South Korea. (9)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for
Nuclear Receptor Signals and Hormone Research Center, School of Biological
Sciences and Technology, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, South
Korea. (10)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon,
Université Lyon 1, CNRS, INRA, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46 allée
d'Italie, 69364 Lyon cedex 07, France. (11)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (12)Department of
Microbiology, Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747,
South Korea; Infection Signaling Network Research Center, Chungnam National
University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea. Electronic address: 
hayoungj@cnu.ac.kr.

The orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor a (ERRa; NR3B1) is a key
metabolic regulator, but its function in regulating inflammation remains largely 
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that ERRa negatively regulates Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-induced inflammation by promoting Tnfaip3 transcription and fine-tuning of 
metabolic reprogramming in macrophages. ERRa-deficient (Esrra(-/-)) mice showed
increased susceptibility to endotoxin-induced septic shock, leading to more
severe pro-inflammatory responses than control mice. ERRa regulated macrophage
inflammatory responses by directly binding the promoter region of Tnfaip3, a
deubiquitinating enzyme in TLR signaling. In addition, Esrra(-/-) macrophages
showed an increased glycolysis, but impaired mitochondrial respiratory function
and biogenesis. Further, ERRa was required for the regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling 
by controlling p65 acetylation via maintenance of NAD(+) levels and sirtuin 1
activation. These findings unravel a previously unappreciated role for ERRa as a 
negative regulator of TLR-induced inflammatory responses through inducing Tnfaip3
transcription and controlling the metabolic reprogramming.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26200012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jun 5;461(3):560-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.04.083. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Differential regulation of HIF-1a and HIF-2a in neuroblastoma: Estrogen-related
receptor alpha (ERRa) regulates HIF2A transcription and correlates to poor
outcome.

Hamidian A(1), von Stedingk K(1), Munksgaard Thorén M(1), Mohlin S(1), Påhlman
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lund University, Translational Cancer Research, Lund University Cancer Center 
at Medicon Village, Building 406, SE-223 81 Lund, Sweden. (2)Lund University,
Translational Cancer Research, Lund University Cancer Center at Medicon Village, 
Building 406, SE-223 81 Lund, Sweden. Electronic address: sven.pahlman@med.lu.se.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are differentially regulated in tumor cells.
While the current paradigm supports post-translational regulation of the HIF-a
subunits, we recently showed that hypoxic HIF-2a is also transcriptionally
regulated via insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-II in the childhood tumor
neuroblastoma. Here, we demonstrate that transcriptional regulation of HIF-2a
seems to be restricted to neural cell-derived tumors, while HIF-1a is canonically
regulated at the post-translational level uniformly across different tumor forms.
Enhanced expression of HIF2A mRNA at hypoxia is due to de novo transcription
rather than increased mRNA stability, and chemical stabilization of the HIF-a
proteins at oxygen-rich conditions unexpectedly leads to increased HIF2A
transcription. The enhanced HIF2A levels do not seem to be dependent on active
HIF-1. Using a transcriptome array approach, we identified members of the
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator
(PGC)/Estrogen-related receptor (ERR) complex families as potential regulators of
HIF2A. Knockdown or inhibition of one of the members, ERRa, leads to decreased
expression of HIF2A, and high expression of the ERRa gene ESRRA correlates with
poor overall and progression-free survival in a clinical neuroblastoma material
consisting of 88 tumors. Thus, targeting of ERRa and pathways regulating
transcriptional HIF-2a are promising therapeutic avenues in neuroblastoma.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25912138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cell Rep. 2015 Apr 21;11(3):344-50. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.03.032. Epub 2015 
Apr 9.

Behavioral disturbances in estrogen-related receptor alpha-null mice.

Cui H(1), Lu Y(1), Khan MZ(1), Anderson RM(2), McDaniel L(1), Wilson HE(1), Yin
TC(1), Radley JJ(3), Pieper AA(4), Lutter M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA. (2)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Carver
College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. (3)Department of Psychology,
University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA;
Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program, University of Iowa, Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. (4)Department of Psychiatry, University of
Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Department of
Neurology, University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242,
USA; Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program, University of Iowa, Carver College
of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. (5)Department of Psychiatry, University of
Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Interdisciplinary
Neuroscience Program, University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, 
IA 52242, USA. Electronic address: michael-lutter@uiowa.edu.

Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, are common and
severe mental illnesses of unknown etiology. Recently, we identified a rare
missense mutation in the transcription factor estrogen-related receptor alpha
(ESRRA) that is associated with the development of eating disorders. However,
little is known about ESRRA function in the brain. Here, we report that Esrra is 
expressed in the mouse brain and demonstrate that Esrra levels are regulated by
energy reserves. Esrra-null female mice display a reduced operant response to a
high-fat diet, compulsivity/behavioral rigidity, and social deficits. Selective
Esrra knockdown in the prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices of adult female mice
recapitulates reduced operant response and increased compulsivity, respectively. 
These results indicate that Esrra deficiency in the mouse brain impairs
behavioral responses in multiple functional domains.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4440329 [Available on 2016-04-21]
PMID: 25865889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 14;289(46):32276-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.584136. Epub
2014 Sep 29.

MicroRNA-125a reduces proliferation and invasion of oral squamous cell carcinoma 
cells by targeting estrogen-related receptor a: implications for cancer
therapeutics.

Tiwari A(1), Shivananda S(2), Gopinath KS(2), Kumar A(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012 and. (2)the Department of Surgery, 
Bangalore Institute of Oncology, Bangalore 560027, India. (3)From the Department 
of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012 and karun@mrdg.iisc.ernet.in.

Estrogen-related receptor a (ESRRA) functions as a transcription factor and
regulates the expression of several genes, such as WNT11 and OPN. Up-regulation
of ESRRA has been reported in several cancers. However, the mechanism underlying 
its up-regulation is unclear. Furthermore, the reports regarding the role and
regulation of ESRRA in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) are completely
lacking. Here, we show that tumor suppressor miR-125a directly binds to the 3'UTR
of ESRRA and represses its expression. Overexpression of miR-125a in OSCC cells
drastically reduced the level of ESRRA, decreased cell proliferation, and
increased apoptosis. Conversely, the delivery of an miR-125a inhibitor to these
cells drastically increased the level of ESRRA, increased cell proliferation, and
decreased apoptosis. miR-125a-mediated down-regulation of ESRRA impaired
anchorage-independent colony formation and invasion of OSCC cells. Reduced cell
proliferation and increased apoptosis of OSCC cells were dependent on the
presence of the 3'UTR in ESRRA. The delivery of an miR-125a mimic to OSCC cells
resulted in marked regression of xenografts in nude mice, whereas the delivery of
an miR-125a inhibitor to OSCC cells resulted in a significant increase of
xenografts and abrogated the tumor suppressor function of miR-125a. We observed
an inverse correlation between the expression levels of miR-125a and ESRRA in
OSCC samples. In summary, up-regulation of ESRRA due to down-regulation of
miR-125a is not only a novel mechanism for its up-regulation in OSCC, but
decreasing the level of ESRRA by using a synthetic miR-125a mimic may have an
important role in therapeutic intervention of OSCC and other cancers.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4231701
PMID: 25266720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Bioinformatics. 2014 Dec 1;30(23):3342-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu571.
Epub 2014 Aug 27.

VSEAMS: a pipeline for variant set enrichment analysis using summary GWAS data
identifies IKZF3, BATF and ESRRA as key transcription factors in type 1 diabetes.

Burren OS(1), Guo H(1), Wallace C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, JDRF/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation 
Laboratory, NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Cambridge
Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK and MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge
Institute of Public Health, Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge Biomedical
Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0SR, UK. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, JDRF/Wellcome 
Trust Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory, NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research
Centre, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge,
Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK 
and MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge Institute of Public Health, Forvie Site,
Robinson Way, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0SR, UK Department of
Medical Genetics, JDRF/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory, NIHR 
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Cambridge Biomedical
Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK and MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge Institute of
Public Health, Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge,
CB2 0SR, UK.

MOTIVATION: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified many loci
implicated in disease susceptibility. Integration of GWAS summary statistics
(P-values) and functional genomic datasets should help to elucidate mechanisms.
RESULTS: We extended a non-parametric SNP set enrichment method to test for
enrichment of GWAS signals in functionally defined loci to a situation where only
GWAS P-values are available. The approach is implemented in VSEAMS, a freely
available software pipeline. We use VSEAMS to identify enrichment of type 1
diabetes (T1D) GWAS associations near genes that are targets for the
transcription factors IKZF3, BATF and ESRRA. IKZF3 lies in a known T1D
susceptibility region, while BATF and ESRRA overlap other immune disease
susceptibility regions, validating our approach and suggesting novel avenues of
research for T1D.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: VSEAMS is available for download
(http://github.com/ollyburren/vseams).

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4296156
PMID: 25170024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Dairy Sci. 2014 Jul;97(7):4193-207. doi: 10.3168/jds.2013-7471. Epub 2014 Apr
24.

Transcriptional regulators transforming growth factor-ß1 and estrogen-related
receptor-a identified as putative mediators of calf rumen epithelial tissue
development and function during weaning.

Connor EE(1), Baldwin RL 6th(2), Walker MP(2), Ellis SE(3), Li C(2), Kahl S(2),
Chung H(4), Li RW(2).

Author information: 
(1)USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Bovine Functional Genomics Laboratory,
Beltsville, MD 20705. Electronic address: erin.connor@ars.usda.gov. (2)USDA,
Agricultural Research Service, Bovine Functional Genomics Laboratory, Beltsville,
MD 20705. (3)Animal and Veterinary Science Department, Clemson University,
Clemson, SC 29634. (4)Animal Genomics and Bioinformatics Division, National
Livestock Institute, Suwon 441-701, Korea.

Molecular mechanisms regulating rumen epithelial development remain largely
unknown. To identify gene networks and regulatory factors controlling rumen
development, Holstein bull calves (n=18) were fed milk replacer only (MRO) until 
42 d of age. Three calves each were euthanized at 14 and 42 d of age for tissue
collection to represent preweaning, and the remaining calves were provided diets 
of either milk replacer + orchard grass hay (MH; n=6) to initiate weaning without
development of rumen papillae, or milk replacer + calf starter (MG; n=6) to
initiate weaning and development of rumen papillae. At 56 and 70 d of age, 3
calves from the MH and MG groups were euthanized for collection of rumen
epithelium. Total RNA and protein were extracted for microarray analysis and to
validate detected changes in selected protein expression, respectively. As
expected, calves fed MRO had no rumen papillae and development of papillae was
greater in MG versus MH calves. Differentially expressed genes between the MRO
diet at d 42 (preweaning) versus the MG or MH diets at d 56 (during weaning) were
identified using permutation analysis of differential expression. Expression of
345 and 519 transcripts was uniquely responsive to MG and MH feeding,
respectively. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen, Redwood City, CA) indicated
that the top-ranked biological function affected by the MG diet was the cell
cycle, and TFGB1, FBOX01, and PPARA were identified as key transcriptional
regulators of genes responsive to the MG diet and associated with development of 
rumen papillae. Increased expressions of TGFB1 mRNA and protein in response to
the MG diet were confirmed by subsequent analyses. The top-ranking biological
function affected by the MH diet was energy production. Receptors for IGF-1 and
insulin, ESRRA, and PPARD were identified by ingenuity pathway analysis as
transcriptional regulators of genes responsive to the MH diet. Further analysis
of TGFB1 and ESRRA mRNA expression in rumen epithelium obtained from a separate
ontogenic study of Holstein calves (n=26) euthanized every 7d from birth to 42 d 
of age showed increases in transcript expression with advancing age, supporting
their roles in mediating rumen epithelial development and function during
weaning. Additional evaluation of gene expression in the rumen epithelium of
adult cows ruminally infused with butyrate also suggested that observed changes
in ESRRA mRNA expression in developing calf rumen may be mediated by increased
butyrate concentration. Our results identify TGFB1 and ESRRA as likely
transcriptional regulators of rumen epithelial development and energy metabolism,
respectively, and provide targets for modulation of rumen development and
function in the growing calf.

Copyright © 2014 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24767884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS Biol. 2014 Feb 4;12(2):e1001784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001784.
eCollection 2014.

Low frequency of ESRRA-C11orf20 fusion gene in ovarian carcinomas.

Micci F(1), Panagopoulos I(1), Thorsen J(1), Davidson B(2), Tropé CG(3), Heim
S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway ; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway ; Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Gynecology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (4)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer 
Genetics and Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway ; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway ; Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

The identification of recurrent gene fusions in common epithelial cancers--for
example, TMPRSS2/ERG in prostate cancer and EML4/ALK in nonsmall cell lung
carcinomas--has raised the question of whether fusion genes are pathogenetically 
important also in ovarian carcinomas. The first recurrent fusion transcript in
serous ovarian carcinomas was reported by Salzman et al. in 2011, who used deep
paired-end sequencing to detect the fusion gene ESRRA-C11orf20 in 10 out of 67
(15%) serous ovarian carcinomas examined, a finding that holds great promise for 
our understanding of ovarian tumorigenesis as well as, potentially, for new
treatment strategies. We wanted to test how frequent the ESRRA/C11orf20 fusion is
in ovarian carcinomas of all subtypes, and therefore examined a series of 230
ovarian carcinomas of which 197 were of the serous subtype and 163 of the 197
were of stages III and IV--that is, the very same carcinoma subset where the
fusion transcript had been found. We performed PCR and high-throughput sequencing
analyses in search of the fusion transcript. We used the same primers described
previously for the detection of the fusion and the same primer combination, but
found no ESRRA/C11orf20 fusion in our series. A synthetic DNA plasmid containing 
the reported ESRRA/C11orf20 fusion was included as a positive control for our PCR
experiments. Data from high-throughput sequencing of 23 ovarian carcinomas were
screened in search of alternative partner(s) for the ESRRA and/or C11orf20 gene, 
but none was found. We conclude that the frequency of the ESRRA/C11orf20 gene
fusion in serous ovarian carcinomas of stages III and IV must be considerable
less than that reported previously (0/163 in our experience compared with 10/67
in the previous study). At the very least, it seems clear that the said fusion
cannot be a common pathogenetic event in this tumor type.

PMCID: PMC3913552
PMID: 24504521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. FASEB J. 2014 Mar;28(3):1082-97. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-229211. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Estrogen-related receptor-a (ERRa) deficiency in skeletal muscle impairs
regeneration in response to injury.

LaBarge S(1), McDonald M, Smith-Powell L, Auwerx J, Huss JM.

Author information: 
(1)1Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases Research, Leslie and Susan Gonda
(Goldschmied) Building, Room 2132E3, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope,
1500 E. Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010, USA. jhuss@coh.org.

The estrogen-related receptor-a (ERRa) regulates mitochondrial biogenesis and
glucose and fatty acid oxidation during differentiation in skeletal myocytes.
However, whether ERRa controls metabolic remodeling during skeletal muscle
regeneration in vivo is unknown. We characterized the time course of skeletal
muscle regeneration in wild-type (M-ERRaWT) and muscle-specific ERRa(-/-)
(M-ERRa(-/-)) mice after injury by intramuscular cardiotoxin injection.
M-ERRa(-/-) mice exhibited impaired regeneration characterized by smaller
myofibers with increased centrally localized nuclei and reduced mitochondrial
density and cytochrome oxidase and citrate synthase activities relative to
M-ERRaWT. Transcript levels of mitochondrial transcription factor A, nuclear
respiratory factor-2a, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-<U+03B3>
coactivator (PGC)-1ß, were downregulated in the M-ERRa(-/-) muscles at the onset 
of myogenesis. Furthermore, coincident with delayed myofiber recovery, we
observed reduced muscle ATP content (-45% vs. M-ERRaWT) and enhanced
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activation in M-ERRa(-/-) muscle. We
subsequently demonstrated that pharmacologic postinjury AMPK activation was
sufficient to delay muscle regeneration in WT mice. AMPK activation induced ERRa 
transcript expression in M-ERRaWT muscle and in C2C12 myotubes through induction 
of the Esrra promoter, indicating that ERRa may control gene regulation
downstream of the AMPK pathway. Collectively, these results suggest that ERRa
deficiency during muscle regeneration impairs recovery of mitochondrial energetic
capacity and perturbs AMPK activity, resulting in delayed myofiber repair.

PMCID: PMC3929682
PMID: 24277576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Reproduction. 2014 Mar 2;147(4):419-26. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0423. Print 2014.

Bisphenol A modulates the metabolic regulator oestrogen-related receptor-a in
T-cells.

Cipelli R(1), Harries L, Okuda K, Yoshihara S, Melzer D, Galloway T.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4
4PS, UK.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is a widely used plastics constituent that has been associated 
with endocrine, immune and metabolic effects. Evidence for how BPA exerts
significant biological effects at chronic low levels of exposure has remained
elusive. In adult men, exposure to BPA has been associated with higher expression
of two nuclear receptors, oestrogen receptor-ß (ERß) and
oestrogen-related-receptor-a (ERRa), in peripheral white blood cells in vivo. In 
this study, we explore the expression of ESR2 (ERß) and ESRRA (ERRa) in human
leukaemic T-cell lymphoblasts (Jurkat cells) exposed to BPA in vitro. We show
that exposure to BPA led to enhanced expression of ESRRA within 6<U+200A>h of exposure
(mean±s.e.m.: 1.43±0.08-fold increase compared with the control, P<0.05). After
72<U+200A>h, expression of ESRRA remained significantly enhanced at concentrations of
BPA =1<U+200A>nM. Oxidative metabolism of BPA by rat liver S9 fractions yields the
potent oestrogenic metabolite, 4-methyl-2,4-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)pent-1-ene (MBP).
Exposure of cells to 1-100<U+200A>nM MBP increased the expression of both ESRRA
(significantly induced, P<0.05, at 1, 10, 100<U+200A>nM) and ESR2 (1.32±0.07-fold
increase at 100<U+200A>nM exposure, P<0.01). ERRa is a major control point for oxidative
metabolism in many cell types, including T-cells. Following exposure to both BPA 
and MBP, we found that cells showed a decrease in cell proliferation rate. Taken 
together, these results confirm the bioactivity of BPA against putative T-cell
targets in vitro at concentrations relevant to general human exposure.

PMID: 24231368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Clin Invest. 2013 Nov;123(11):4706-13.

Eating disorder predisposition is associated with ESRRA and HDAC4 mutations.

Cui H, Moore J, Ashimi SS, Mason BL, Drawbridge JN, Han S, Hing B, Matthews A,
McAdams CJ, Darbro BW, Pieper AA, Waller DA, Xing C, Lutter M.

Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are common and severe eating disorders (EDs)
of unknown etiology. Although genetic factors have been implicated in the
psychopathology of EDs, a clear biological pathway has not been delineated. DNA
from two large families affected by EDs was collected, and mutations segregating 
with illness were identified by whole-genome sequencing following linkage mapping
or by whole-exome sequencing. In the first family, analysis of twenty members
across three generations identified a rare missense mutation in the
estrogen-related receptor a (ESRRA) gene that segregated with illness. In the
second family, analysis of eight members across four generations identified a
missense mutation in the histone deacetylase 4 (HDAC4) gene that segregated with 
illness. ESRRA and HDAC4 were determined to interact both in vitro in HeLa cells 
and in vivo in mouse cortex. Transcriptional analysis revealed that HDAC4
potently represses the expression of known ESRRA-induced target genes.
Biochemical analysis of candidate mutations revealed that the identified ESRRA
mutation decreased its transcriptional activity, while the HDAC4 mutation
increased transcriptional repression of ESRRA. Our findings suggest that
mutations that result in decreased ESRRA activity increase the risk of developing
EDs.

PMCID: PMC3809805
PMID: 24216484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cell Metab. 2013 Aug 6;18(2):296-302. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.07.004.

DNA methylation analysis in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease suggests distinct
disease-specific and remodeling signatures after bariatric surgery.

Ahrens M(1), Ammerpohl O, von Schönfels W, Kolarova J, Bens S, Itzel T, Teufel A,
Herrmann A, Brosch M, Hinrichsen H, Erhart W, Egberts J, Sipos B, Schreiber S,
Häsler R, Stickel F, Becker T, Krawczak M, Röcken C, Siebert R, Schafmayer C,
Hampe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Thoracic Surgery, Christian-Albrechts-University
Kiel/University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Germany.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common chronic liver
disorder in industrialized countries. Liver samples from morbidly obese patients 
(n = 45) with all stages of NAFLD and controls (n = 18) were analyzed by
array-based DNA methylation and mRNA expression profiling. NAFLD-specific
expression and methylation differences were seen for nine genes coding for key
enzymes in intermediate metabolism (including PC, ACLY, and PLCG1) and
insulin/insulin-like signaling (including IGF1, IGFBP2, and PRKCE) and replicated
by bisulfite pyrosequening (independent n = 39). Transcription factor binding
sites at NAFLD-specific CpG sites were >1,000-fold enriched for ZNF274, PGC1A,
and SREBP2. Intraindividual comparison of liver biopsies before and after
bariatric surgery showed NAFLD-associated methylation changes to be partially
reversible. Postbariatric and NAFLD-specific methylation signatures were clearly 
distinct both in gene ontology and transcription factor binding site analyses,
with >400-fold enrichment of NRF1, HSF1, and ESRRA sites. Our findings provide an
example of treatment-induced epigenetic organ remodeling in humans.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23931760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 9;168(4):3704-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.06.018. Epub
2013 Jul 17.

Tbx20 functions as an important regulator of estrogen-mediated cardiomyocyte
protection during oxidative stress.

Shen T(1), Yang C, Ding L, Zhu Y, Ruan Y, Cheng H, Qin W, Huang X, Zhang H, Man
Y, Liu D, Wang S, Bian Y, Xiao C, Zhao Y, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Geriatrics, Beijing Hospital and Beijing Institute of
Geriatrics, Ministry of Health, Beijing 100730, China.

BACKGROUND: As a transcription factor mainly expressed in cardiovascular system, 
T-box 20 (Tbx20) plays an important role in embryonic cardiovascular system
development and adult heart function. Here, we determined the mechanism by which 
Tbx20 regulates cardiomyocyte apoptosis and cardiomyopathies.
METHODS: We analyzed Tbx20 expression levels and apoptosis rates in normal and
heart failure human autopsy heart samples. Female C57BL/6 mice were
ovariectomized and treated with 17ß-estradiol to determine Tbx20 expression
levels. ROS production, TUNEL, DNA laddering, qRT-PCR, Western blot,
immunohistochemistry and ChIP analyses were performed on male C57BL/6 transverse 
aortic constriction-induced heart failure samples and on neonatal rat ventricular
myocytes that were treated with H2O2 to investigate the role of Tbx20 in
estrogen-mediated heart protection.
RESULTS: Tbx20 expression was down regulated during heart failure, accompanied by
elevated cardiomyocyte apoptotic levels in humans and mice. H2O2 led to a
concurrent decrease in Tbx20 expression and increase in apoptosis in cultured
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. Tbx20 overexpression reduced H2O2-induced
cardiomyocyte apoptosis and was associated with a profound inhibition of p38MAPK,
Bax and caspase3 and the activation of Bcl-2. Estrogen was able to protect
cardiomyocytes from H2O2-induced apoptosis by upregulating Tbx20 expression in a 
concentration-dependent manner. Tbx20 silencing increased oxidative
stress-induced apoptosis in H9c2 cells. Moreover, Tbx20 directly regulated Esrra 
expression to enhance the heart-protective effect of estrogen.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that Tbx20 functions as an important
regulator of estrogen-mediated cardiomyocyte protection during oxidative stress, 
suggesting that estorgen-Tbx20-ERR-a may represent a crucial regulatory cascade
and a potential therapeutic target for heart failure.

© 2013.

PMID: 23871353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57193. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057193. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Integrative bioinformatics analysis of genomic and proteomic approaches to
understand the transcriptional regulatory program in coronary artery disease
pathways.

Vangala RK(1), Ravindran V, Ghatge M, Shanker J, Arvind P, Bindu H, Shekar M, Rao
VS.

Author information: 
(1)Tata Proteomics and Coagulation Department, Thrombosis Research Institute,
Bangalore, Karnataka, India. rajani@triindia.org.in

Patients with cardiovascular disease show a panel of differentially regulated
serum biomarkers indicative of modulation of several pathways from disease onset 
to progression. Few of these biomarkers have been proposed for multimarker risk
prediction methods. However, the underlying mechanism of the expression changes
and modulation of the pathways is not yet addressed in entirety. Our present work
focuses on understanding the regulatory mechanisms at transcriptional level by
identifying the core and specific transcription factors that regulate the
coronary artery disease associated pathways. Using the principles of systems
biology we integrated the genomics and proteomics data with computational tools. 
We selected biomarkers from 7 different pathways based on their association with 
the disease and assayed 24 biomarkers along with gene expression studies and
built network modules which are highly regulated by 5 core regulators PPARG,
EGR1, ETV1, KLF7 and ESRRA. These network modules in turn comprise of biomarkers 
from different pathways showing that the core regulatory transcription factors
may work together in differential regulation of several pathways potentially
leading to the disease. This kind of analysis can enhance the elucidation of
mechanisms in the disease and give better strategies of developing multimarker
module based risk predictions.

PMCID: PMC3585295
PMID: 23468932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e42755. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042755. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Identification of genes for complex diseases using integrated analysis of
multiple types of genomic data.

Cao H(1), Lei S, Deng HW, Wang YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tulane University, New Orleans,
Louisiana, United States of America.

Various types of genomic data (e.g., SNPs and mRNA transcripts) have been
employed to identify risk genes for complex diseases. However, the analysis of
these data has largely been performed in isolation. Combining these multiple data
for integrative analysis can take advantage of complementary information and thus
can have higher power to identify genes (and/or their functions) that would
otherwise be impossible with individual data analysis. Due to the different
nature, structure, and format of diverse sets of genomic data, multiple genomic
data integration is challenging. Here we address the problem by developing a
sparse representation based clustering (SRC) method for integrative data
analysis. As an example, we applied the SRC method to the integrative analysis of
376821 SNPs in 200 subjects (100 cases and 100 controls) and expression data for 
22283 genes in 80 subjects (40 cases and 40 controls) to identify significant
genes for osteoporosis (OP). Comparing our results with previous studies, we
identified some genes known related to OP risk (e.g., 'THSD4', 'CRHR1',
'HSD11B1', 'THSD7A', 'BMPR1B' 'ADCY10', 'PRL', 'CA8','ESRRA', 'CALM1', 'CALM1',
'SPARC', and 'LRP1'). Moreover, we uncovered novel osteoporosis susceptible genes
('DICER1', 'PTMA', etc.) that were not found previously but play functionally
important roles in osteoporosis etiology from existing studies. In addition, the 
SRC method identified genes can lead to higher accuracy for the
diagnosis/classification of osteoporosis subjects when compared with the
traditional T-test and Fisher-exact test, which further validates the proposed
SRC approach for integrative analysis.

PMCID: PMC3434191
PMID: 22957024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:205752. doi: 10.1155/2012/205752. Epub 2012 Jun
18.

Association of polymorphisms in mitofusin-2 gene with type 2 diabetes in Han
Chinese.

Li P(1), Zhu S, Wu X, Zhu X, Li J, Pan L, Xin Z, Niu F, Wu J, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, 5 Dongdan 3 Tiao, Beijing 100005, China.

MFN2 and ESRRA are candidate genes involved in the pathogenesis of T2D. Five
tag-SNPs in MFN2 gene and three in ESRRA gene were selected and genotyped with
TaqMan or PCR-RFLP method in stage 1 populations (555 patients with T2D and 649
control subjects) and stage 2 populations (546 patients with T2D versus 419
control subjects) in Han Chinese. And combining our published data, we estimated 
the interactions between genetic variants in the MFN2, ESRRA, and PGC-1a genes on
the T2D risk using MDR. rs873458 (G > A) and rs2878677 (C > T) in MFN2 gene were 
significantly associated with T2D (P = 0.005 and 0.01) in stage 1 populations,
and the association of other SNPs with T2D was not found. In stage 2 populations,
we further confirmed the association between rs2878677 and T2D (P = 0.01).
Combining the two stage populations, the data supported more significant effect
of rs873458 and rs2878677 on T2D risk (P = 0.003 and 0.0001). A-C-G-T-C and
G-T-C-T-C in MFN2 had significant association with T2D (P = 0.007 and 0.009). The
present study also provided the evidence that MFN2 had interactions with PGC-1a
(P < 0.0001) or ESRRA (P < 0.0001). This study suggested a role of MFN2
polymorphism in the risk of T2D; however, further studies are needed.

PMCID: PMC3385923
PMID: 22778543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2013 Jul;65(5):549-57. doi: 10.1016/j.etp.2012.04.001. Epub
2012 Apr 28.

Responses of brown adipose tissue to diet-induced obesity, exercise, dietary
restriction and ephedrine treatment.

Slocum N(1), Durrant JR, Bailey D, Yoon L, Jordan H, Barton J, Brown RH, Clifton 
L, Milliken T, Harrington W, Kimbrough C, Faber CA, Cariello N, Elangbam CS.

Author information: 
(1)Safety Assessment, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-3398,
USA.

Drug-induced weight loss in humans has been associated with undesirable side
effects not present in weight loss from lifestyle interventions (caloric
restriction or exercise). To investigate the mechanistic differences of weight
loss by drug-induced and lifestyle interventions, we examined the gene expression
(mRNA) in brown adipose tissue (BAT) and conducted histopathologic assessments in
diet-induced obese (DIO) mice given ephedrine (18 mg/kg/day orally), treadmill
exercise (10 m/min, 1-h/day), and dietary restriction (DR: 26% dietary
restriction) for 7 days. Exercise and DR mice lost more body weight than controls
and both ephedrine and exercise reduced percent body fat. All treatments reduced 
BAT and liver lipid accumulation (i.e., cytoplasmic lipids in brown adipocytes
and hepatocytes) and increased oxygen consumption (VO2 ml/kg/h) compared with
controls. Mitochondrial biogenesis/function-related genes (TFAM, NRF1 and GABPA) 
were up-regulated in the BAT of all groups. UCP-1 was up-regulated in exercise
and ephedrine groups, whereas MFSD2A was up-regulated in ephedrine and DR groups.
PGC-1a up-regulation was observed in exercise and DR groups but not in ephedrine 
group. In all experimental groups, except for ephedrine, fatty acid transport and
metabolism genes were up-regulated, but the magnitude of change was higher in the
DR group. PRKAA1 was up-regulated in all groups but not significantly in the
ephedrine group. ADRß3 was slightly up-regulated in the DR group only, whereas
ESRRA remained unchanged in all groups. Although our data suggest a common
pathway of BAT activation elicited by ephedrine treatment, exercise or DR, mRNA
changes were indicative of additional nutrient-sensing pathways in exercise and
DR.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22542811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Neuropediatrics. 2012 Feb;43(1):37-43. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1308856. Epub 2012 Mar
19.

Variant of Rett syndrome and CDKL5 gene: clinical and autonomic description of 10
cases.

Pini G(1), Bigoni S, Engerström IW, Calabrese O, Felloni B, Scusa MF, Di Marco P,
Borelli P, Bonuccelli U, Julu PO, Nielsen JB, Morin B, Hansen S, Gobbi G,
Visconti P, Pintaudi M, Edvige V, Romanelli A, Bianchi F, Casarano M, Battini R, 
Cioni G, Ariani F, Renieri A, Benincasa A, Delamont RS, Zappella M; ESRRA group.

Collaborators: Bergström-Isacsson M, Engerström B, Engerström L, Larsson G,
Al-Rawas SS, Apartopoulos F, Keter E, Curfs LM, Halbach N, Smeets EE.

Author information: 
(1)Tuscany Rett Centre Versilia Hospital, Lido di Camaiore, Italy.
g.pini@usl12.toscana.it

Erratum in
    Neuropediatrics. 2013 Aug;44(4):237.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder affecting almost
exclusively females. The Hanefeld variant, or early-onset seizure variant, has
been associated with mutations in CDKL5 gene.AIMS: In recent years more than 60
patients with mutations in the CDKL5 gene have been described in the literature, 
but the cardiorespiratory phenotype has not been reported. Our aim is to describe
clinical and autonomic features of these girls.
METHODS: 10 girls with CDKL5 mutations and a diagnosis of Hanefeld variant have
been evaluated on axiological and clinical aspects. In all subjects an evaluation
of the autonomic system was performed using the Neuroscope.
RESULTS: Common features were gaze avoidance, repetitive head movements and hand 
stereotypies. The autonomic evaluation disclosed eight cases with the Forceful
breather cardiorespiratory phenotype and two cases with the Apneustic breather
phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical picture remains within the RTT spectrum but some
symptoms are more pronounced in addition to the very early onset of seizures. The
cardiorespiratory phenotype was dominated by Forceful breathers, while Feeble
breathers were not found, differently from the general Rett population,
suggesting a specific behavioral and cardiorespiratory phenotype of the RTT the
Hanefeld variant.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMID: 22430159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Mar 12;48(2):177-91. doi: 10.1530/JME-11-0140. Print 2012 
Apr.

Estrogen-related receptor a regulates osteoblast differentiation via
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Auld KL(1), Berasi SP, Liu Y, Cain M, Zhang Y, Huard C, Fukayama S, Zhang J, Choe
S, Zhong W, Bhat BM, Bhat RA, Brown EL, Martinez RV.

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer Global Biotherapeutics Technologies, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Based on its homology to the estrogen receptor and its roles in osteoblast and
chondrocyte differentiation, the orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related
receptor a (ERRa (ESRRA)) is an intriguing therapeutic target for osteoporosis
and other bone diseases. The objective of this study was to better characterize
the molecular mechanisms by which ERRa modulates osteoblastogenesis. Experiments 
from multiple systems demonstrated that ERRa modulates Wnt signaling, a crucial
pathway for proper regulation of bone development. This was validated using a
Wnt-luciferase reporter, where ERRa showed co-activator-dependent (peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator 1a, PGC-1a) stimulatory
effects. Interestingly, knockdown of ERRa expression also enhanced WNT signaling.
In combination, these data indicated that ERRa could serve to either activate or 
repress Wnt signaling depending on the presence or absence of its co-activator
PGC-1a. The observed Wnt pathway modulation was cell intrinsic and did not alter 
ß-catenin nuclear translocation but was dependent on DNA binding of ERRa. We also
found that expression of active ERRa correlated with Wnt pathway effects on
osteoblastic differentiation in two cell types, consistent with a role for ERRa
in modulating the Wnt pathway. In conclusion, this work identifies ERRa, in
conjunction with co-activators such as PGC-1a, as a new regulator of the
Wnt-signaling pathway during osteoblast differentiation, through a cell-intrinsic
mechanism not affecting ß-catenin nuclear translocation.

PMID: 22333182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026952. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Immune response and mitochondrial metabolism are commonly deregulated in DMD and 
aging skeletal muscle.

Baron D(1), Magot A, Ramstein G, Steenman M, Fayet G, Chevalier C, Jourdon P,
Houlgatte R, Savagner F, Pereon Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR915, Nantes, France. daniel.baron@inserm.fr

Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is a complex process involving multiple
pathways downstream of the primary genetic insult leading to fatal muscle
degeneration. Aging muscle is a multifactorial neuromuscular process
characterized by impaired muscle regeneration leading to progressive atrophy. We 
hypothesized that these chronic atrophying situations may share specific myogenic
adaptative responses at transcriptional level according to tissue remodeling.
Muscle biopsies from four young DMD and four AGED subjects were referred to a
group of seven muscle biopsies from young subjects without any neuromuscular
disorder and explored through a dedicated expression microarray. We identified
528 differentially expressed genes (out of 2,745 analyzed), of which 328 could be
validated by an exhaustive meta-analysis of public microarray datasets referring 
to DMD and Aging in skeletal muscle. Among the 328 validated co-expressed genes, 
50% had the same expression profile in both groups and corresponded to
immune/fibrosis responses and mitochondrial metabolism. Generalizing these
observed meta-signatures with large compendia of public datasets reinforced our
results as they could be also identified in other pathological processes and in
diverse physiological conditions. Focusing on the common gene signatures in these
two atrophying conditions, we observed enrichment in motifs for candidate
transcription factors that may coordinate either the immune/fibrosis responses
(ETS1, IRF1, NF1) or the mitochondrial metabolism (ESRRA). Deregulation in their 
expression could be responsible, at least in part, for the same transcriptome
changes initiating the chronic muscle atrophy. This study suggests that distinct 
pathophysiological processes may share common gene responses and pathways related
to specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3212519
PMID: 22096509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS Biol. 2011 Sep;9(9):e1001156. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001156. Epub 2011
Sep 20.

ESRRA-C11orf20 is a recurrent gene fusion in serous ovarian carcinoma.

Salzman J(1), Marinelli RJ, Wang PL, Green AE, Nielsen JS, Nelson BH, Drescher
CW, Brown PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, USA.

Every year, ovarian cancer kills approximately 14,000 women in the United States 
and more than 140,000 women worldwide. Most of these deaths are caused by tumors 
of the serous histological type, which is rarely diagnosed before it has
disseminated. By deep paired-end sequencing of mRNA from serous ovarian cancers, 
followed by deep sequencing of the corresponding genomic region, we identified a 
recurrent fusion transcript. The fusion transcript joins the 5' exons of ESRRA,
encoding a ligand-independent member of the nuclear-hormone receptor superfamily,
to the 3' exons of C11orf20, a conserved but uncharacterized gene located
immediately upstream of ESRRA in the reference genome. To estimate the prevalence
of the fusion, we tested 67 cases of serous ovarian cancer by RT-PCR and
sequencing and confirmed its presence in 10 of these. Targeted resequencing of
the corresponding genomic region from two fusion-positive tumor samples
identified a nearly clonal chromosomal rearrangement positioning ESRRA upstream
of C11orf20 in one tumor, and evidence of local copy number variation in the
ESRRA locus in the second tumor. We hypothesize that the recurrent novel fusion
transcript may play a role in pathogenesis of a substantial fraction of serous
ovarian cancers and could provide a molecular marker for detection of the cancer.
Gene fusions involving adjacent or nearby genes can readily escape detection but 
may play important roles in the development and progression of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3176749
PMID: 21949640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Environ Health Perspect. 2011 Dec;119(12):1788-93. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1103809. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

Bisphenol A exposure is associated with in vivo estrogenic gene expression in
adults.

Melzer D(1), Harries L, Cipelli R, Henley W, Money C, McCormack P, Young A,
Guralnik J, Ferrucci L, Bandinelli S, Corsi AM, Galloway T.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Public Health, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Environ Health Perspect. 2011 Dec;119(12):A524.

BACKGROUND: Bisphenol A (BPA) is a synthetic estrogen commonly used in
polycarbonate plastic and resin-lined food and beverage containers. Exposure of
animal and cell models to doses of BPA below the recommended tolerable daily
intake (TDI) of 50 µg/kg/day have been shown to alter specific
estrogen-responsive gene expression, but this has not previously been shown in
humans.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated associations between BPA exposure and in vivo
estrogenic gene expression in humans.
METHODS: We studied 96 adult men from the InCHIANTI population study and examined
in vivo expression of six estrogen receptor, estrogen-related receptor, and
androgen receptor genes in peripheral blood leukocytes.
RESULTS: The geometric mean urinary BPA concentration was 3.65 ng/mL [95%
confidence interval (CI): 3.13, 4.28], giving an estimated mean excretion of 5.84
µg/day (95% CI: 5.00, 6.85), significantly below the current TDI. In age-adjusted
models, there were positive associations between higher BPA concentrations and
higher ESR2 [estrogen receptor 2 (ER beta)] expression (unstandardized linear
regression coefficient = 0.1804; 95% CI: 0.0388, 0.3221; p = 0.013) and ESRRA
(estrogen related receptor alpha) expression (coefficient = 0.1718; 95% CI:
0.0213, 0.3223; p = 0.026): These associations were little changed after
adjusting for potential confounders, including obesity, serum lipid
concentrations, and white cell subtype percentages. Upper-tertile BPA excretors
(urinary BPA > 4.6 ng/mL) had 65% higher mean ESR2 expression than did
lower-tertile BPA excretors (0-2.4 ng/mL).
CONCLUSIONS: Because activation of nuclear-receptor-mediated pathways by BPA is
consistently found in laboratory studies, such activation in humans provides
evidence that BPA is likely to function as a xenoestrogen in this sample of
adults.

PMCID: PMC3261992
PMID: 21831745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2011 Jun;20(6):1131-45. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-1224. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Inherited variants in mitochondrial biogenesis genes may influence epithelial
ovarian cancer risk.

Permuth-Wey J(1), Chen YA, Tsai YY, Chen Z, Qu X, Lancaster JM, Stockwell H,
Dagne G, Iversen E, Risch H, Barnholtz-Sloan J, Cunningham JM, Vierkant RA,
Fridley BL, Sutphen R, McLaughlin J, Narod SA, Goode EL, Schildkraut JM,
Fenstermacher D, Phelan CM, Sellers TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida
33612-9416, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondria contribute to oxidative stress, a phenomenon implicated 
in ovarian carcinogenesis. We hypothesized that inherited variants in
mitochondrial-related genes influence epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
susceptibility.
METHODS: Through a multicenter study of 1,815 Caucasian EOC cases and 1,900
controls, we investigated associations between EOC risk and 128 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from 22 genes/regions within the mitochondrial genome
(mtDNA) and 2,839 nuclear-encoded SNPs localized to 138 genes involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis (BIO, n = 35), steroid hormone metabolism (HOR, n = 13),
and oxidative phosphorylation (OXP, n = 90) pathways. Unconditional logistic
regression was used to estimate OR and 95% CI between genotype and case status.
Overall significance of each gene and pathway was evaluated by using Fisher's
method to combine SNP-level evidence. At the SNP level, we investigated whether
lifetime ovulation, hormone replacement therapy (HRT), and cigarette smoking were
confounders or modifiers of associations.
RESULTS: Interindividual variation involving BIO was most strongly associated
with EOC risk (empirical P = 0.050), especially for NRF1, MTERF, PPARGC1A, ESRRA,
and CAMK2D. Several SNP-level associations strengthened after adjustment for
nongenetic factors, particularly for MTERF. Statistical interactions with
cigarette smoking and HRT use were observed with MTERF and CAMK2D SNPs,
respectively. Overall variation within mtDNA, HOR, and OXP was not statistically 
significant (empirical P > 0.10).
CONCLUSION: We provide novel evidence to suggest that variants in mitochondrial
biogenesis genes may influence EOC susceptibility.
IMPACT: A deeper understanding of the complex mechanisms implicated in
mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative stress may aid in developing strategies to
reduce morbidity and mortality from EOC.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3111851
PMID: 21447778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nutr Cancer. 2009;61(4):554-63. doi: 10.1080/01635580802666281.

Kaempferol inhibits angiogenesis and VEGF expression through both HIF dependent
and independent pathways in human ovarian cancer cells.

Luo H(1), Rankin GO, Liu L, Daddysman MK, Jiang BH, Chen YC.

Author information: 
(1)Alderson-Broaddus College, Philippi, West Virginia, USA.

Ovarian cancer is 1 of the most significant malignancies in the Western world,
and the antiangiogenesis strategy has been postulated for prevention and
treatment of ovarian cancers. Kaempferol is a natural flavonoid present in many
fruits and vegetables. The antiangiogenesis potential of kaempferol and its
underlying mechanisms were investigated in two ovarian cancer cell lines, OVCAR-3
and A2780/CP70. Kaempferol mildly inhibits cell viability but significantly
reduces VEGF gene expression at mRNA and protein levels in both ovarian cancer
cell lines. In chorioallantoic membranes of chicken embryos, kaempferol
significantly inhibits OVCAR-3-induced angiogenesis and tumor growth. HIF-1alpha,
a regulator of VEGF, is downregulated by kaempferol treatment in both ovarian
cancer cell lines. Kaempferol also represses AKT phosphorylation dose dependently
at 5 to 20 muM concentrations. ESRRA is a HIF-independent VEGF regulator, and it 
is also downregulated by kaempferol in a dose-dependent manner. Overall, this
study demonstrated that kaempferol is low in cytotoxicity but inhibits
angiogenesis and VEGF expression in human ovarian cancer cells through both
HIF-dependent (Akt/HIF) and HIF-independent (ESRRA) pathways and deserves further
studies for possible application in angio prevention and treatment of ovarian
cancers.

PMCID: PMC2770884
PMID: 19838928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jul 7;101(1):132-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605111. Epub 2009 Jun 
16.

Death-associated protein 3 is overexpressed in human thyroid oncocytic tumours.

Jacques C(1), Fontaine JF, Franc B, Mirebeau-Prunier D, Triau S, Savagner F,
Malthiery Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U694, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers, Laboratoire de
Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Angers, France.
caroline.jacques@univ-angers.fr

BACKGROUND: The human death-associated protein 3 (hDAP3) is a GTP-binding
constituent of the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome with a
pro-apoptotic function.
METHODS: A search through publicly available microarray data sets showed 337
genes potentially coregulated with the DAP3 gene. The promoter sequences of these
337 genes and 70 out of 85 mitochondrial ribosome genes were analysed in silico
with the DAP3 gene promoter sequence. The mitochondrial role of DAP3 was also
investigated in the thyroid tumours presenting various mitochondrial contents.
RESULTS: The study revealed nine transcription factors presenting enriched motifs
for these gene promoters, five of which are implicated in cellular growth (ELK1, 
ELK4, RUNX1, HOX11-CTF1, TAL1-ternary complex factor 3) and four in mitochondrial
biogenesis (nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), GABPA, PPARG-RXRA and
estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRA)). An independent microarray data set
showed the overexpression of ELK1, RUNX1 and ESRRA in the thyroid oncocytic
tumours. Exploring the thyroid tumours, we found that DAP3 mRNA and protein
expression is upregulated in tumours presenting a mitochondrial biogenesis
compared with the normal tissue. ELK1 and ESRRA were also showed upregulated with
DAP3.
CONCLUSION: ELK1 and ESRRA may be considered as potential regulators of the DAP3 
gene expression. DAP3 may participate in mitochondrial maintenance and play a
role in the balance between mitochondrial homoeostasis and tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2713694
PMID: 19536094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2009 May 20;4(5):e5624. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005624.

Characterization of a novel small molecule subtype specific estrogen-related
receptor alpha antagonist in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Chisamore MJ(1), Cunningham ME, Flores O, Wilkinson HA, Chen JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Merck Research Laboratories, West
Point, Pennsylvania, USA. michael_chisamore@merck.com

BACKGROUND: The orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor alpha
(ERRalpha) is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily. It was identified
through a search for genes encoding proteins related to estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha). An endogenous ligand has not been found. Novel ERRalpha antagonists
that are highly specific for binding to the ligand binding domain (LBD) of
ERRalpha have been recently reported. Research suggests that ERRalpha may be a
novel drug target to treat breast cancer and/or metabolic disorders and this has 
led to an effort to characterize the mechanisms of action of
N-[(2Z)-3-(4,5-dihydro-1,3-thiazol-2-yl)-1,3-thiazolidin-2-yl idene]-5H
dibenzo[a,d][7]annulen-5-amine, a novel ERRalpha specific antagonist.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We demonstrate this ERRalpha ligand inhibits
ERRalpha transcriptional activity in MCF-7 cells by luciferase assay but does not
affect mRNA levels measured by real-time RT-PCR. Also, ERalpha (ESR1) mRNA levels
were not affected upon treatment with the ERRalpha antagonist, but other ERRalpha
(ESRRA) target genes such as pS2 (TFF1), osteopontin (SPP1), and aromatase
(CYP19A1) mRNA levels decreased. In vitro, the ERRalpha antagonist prevents the
constitutive interaction between ERRalpha and nuclear receptor coactivators.
Furthermore, we use Western blots to demonstrate ERRalpha protein degradation via
the ubiquitin proteasome pathway is increased by the ERRalpha-subtype specific
antagonist. We demonstrate by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) that the
interaction between ACADM, ESRRA, and TFF1 endogenous gene promoters and ERRalpha
protein is decreased when cells are treated with the ligand. Knocking-down
ERRalpha (shRNA) led to similar genomic effects seen when MCF-7 cells were
treated with our ERRalpha antagonist.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We report the mechanism of action of a novel ERRalpha
specific antagonist that inhibits transcriptional activity of ERRalpha, disrupts 
the constitutive interaction between ERRalpha and nuclear coactivators, and
induces proteasome-dependent ERRalpha protein degradation. Additionally, we
confirmed that knocking-down ERRalpha lead to similar genomic effects
demonstrated in vitro when treated with the ERRalpha specific antagonist.

PMCID: PMC2680043
PMID: 19462000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell Mol Immunol. 2008 Oct;5(5):357-64. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2008.44.

17beta-estradiol suppresses cytotoxicity and proliferative capacity of murine
splenic NK1.1+ cells.

Hao S(1), Li P, Zhao J, Hu Y, Hou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Reproductive Biology Lab of Medical School & State Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093,
China.

In order to clarify the effects of 17beta-estradiol (E2) on natural killer (NK)
cells and the possibly regulatory mechanisms, we obtained highly purified and
viable NK cells from C57BL/6J mouse spleen by a magnetic cell sorter (MACS).
These cells were treated with E2 and then their cytotoxicity and proliferative
capacity were examined. To further investigate the mechanisms on the effect of E2
on NK cells, expressions of activation-associated markers (CD69, CD122) and
inhibitory receptors (CD94, Ly49), and intracellular cytokine production were
analyzed. At last, we performed the cDNA microarray to explore the possible
involved genes. We found that E2 could suppress NK cell cytotoxicity and
proliferative capacity in vitro. E2 reduced NK cell cytotoxicity and
proliferative capacity, which may be through influencing the phenotypes and
cytokine expression of NK cells, mainly involving CD94 and IFN-gamma.
Furthermore, regulation of Stat4, Fyn, Sh2d1a, Eat2, Cd244, Irf1, Runx1, Irf7,
Irf5, Esrra and Nr5a1 genes may be related to the cytotoxicity, proliferation and
cytokine production of E2-mediated purified NK cells.

PMCID: PMC4073696
PMID: 18954559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Osteoporos Int. 2008 Dec;19(12):1769-75. doi: 10.1007/s00198-008-0617-z. Epub
2008 Apr 17.

Replication of associations between LRP5 and ESRRA variants and bone density in
premenopausal women.

Giroux S(1), Elfassihi L, Cole DE, Rousseau F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche de l'Hôpital, St-François d'Assise, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec, Quebec, Canada. Sylvie.giroux@crsfa.ulaval.ca

Replication is a critical step to validate positive genetic associations. In this
study, we tested two previously reported positive associations. The low density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) Val667Met and lumbar spine bone
density are replicated. This result is in line with results from large
consortiums such as Genomos. However, the estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRA)
repeat in the promoter is not replicated although the polymorphism studied was
functional and could have been a causative variant.INTRODUCTION: We sought to
validate associations previously reported between LRP5 V667M polymorphism and
lumbar spine (LS, p = 0.013) and femoral neck (FN, p = 0.0002) bone mineral
density (BMD), and between ESRRA 23 base pair repeat polymorphism and LS BMD (p =
0.0036) in a sample of premenopausal Caucasian women using an independent sample.
METHODS: For the replication sample, we recruited 673 premenopausal women from
the Toronto metropolitan area. All women were Caucasian and had BMD measured.
LRP5 V667M was genotyped by allele-specific PCR and ESRRA repeats by sizing of
PCR products on agarose gels.
RESULTS: We reproduced the same association as we reported previously between
LRP5 V667M and LS BMD (p = 0.015) but not with FN BMD (p = 0.254). The combined
data from the two populations indicate an effect size of 0.28SD for LS BMD (p =
0.00048) and an effect size of 0.26 SD for FN BMD (p = 0.00037). In contrast, the
association we reported earlier between ESRRA repeats and LS BMD was not
replicated in the sample from Toronto (p = 0.645).
CONCLUSIONS: The association between LRP5 V667M and LS BMD is confirmed but not
that between ESRRA repeats and LS BMD. This result indicates that it is
imperative to validate any positive association in an independent sample.

PMID: 18418639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2007 May-Jun;17(3):687-96.

Gene expression profiles in squamous cell cervical carcinoma using array-based
comparative genomic hybridization analysis.

Choi YW(1), Bae SM, Kim YW, Lee HN, Kim YW, Park TC, Ro DY, Shin JC, Shin SJ, Seo
JS, Ahn WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Our aim was to identify novel genomic regions of interest and provide highly
dynamic range information on correlation between squamous cell cervical carcinoma
and its related gene expression patterns by a genome-wide array-based comparative
genomic hybridization (array-CGH). We analyzed 15 cases of cervical cancer from
KangNam St Mary's Hospital of the Catholic University of Korea. Microdissection
assay was performed to obtain DNA samples from paraffin-embedded cervical tissues
of cancer as well as of the adjacent normal tissues. The bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) array used in this study consisted of 1440 human BACs and the
space among the clones was 2.08 Mb. All the 15 cases of cervical cancer showed
the differential changes of the cervical cancer-associated genetic alterations.
The analysis limit of average gains and losses was 53%. A significant positive
correlation was found in 8q24.3, 1p36.32, 3q27.1, 7p21.1, 11q13.1, and 3p14.2
changes through the cervical carcinogenesis. The regions of high level of gain
were 1p36.33-1p36.32, 8q24.3, 16p13.3, 1p36.33, 3q27.1, and 7p21.1. And the
regions of homozygous loss were 2q12.1, 22q11.21, 3p14.2, 6q24.3, 7p15.2, and
11q25. In the high level of gain regions, GSDMDC1, RECQL4, TP73, ABCF3, ALG3,
HDAC9, ESRRA, and RPS6KA4 were significantly correlated with cervical cancer. The
genes encoded by frequently lost clones were PTPRG, GRM7, ZDHHC3, EXOSC7, LRP1B, 
and NR3C2. Therefore, array-CGH analyses showed that specific genomic alterations
were maintained in cervical cancer that were critical to the malignant phenotype 
and may give a chance to find out possible target genes present in the gained or 
lost clones.

PMID: 17504382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Alzheimers Dis. 2007 Mar;11(1):45-51.

Rosiglitazone induces mitochondrial biogenesis in mouse brain.

Strum JC(1), Shehee R, Virley D, Richardson J, Mattie M, Selley P, Ghosh S, Nock 
C, Saunders A, Roses A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Quantitative Expression, Division of Genetics Research,
GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27278, USA. Jay.C.Strum@gsk.com

Rosiglitazone was found to simulate mitochondrial biogenesis in mouse brain in an
apolipoprotein (Apo) E isozyme-independent manner. Rosiglitazone induced both
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and estrogen-stimulated related receptor alpha (ESRRA) 
mRNA, a key regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis. Transcriptomics and proteomics
analysis suggested the mitochondria produced in the presence of human ApoE3 and
E4 were not as metabolically efficient as those in the wild type or ApoE knockout
mice. Thus, we propose that PPARgamma agonism induces neuronal mitochondrial
biogenesis and improves glucose utilization leading to improved cellular function
and provides mechanistic support for the improvement in cognition observed in
treatment of Alzheimer's patients with rosiglitazone.

PMID: 17361034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Obes (Lond). 2007 Feb;31(2):365-70. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Genetic analysis of the estrogen-related receptor alpha and studies of
association with obesity and type 2 diabetes.

Larsen LH(1), Rose CS, Sparsø T, Overgaard J, Torekov SS, Grarup N, Jensen DP,
Albrechtsen A, Andersen G, Ek J, Glümer C, Borch-Johnsen K, Jørgensen T, Hansen
T, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRalpha or NR3B1) is a
transcription factor from the nuclear receptor super-family, group III. The gene 
encoding ERRalpha (ESRRA) is located on chromosome 11q13, a region showing
genetic linkage to body mass index and fat percentage. Through interaction with
the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha
(PGC-1alpha), ERRalpha regulates key enzymes involved in the beta-oxidation of
fatty acids.
RESULTS: By screening 48 overweight or obese subjects for variants in the exons, 
exon-intron boundaries and 1000 base pairs (bp) of the promoter region of ESRRA
using bi-directional nucleotide sequencing, we identified seven variants. Four
rare variants had minor allele frequencies (MAF) below 1%: Pro369Pro, Gly406Asp, 
3'UTR+418G>A, 3'UTR+505C>A. Two single-nucleotide polymorphisms, Pro116Pro and
IVS6+65C>T (MAF 15%), were in complete linkage disequilibrium (LD) (r (2)=1). We 
also confirmed the presence of a reported 23 bp microsatellite repeat (ESRRA23). 
The Pro116Pro and ESRRA23 variants were not associated with obesity, type 2
diabetes or related phenotypes in a large population-based study of 6365 Danish
whites. The two variants were examined for interactions with variants in the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha and -beta;
however, no evidence of epistatic effects between the variants was demonstrated.
CONCLUSION: The ESRRA23 and Pro116Pro variants of the gene encoding ERRalpha are 
not associated with obesity, type 2 diabetes or related quantitative traits in
the examined Danish whites.

PMID: 16755280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2005 Sep 1;143(2):184-92.

cDNA microarray reveals signaling pathways involved in hormones expression of
human pituitary.

Ma YY(1), Qi XF, Song SJ, Zhao ZY, Zhu ZD, Qi J, Zhang X, Xiao HS, Teng Y, Han
ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese National Human Genome Center at Shanghai, 351 Guo Shou-Jing Road,
Shanghai 201203, China.

Pituitary, a master gland of neuroendocrine system, secretes hormones that
orchestrate many physiological processes, under the regulation of multiple
signaling pathways. To investigate the genes involved in hormones expression of
human pituitary, homemade cDNA microarray containing 14,800 human genes/ESTs were
used to profile the gene expression in both fetal and adult pituitaries. Seven
hundred and twelve known genes changed over 2-fold between the both tissues. Of
which, 23 genes were changed with hormones expression in aging were confirmed by 
RT-PCR, not only the known regulators such as Pit1, GATA4, ESRRA, GABA-A, and
EMK, but also LOC55884, DUSP3, PNN, and RCL, which had not been reported to be
involved in the hormones expression. Correspondingly, the mRNAs of GH, PRL, POMC,
TSH-beta, FSH-beta, and LH-beta, was increased as much as 6- to 20-fold in adult 
pituitary than those in fetal pituitary, by real-time quantitative RT-PCR assay. 
In addition, the mRNAs of signaling pathways, such as cAMP-PKA-CREB, PI3K-Akt,
and PKA-ERK were further investigated. Of them, it was only cAMP-PKA-CREB
pathway, but not PI3K-Akt and PKA-ERK have the same expressing pattern as
hormones. It suggested that cDNA microarray is highly advantages to profile the
differential expressed genes that were involved in hormones expression of human
pituitary, but it might ignore some responding proteins regulated
posttranscriptionally.

PMID: 15894316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Bone Miner Res. 2005 Jun;20(6):938-44. Epub 2005 Feb 7.

A frequent regulatory variant of the estrogen-related receptor alpha gene
associated with BMD in French-Canadian premenopausal women.

Laflamme N(1), Giroux S, Loredo-Osti JC, Elfassihi L, Dodin S, Blanchet C, Morgan
K, Giguère V, Rousseau F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de Santé Publique du Quebec, Ste-Foy, Quebec, Canada.
nathalie.laflamme@inspq.qc.ca

Genes are important BMD determinants. We studied the association of an ESRRA gene
functional variant with BMD in 1335 premenopausal women. The ESRRA genotype was
an independent predictor of L2-L4 BMD, with an effect similar to smoking and
equivalent to a 10-kg difference in weight.INTRODUCTION: Several genetic
polymorphisms have been associated with osteoporosis or osteoporosis fractures,
but no functional effect has been shown for most of these gene variants. Because 
functional studies have implicated estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRA) in
bone metabolism, we evaluated whether a recently described regulatory variant of 
the ESRRA gene is associated with lumbar and hip BMD as measured by DXA and with 
heel bone parameters as measured by quantitative ultrasound (QUS).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Heel bone parameters were measured by right calcaneal QUS 
in 1335 healthy French-Canadian premenopausal women, and one-half of these women 
also had their BMD evaluated at two sites: femoral neck and lumbar spine (L2-L4) 
by DXA. All bone measures were tested separately for association with the ESRRA
genotype by analysis of covariance. The significance of the ESRRA contribution to
the model was also assessed by two different permutation tests.
RESULTS: A statistically significant association between ESRRA genotype and
lumbar spine BMD was observed: women carrying the long ESRRA genotype had a 3.9% 
(0.045 g/cm2) higher lumbar spine BMD than those carrying the short ESRRA
genotype (p = 0.004), independently of other risk factors measured. This effect
of ESRRA genotype is similar to the effect of smoking and equivalent to a 10-kg
difference in weight. This association was confirmed by permutation tests (p =
0.004). The same trend was observed for femoral neck BMD (2.6%, p = 0.07).
However, no association was observed between ESRRA and QUS heel bone measures.
CONCLUSION: These results support the genetic influence of this ESRRA regulatory 
variant on BMD.

PMID: 15883633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 30;279(18):18504-10. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

A polymorphic autoregulatory hormone response element in the human
estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRalpha) promoter dictates peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha control of ERRalpha
expression.

Laganière J(1), Tremblay GB, Dufour CR, Giroux S, Rousseau F, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Montréal, Québec
H3A 1A1, Canada.

The orphan nuclear estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRalpha) and transcriptional
cofactor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha
(PGC-1alpha) are involved in the regulation of energy metabolism. Recently,
extensive cross-talk between PGC-1alpha and ERRalpha has been demonstrated. The
presence of PGC-1alpha is associated with an elevated expression of ERRalpha, and
the two proteins can influence the transcriptional activities of one another.
Using a candidate gene approach to detect regulatory variants within genes
encoding nuclear receptors, we have identified a 23-bp sequence (ESRRA23)
containing two nuclear receptor recognition half-site motifs that is present in
1-4 copies within the promoter of the human ESRRA gene encoding ERRalpha. The
ESRRA23 sequence contains a functional ERR response element that is specifically 
bound by ERRalpha, and chromatin immunoprecipitation shows that endogenous
ERRalpha occupies its own promoter in vivo. Strikingly, introduction of
PGC-1alpha in HeLa cells by transient transfection induces the activity of the
ESRRA promoter in a manner that is dependent on the presence of the ESRRA23
element and on its dosage. Coexpression of ERRalpha and PGC-1alpha results in a
synergistic activation of the ESRRA promoter. In experiments using ERRalpha null 
fibroblasts, the ability of PGC-1alpha to stimulate the ESRRA promoter is
considerably reduced but can be restored by addition of ERRalpha. Taken together,
these results demonstrate that an interdependent ERRalpha/PGC-1alpha-based
transcriptional pathway targets the ESRRA23 element to dictate the level of
ERRalpha expression. This study further suggests that this regulatory
polymorphism may provide differential responses to ERRalpha/PGC-1alpha-mediated
metabolic cues in the human population.

PMID: 14978033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Genomics. 1997 Oct 15;45(2):320-6.

Chromosomal mapping of the human and murine orphan receptors ERRalpha (ESRRA) and
ERRbeta (ESRRB) and identification of a novel human ERRalpha-related pseudogene.

Sladek R(1), Beatty B, Squire J, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Victoria Hospital, Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, 687
Pine Avenue West, Montr-eal, Quebec, H3A 1A1, Canada.

The estrogen-related receptors ERRalpha and ERRbeta (formerly ERR1 and ERR2) form
a subgroup of the steroid/thyroid/retinoid receptor family. ERRalpha and ERRbeta 
are homologous to the estrogen receptor and bind similar DNA targets; however,
they are unable to activate gene transcription in response to estrogens. We have 
used interspecific backcross analysis to map the murine Estrra locus to
chromosome 19 and Estrrb to mouse chromosome 12. Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization, we have mapped the human ESRRA gene to chromosome 11q12-q13 and
the human ESRRB gene to chromosome 14q24.3. In addition, we report the isolation 
of a processed human ERRalpha pseudogene mapping to chromosome 13q12.1. To our
knowledge, this represents the first report of a pseudogene associated with a
member of the nuclear receptor superfamily.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9344655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


