
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 3;11(3):e0150936. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150936.
eCollection 2016.

CHIR99021 enhances Klf4 Expression through ß-Catenin Signaling and miR-7a
Regulation in J1 Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells.

Ai Z(1,)(2), Shao J(1,)(2), Wu Y(3,)(2), Yu M(3,)(2), Du J(1,)(2), Shi X(1,)(2), 
Shi X(1,)(2), Zhang Y(3,)(2), Guo Z(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China. 
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A& 
F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China. (3)College of Veterinary Medicine,
Northwest A& F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.

Understanding the mechanisms that regulate pluripotency of embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) is important to ensure their safe clinical use. CHIR99021 (CHIR)-induced
activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling promotes self-renewal in mouse ESCs
(mESCs). ß-catenin functions individually or cooperates with transcription
factors to activate stemness factors such as c-Myc, Esrrb, Pou5f1, and Nanog.
However the relationship between the core pluripotent factor, Kruppel-like factor
4 (also known as GKLF or EZF) and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, remains ambiguous in
J1 mESCs. DNA microarray analysis revealed that CHIR-treatment promoted
pluripotency-maintaining transcription factors and repressed germ layer
specification markers. CHIR also promoted genes related to the development of
extracellular regions and the plasma membrane to maintain pluripotency of J1
mESCs. Among the CHIR-regulated genes, Klf4 has not been reported previously. We 
identified a novel cis element in the Klf4 gene that was activated by ß-catenin
in J1 mESCs. We determined that ß-catenin interacted with this cis element,
identifying Klf4 as a ß-catenin target gene in this context. Moreover, several
microRNAs that targeted the 3'-UTR of Klf4 mRNA were identified, with miR-7a
being down-regulated by CHIR in a ß-catenin-independent manner in J1 mESCs. These
data collectively suggest that CHIR enhances Klf4 expression by repressing miR-7a
expression or canonical Wnt pathway activation.

PMCID: PMC4777400
PMID: 26938105  [PubMed - in process]


2. EBioMedicine. 2015 Sep 24;2(11):1619-1626. eCollection 2015.

Distinct Transcriptional and Anti-Mycobacterial Profiles of Peripheral Blood
Monocytes Dependent on the Ratio of Monocytes: Lymphocytes.

Naranbhai V(1), Fletcher HA(2), Tanner R(3), O'Shea MK(3), McShane H(3), Fairfax 
BP(1), Knight JC(1), Hill AV(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)The Jenner Institute, Nuffield
Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom. (3)The Jenner
Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom. (4)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; The Jenner Institute,
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The ratio of monocytes and lymphocytes (ML ratio) in peripheral blood is
associated with tuberculosis and malaria disease risk and cancer and
cardiovascular disease outcomes. We studied anti-mycobacterial function and the
transcriptome of monocytes in relation to the ML ratio. Mycobacterial growth
inhibition assays of whole or sorted blood were performed and mycobacteria were
enumerated by liquid culture. Transcriptomes of unstimulated CD14 + monocytes
isolated by magnetic bead sorting were characterised by microarray. Transcript
expression was tested for association with ML ratio calculated from leucocyte
differential counts by linear regression. The ML ratio was associated with
mycobacterial growth in vitro (ß = 2.23, SE 0.91, p = 0.02). Using sorted
monocytes and lymphocytes, in vivo ML ratio (% variance explained R(2) = 11%,
p = 0.02) dominated over in vitro ratios (R(2) = 5%, p = 0.10) in explaining
mycobacterial growth. Expression of 906 genes was associated with the ML ratio
and 53 with monocyte count alone. ML-ratio associated genes were enriched for
type-I and -II interferon signalling (p = 1.2 × 10(- 8)), and for genes under
transcriptional control of IRF1, IRF2, RUNX1, RELA and ESRRB. The
ML-ratio-associated gene set was enriched in TB disease (3.11-fold, 95% CI:
2.28-4.19, p = 5.7 × 10(- 12)) and other inflammatory diseases including atopy,
HIV, IBD and SLE. The ML ratio is associated with distinct transcriptional and
anti-mycobacterial profiles of monocytes that may explain the disease
associations of the ML ratio.

PMCID: PMC4740301
PMID: 26870787  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Acta Naturae. 2015 Oct-Dec;7(4):56-69.

Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells of Microtus levis x Microtus arvalis Vole Hybrids:
Conditions Necessary for Their Generation and Self-Renewal.

Grigor'eva EV(1), Shevchenko AI(1), Medvedev SP(2), Mazurok NA(1), Zhelezova
AI(3), Zakian SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Federal Research Center, Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Ave., 10, 630090, Novosibirsk,
Russia ; Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Ave., 8, 630090, Novosibirsk,
Russia ; State Research Institute of Circulation Pathology, Ministry of
Healthcare of the, Rechkunovskaya Str., 15, 630055, Novosibirsk, Russia.
(2)Federal Research Center, Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Ave., 10, 630090, Novosibirsk,
Russia ; Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Ave., 8, 630090, Novosibirsk,
Russia ; State Research Institute of Circulation Pathology, Ministry of
Healthcare of the, Rechkunovskaya Str., 15, 630055, Novosibirsk, Russia ;
Novosibirsk State University, Pirogova Str., 2, 630090, Novosibirsk, Russia.
(3)Federal Research Center, Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Lavrentiev Ave., 10, 630090, Novosibirsk,
Russia.

Every year, the list of mammalian species for which cultures of pluripotent stem 
cells (PSCs) are generated increases. PSCs are a unique tool for extending the
limits of experimental studies and modeling different biological processes. In
this work, induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from the hybrids of common
voles Microtus levis and Microtus arvalis, which are used as model objects to
study genome organization on the molecular-genetic level and the mechanisms of
X-chromosome inactivation, have been generated. Vole iPSCs were isolated and
cultured in a medium containing cytokine LIF, basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF), ascorbic acid, and fetal bovine serum. Undifferentiated state of vole
iPSCs is maintained by activation of their endogenous pluripotency genes - Nanog,
Oct4, Sox2, Sall4, and Esrrb. The cells were able to maintain undifferentiated
state for at least 28 passages without change in their morphology and give rise
to three germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm) upon differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4717250
PMID: 26798492  [PubMed]


4. Genesis. 2016 Jan;54(1):53-61. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22912. Epub 2015 Dec 28.

Esrrb-Cre excises loxP-flanked alleles in early four-cell embryos.

Lee S(1), Pallerla SR(1), Kim S(1), Shaffer B(1), Simerly CR(1), Chaillet JR(1), 
Barak Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Magee-Womens
Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh, 204 Craft Ave, Pittsburgh, PA,
15213.

Among transgenic mice with ubiquitous Cre recombinase activity, all strains to
date excise loxP-flanked (floxed) alleles either at or before the zygote stage or
at nondescript stages of development. This manuscript describes a new mouse
strain, in which Cre recombinase, integrated into the Esrrb locus, efficiently
excises floxed alleles in pre-implantation embryos at the onset of the four-cell 
stage. By enabling inactivation of genes only after the embryo has undergone two 
cleavages, this strain should facilitate in vivo studies of genes with essential 
gametic or zygotic functions. In addition, this study describes a new, highly
pluripotent hybrid C57BL/6J x 129S1/SvImJ mouse embryonic stem cell line, HYB12, 
in which this knockin and additional targeted alleles have been generated.
genesis 54:53-61, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4724263 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26663459  [PubMed - in process]


5. BMC Mol Biol. 2015 Dec 1;16(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s12867-015-0049-1.

Messenger RNA profile analysis deciphers new Esrrb responsive genes in prostate
cancer cells.

Lu Y(1,)(2,)(3), Li J(4,)(5,)(6), Cheng J(7,)(8,)(9), Lubahn DB(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. 
y_l54@txstate.edu. (2)MU Center for Botanical Interaction Studies, University of 
Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. y_l54@txstate.edu. (3)Xiphophorus Genetic
Stock Center, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, 78666, USA.
y_l54@txstate.edu. (4)MU Center for Botanical Interaction Studies, University of 
Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. jl482@mail.missouri.edu. (5)Computer Science 
Department, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA.
jl482@mail.missouri.edu. (6)Informatics Institute, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. jl482@mail.missouri.edu. (7)MU Center for Botanical
Interaction Studies, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA.
chengji@missouri.edu. (8)Computer Science Department, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. chengji@missouri.edu. (9)Informatics Institute,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. chengji@missouri.edu.
(10)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA.
lubahnd@missouri.edu. (11)MU Center for Botanical Interaction Studies, University
of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. lubahnd@missouri.edu.

BACKGROUND: Orphan nuclear receptor estrogen related receptor ß (Esrrb or ERRß)
is well known in stem cells and early embryonic development. However, little is
known about its function in cancer.
METHOD: We investigated the mRNA profile alterations induced by Esrrb expression 
and its synthetic ligand DY131 in human prostate cancer DU145 cells via RNA-Seq
analysis.
RESULTS: We distinguished 67 mRNAs differentially expressed by Esrrb alone.
Although DY131 alone did not change any gene, treatment of DY131 in the presence 
of Esrrb altered 1161 mRNAs. These observations indicated Esrrb had both
ligand-independent and ligand-dependent activity. When Esrrb was expressed, DY131
treatment further regulated 15 Esrrb-altered mRNAs. DY131 acted as an antagonist 
for 11 of 15 mRNAs (wdr52, f13a1, pxdn, spns2, loc100506599, tagln, loc441454,
tkel1, sema3f, zcwpw2, sdc2) and as an agonist for 4 of the 15 mRNAs (rarres3,
oasl, padi2, ddx60). Gene ontology analyses showed altered genes are related to
transcription and translation regulation, cell proliferation and apoptosis
regulation, and cellular metabolism.
CONCLUSION: Our results characterized mRNA profiles in DU145 prostate cancer
cells driven by Esrrb expression and Esrrb ligand DY131, and provided multiple
markers to characterize Esrrb's function in Esrrb research.

PMCID: PMC4667504
PMID: 26627478  [PubMed - in process]


6. BMC Mol Biol. 2015 Nov 23;16(1):19. doi: 10.1186/s12867-015-0047-3.

Genes targeted by the Hedgehog-signaling pathway can be regulated by Estrogen
related receptor ß.

Lu Y(1,)(2,)(3), Li J(4,)(5,)(6), Cheng J(7,)(8,)(9), Lubahn DB(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. 
y_l54@txstate.edu. (2)MU Center for Botanical Interaction Studies, University of 
Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. y_l54@txstate.edu. (3)Xiphophorus Genetic
Stock Center, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, 78666, USA.
y_l54@txstate.edu. (4)MU Center for Botanical Interaction Studies, University of 
Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. jl482@mail.missouri.edu. (5)Computer Science 
Department, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA.
jl482@mail.missouri.edu. (6)Informatics Institute, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. jl482@mail.missouri.edu. (7)MU Center for Botanical
Interaction Studies, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA.
chengji@missouri.edu. (8)Computer Science Department, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. chengji@missouri.edu. (9)Informatics Institute,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. chengji@missouri.edu.
(10)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA.
lubahnd@missouri.edu. (11)MU Center for Botanical Interaction Studies, University
of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. lubahnd@missouri.edu.

BACKGROUND: Nuclear receptor family member, Estrogen related receptor ß, and the 
Hedgehog signal transduction pathway are both reported to relate to tumorigenesis
and induced pluripotent stem cell reprogramming. We hypothesize that Estrogen
related receptor ß can modulate the Hedgehog signaling pathway and affect
Hedgehog driven downstream gene expression.
RESULTS: We established an estrogen related receptor ß-expressing
Hedgehog-responsive NIH3T3 cell line by Esrrb transfection, and performed mRNA
profiling using RNA-Seq after Hedgehog ligand conditioned medium treatment. Esrrb
expression altered 171 genes, while Hedgehog signaling activation alone altered
339 genes. Additionally, estrogen related receptor ß expression in combination
with Hedgehog signaling activation affects a group of 109 Hedgehog responsive
mRNAs, including Hsd11b1, Ogn, Smoc2, Igf1, Pdcd4, Igfbp4, Stmn1, Hp, Hoxd8,
Top2a, Tubb4b, Sfrp2, Saa3, Prl2c3 and Dpt.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that Estrogen related receptor ß is capable of
interacting with Hh-signaling downstream targets. Our results suggest a new level
of regulation of Hedgehog signaling by Estrogen related receptor ß, and indicate 
modulation of Estrogen related receptor ß can be a new strategy to regulate
various functions driven by the Hedgehog signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4657266
PMID: 26597826  [PubMed - in process]


7. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2016 Mar;45(3):323-31. doi:
10.1016/j.ijom.2015.10.007. Epub 2015 Nov 14.

ESRRB polymorphisms are associated with comorbidity of temporomandibular
disorders and rotator cuff disease.

Bonato LL(1), Quinelato V(1), Pinheiro Ad(2), Amaral MV(3), de Souza FN(1), Lobo 
JC(4), Aguiar DP(5), Augusto LM(5), Vieira AR(6), Salles JI(7), Cossich VR(7),
Guimarães JA(8), de Gouvêa CV(9), Granjeiro JM(10), Casado PL(11).

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry and Clinical Research Unit, Fluminense Federal University,
Niterói, RJ, Brazil. (2)Dental Clinical Department and Oral Implantology
Post-graduation, Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, RJ, Brazil.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Center of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery,
National Institute of Traumatology and Orthopedics, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(4)Clinical Research Unit and Biology Institute, Fluminense Federal University,
Niterói, RJ, Brazil. (5)Research Division, National Institute of Traumatology and
Orthopedics, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. (6)Department of Oral Biology, School of
Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA. (7)Neuromuscular
Research Laboratory, National Institute of Traumatology and Orthopedics, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. (8)Department of Trauma and Orthopedic Surgery, National
Institute of Traumatology and Orthopedics, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(9)Department of Prosthodontics, Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, RJ,
Brazil. (10)National Institute of Metrology, Quality and Technology, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil; Cell Therapy Center, Clinical Research Unit and Biology
Institute, Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, RJ, Brazil. (11)School of
Dentistry and Clinical Research Unit, Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, RJ,
Brazil. Electronic address: plcasado@hotmail.com.

Temporomandibular disorders (TMD) are associated with comorbidity. Shoulder pain 
is among the symptoms associated with TMD. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the association between TMD and rotator cuff disease (RCD) and
related genetic aspects. All subjects underwent orofacial and shoulder
examinations. The control group comprised 30 subjects with no pain. Affected
subjects were divided into three groups: RCD (TMD-free, n=16), TMD (RCD-free,
n=13), and TMD/RCD (patients with both RCD and TMD, n=49). A total of eight
single nucleotide polymorphisms in the ESRRB gene were investigated. A
chemiluminescent immunoassay was used to measure estradiol levels. Surface
electromyography recorded head and cervical muscle activity. The <U+03C7>(2) test and
Student t-test/Mann-Whitney test were used to assess the significance of nominal 
and continuous variables. A P-value of <0.05 was considered significant. TMD
subjects were seven times more susceptible to RCD than controls. The rs1676303 TT
(P=0.02) and rs6574293 GG (P=0.04) genotypes were associated with RCD and TMD,
respectively. TMD/RCD subjects showed associations with rs4903399 (P=0.02),
rs10132091 (P=0.02), and CTTCTTAG/CCTCTCAG (P=0.01) haplotypes and lower muscle
activity. Estradiol levels were similar among groups. This study supports TMD as 
a risk factor for RCD. ESRRB haplotypes and low muscle activity are common
biomechanical characteristics in subjects with both diseases.

Copyright © 2015 International Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26584852  [PubMed - in process]


8. Stem Cells. 2016 Feb;34(2):322-33. doi: 10.1002/stem.2243. Epub 2015 Nov 26.

Combined Overexpression of JARID2, PRDM14, ESRRB, and SALL4A Dramatically
Improves Efficiency and Kinetics of Reprogramming to Induced Pluripotent Stem
Cells.

Iseki H(1,)(2), Nakachi Y(1,)(3), Hishida T(4,)(2), Yamashita-Sugahara Y(1),
Hirasaki M(4), Ueda A(4), Tanimoto Y(5), Iijima S(5), Sugiyama F(5), Yagami K(5),
Takahashi S(2,)(5), Okuda A(4,)(2), Okazaki Y(1,)(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics and Systems Medicine, Saitama Medical
University, Saitama, Japan. (2)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 
Saitama, Japan. (3)Division of Translational Research, Saitama Medical
University, Saitama, Japan. (4)Division of Developmental Biology, Research Center
for Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan. (5)Laboratory
Animal Resource Center, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Identification of a gene set capable of driving rapid and proper reprogramming to
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) is an important issue. Here we show that
the efficiency and kinetics of iPSC reprogramming are dramatically improved by
the combined expression of Jarid2 and genes encoding its associated proteins. We 
demonstrate that forced expression of JARID2 promotes iPSC reprogramming by
suppressing the expression of Arf, a known reprogramming barrier, and that the
N-terminal half of JARID2 is sufficient for such promotion. Moreover, JARID2
accelerated silencing of the retroviral Klf4 transgene and demethylation of the
Nanog promoter, underpinning the potentiating activity of JARID2 in iPSC
reprogramming. We further show that JARID2 physically interacts with ESRRB,
SALL4A, and PRDM14, and that these JARID2-associated proteins synergistically and
robustly facilitate iPSC reprogramming in a JARID2-dependent manner. Our findings
provide an insight into the important roles of JARID2 during reprogramming and
suggest that the JARID2-associated protein network contributes to overcoming
reprogramming barriers. Stem Cells 2016;34:322-333.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26523946  [PubMed - in process]


9. Haematologica. 2016 Jan;101(1):e20-3. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.132332. Epub
2015 Oct 22.

PAX5-ESRRB is a recurrent fusion gene in B-cell precursor pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Marincevic-Zuniga Y(1), Zachariadis V(2), Cavelier L(3), Castor A(4), Barbany
G(2), Forestier E(5), Fogelstrand L(6), Heyman M(7), Abrahamsson J(8), Lönnerholm
G(9), Nordgren A(2), Syvänen AC(1), Nordlund J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Medicine and Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Sweden. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine and
Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm. (3)Department of Immunology, Genetics 
and Pathology, Uppsala University, Sweden. (4)Pediatric Oncology/Hematology,
Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. (5)Department of Medical Biosciences,
University of Umeå, Sweden. (6)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion
Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of
Gothenburg, Sweden Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, Sahlgrenska University
Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. (7)Childhood Cancer Research Unit, Karolinska
Institutet, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Queen Silvia Children's Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden. (9)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Pediatric
Oncology, Uppsala University, Sweden. (10)Department of Medical Sciences,
Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Sweden
jessica.nordlund@medsci.uu.se.

PMCID: PMC4697902
PMID: 26494837  [PubMed - in process]


10. Genes Dev. 2015 Oct 1;29(19):2004-9. doi: 10.1101/gad.267112.115.

Role of the small subunit processome in the maintenance of pluripotent stem
cells.

You KT(1), Park J(1), Kim VN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul 151-742, Korea;
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play integral roles in gene regulation, yet only a
small fraction of RBPs has been studied in the context of stem cells. Here we
applied an RNAi screen for RBPs in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and
identified 16 RBPs involved in pluripotency maintenance. Interestingly, six
identified RBPs, including Krr1 and Ddx47, are part of a complex called small
subunit processome (SSUP) that mediates 18S rRNA biogenesis. The SSUP components 
are preferentially expressed in stem cells and enhance the global translational
rate, which is critical to sustain the protein levels of labile pluripotency
factors such as Nanog and Esrrb. Furthermore, the SSUP proteins are required for 
efficient reprogramming of induced pluripotent stem cells. Our study uncovers the
role of the SSUP and the importance of translational control in stem cell fate
decision.

© 2015 You et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4604342
PMID: 26443847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Anim Sci. 2015 Sep;93(9):4258-66. doi: 10.2527/jas.2015-9188.

Characterization and functional analysis of porcine estrogen-related receptors
and their alternative splicing variants.

Yang F, Du X, Wang Y, Wang C, Huang C, Xiao Q, Bai X, Wang H.

Estrogen-related receptors (ESRR) are orphan nuclear hormone receptors with
unidentified ligands; they play important roles in tissue regulation and
development and maintenance of pluripotent cell identity. The splicer variant,
genomic organization, and physiological roles of ESRR have been elucidated in the
human and the mouse. However, in livestock, they remain elusive. In this study,
we cloned porcine ESRR family members , , and . Two alternative splicing
variants, and , and a novel were identified. To determine the domain function, we
constructed vectors with sequential deletions of the ESRRB coding sequence. The
functional analysis showed that the C domain of ESRR plays a core role in
promoting the activation of estrogen response elements that are found in all
kinds of ESRR-targeting genes, whereas the E domain is not essential for
transcription regulation of ESRR unless a specific and identified ligand is
applied.

PMID: 26440325  [PubMed - in process]


12. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2015 Apr;31(4):491-500.

[Cloning and regulation of pig estrogen related receptor ß gene (ESRRB)
promoter].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang Y, Wang Y, Du L, Wang H.

The estrogen related receptor family member Esrrb (Estrogen related receptor ß)
is a gene that expresses in the early stage of embryo and plays an important role
in the core pluripotent network. Its function has been analyzed in human and
mouse, although no report so far related to pig. Therefore, to explore its
mechanism of transcriptional regulation and expression pattern, we cloned a 3.3
kb pig ESRRB promoter by PCR and constructed the green fluorescence protein (GFP)
reporter vector pE3.3. We used these vectors to study the ESRRB expression
pattern in 293T, Hela and C2C12. Sequence was analyzed for regulatory elements
that share homology to known transcription factor binding sites by TFSEARCH and
JASPER program. Some pluripotency related genes such as SMAD, STAT3, MYC, KLF4
and ESRRB have been found within the 3.3 kb sequence by co-transfected pig ESRRB 
promoter and these potential regulators. We found that ESRRB only expressed in
293T and SMAD could activate ESRRB expression obviously. To determine the core
promoter region, a series of ESRRB promoter fragments with gradually truncated
5'-end were produced by PCR and inserted into pGL3-Basic vector. After transient 
transfection into 293T, dual luciferase assay was used to measure these promoter 
activities. The result suggested that the core promoter of pig ESRRB located
within -25 bp to -269 bp region. These results suggest that these transcription
factor binding sites and the core promoter region may be essential for
transcriptional regulation of pig ESRRB gene.

PMID: 26380406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 10;5:12933. doi: 10.1038/srep12933.

Gene expression in breastmilk cells is associated with maternal and infant
characteristics.

Twigger AJ(1), Hepworth AR(1), Lai CT(1), Chetwynd E(2), Stuebe AM(2), Blancafort
P(3), Hartmann PE(1), Geddes DT(1), Kakulas F(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, The University of
Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley WA 6009, Australia. (2)Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, School of
Medicine, University of North Carolina, 3010 Old Clinic Building, CB 7615, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA. (3)1] Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
University of North Carolina, 120 Mason Farm Road, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA [2]
Cancer Epigenetics group, the Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, and
School of Anatomy, Physiology and human Biology, The University of Western
Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley WA 6009, Australia.

Breastmilk is a rich source of cells with a heterogeneous composition comprising 
early-stage stem cells, progenitors and more differentiated cells. The gene
expression profiles of these cells and their associations with characteristics of
the breastfeeding mother and infant are poorly understood. This study
investigated factors associated with the cellular dynamics of breastmilk and
explored variations amongst women. Genes representing different breastmilk cell
populations including mammary epithelial and myoepithelial cells, progenitors,
and multi-lineage stem cells showed great variation in expression. Stem cell
markers ESRRB and CK5, myoepithelial marker CK14, and lactocyte marker
a-lactalbumin were amongst the genes most highly expressed across all samples
tested. Genes exerting similar functions, such as either stem cell regulation or 
milk production, were found to be closely associated. Infant gestational age at
delivery and changes in maternal bra cup size between pre-pregnancy and
postpartum lactation were associated with expression of genes controlling
stemness as well as milk synthesis. Additional correlations were found between
genes and dyad characteristics, which may explain abnormalities related to low
breastmilk supply or preterm birth. Our findings highlight the heterogeneity of
breastmilk cell content and its changes associated with characteristics of the
breastfeeding dyad that may reflect changing infant needs.

PMCID: PMC4542700
PMID: 26255679  [PubMed - in process]


14. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 24;6:7776. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8776.

Fgf and Esrrb integrate epigenetic and transcriptional networks that regulate
self-renewal of trophoblast stem cells.

Latos PA(1), Goncalves A(2), Oxley D(3), Mohammed H(4), Turro E(5), Hemberger
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK [2] Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (2)Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (3)Proteomics Group, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (4)Epigenetics Programme, The
Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (5)1]
Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, NHS Blood and Transplant,
Long Road, Cambridge CB2 0PT, UK [2] Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit,
Cambridge Institute of Public Health, Robinson Way, Forvie Site, Cambridge CB2
0SR, UK.

Esrrb (oestrogen-related receptor beta) is a transcription factor implicated in
embryonic stem (ES) cell self-renewal, yet its knockout causes intrauterine
lethality due to defects in trophoblast development. Here we show that in
trophoblast stem (TS) cells, Esrrb is a downstream target of fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf) signalling and is critical to drive TS cell self-renewal. In
contrast to its occupancy of pluripotency-associated loci in ES cells, Esrrb
sustains the stemness of TS cells by direct binding and regulation of TS
cell-specific transcription factors including Elf5 and Eomes. To elucidate the
mechanisms whereby Esrrb controls the expression of its targets, we characterized
its TS cell-specific interactome using mass spectrometry. Unlike in ES cells,
Esrrb interacts in TS cells with the histone demethylase Lsd1 and with the RNA
Polymerase II-associated Integrator complex. Our findings provide new insights
into both the general and context-dependent wiring of transcription factor
networks in stem cells by master transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4525203
PMID: 26206133  [PubMed - in process]


15. Stem Cells. 2015 Oct;33(10):2961-72. doi: 10.1002/stem.2116.

CHD1L Regulated PARP1-Driven Pluripotency and Chromatin Remodeling During the
Early-Stage Cell Reprogramming.

Jiang BH(1), Chen WY(2,)(3), Li HY(4,)(5), Chien Y(6,)(7), Chang WC(8,)(9), Hsieh
PC(2), Wu P(6,)(7), Chen CY(2,)(3), Song HY(6), Chien CS(1,)(7), Sung YJ(4,)(10),
Chiou SH(4,)(6,)(11,)(7,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oral Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)VGH-YM Genomic/Cancer Research Center, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Institute of Pharmacology, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Department of Medical Research and
Education, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Graduate
Institute of Cancer Biology and Center for Molecular Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (9)Department of Biotechnology, Asia University,
Taichung, Taiwan. (10)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, 
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (11)Institute of Clinical
Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (12)Genomics Research
Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

PARP1 and poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation) have been shown to be essential for
the initial steps of cellular reprogramming. However, the mechanism underlying
PARP1/PARylation-regulated activation of pluripotency loci remains undetermined. 
Here, we demonstrate that CHD1L, a DNA helicase, possesses chromatin remodeling
activity and interacts with PARP1/PARylation in regulating pluripotency during
reprogramming. We found that this interaction is mediated through the interplay
of the CHD1L macro-domain and the PAR moiety of PARylated-PARP1. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated the co-occupancy of CHD1L and PARP1 at
Pou5f1, Nanog, and Esrrb pluripotency loci. Knockdown of CHD1L significantly
blocked the binding activity of PARP1 at pluripotency loci and inhibited the
efficiency of PARP1-driven reprogramming. Notably, we found that CHD1L-promoted
reprogramming requires both a PARP1-interacting domain and DNA helicase activity,
partly contributing to the chromatin-remodeling states of pluripotency loci.
Taken together, these results identify CHD1L as a key chromatin remodeler
involved in PARP1/PARylation-regulated early-stage reprogramming and pluripotency
in stem cells.

© 2015 The Authors STEM CELLS published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of
AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26201266  [PubMed - in process]


16. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Jul;94(27):e1073. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001073.

Identifying Children With Poor Cochlear Implantation Outcomes Using Massively
Parallel Sequencing.

Wu CC(1), Lin YH, Liu TC, Lin KN, Yang WS, Hsu CJ, Chen PL, Wu CM.

Author information: 
(1)From Department of Otolaryngology, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan (C-CW, Y-HL, T-CL, K-NL, C-JH); Department of Medical Genetics,
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan (C-CW, W-SY, P-LC); Graduate 
Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, National Taiwan University College 
of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan (Y-HL, P-LC); Department of Otolaryngology, Cardinal 
Tien Hospital, New Taipei, Taiwan (K-NL); Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan (W-SY,
P-LC); Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan (W-SY, P-LC); Research Center for Developmental Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan (W-SY, P-LC);
Department of Otolaryngology, Taichung Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical
Foundation, Taichung, Taiwan (C-JH); and Department of Otolaryngology, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan (C-MW).

Cochlear implantation is currently the treatment of choice for children with
severe to profound hearing impairment. However, the outcomes with cochlear
implants (CIs) vary significantly among recipients. The purpose of the present
study is to identify the genetic determinants of poor CI outcomes. Twelve
children with poor CI outcomes (the "cases") and 30 "matched controls" with good 
CI outcomes were subjected to comprehensive genetic analyses using massively
parallel sequencing, which targeted 129 known deafness genes. Audiological
features, imaging findings, and auditory/speech performance with CIs were then
correlated to the genetic diagnoses. We identified genetic variants which are
associated with poor CI outcomes in 7 (58%) of the 12 cases; 4 cases had
bi-allelic PCDH15 pathogenic mutations and 3 cases were homozygous for the DFNB59
p.G292R variant. Mutations in the WFS1, GJB3, ESRRB, LRTOMT, MYO3A, and POU3F4
genes were detected in 7 (23%) of the 30 matched controls. The allele frequencies
of PCDH15 and DFNB59 variants were significantly higher in the cases than in the 
matched controls (both P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001). In the 7 CI recipients with PCDH15 or DFNB59
variants, otoacoustic emissions were absent in both ears, and imaging findings
were normal in all 7 implanted ears. PCDH15 or DFNB59 variants are associated
with poor CI performance, yet children with PCDH15 or DFNB59 variants might show 
clinical features indistinguishable from those of other typical pediatric CI
recipients. Accordingly, genetic examination is indicated in all CI candidates
before operation.

PMCID: PMC4504554
PMID: 26166082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Genes Dev. 2015 Jun 15;29(12):1239-55. doi: 10.1101/gad.257071.114.

Gata6 potently initiates reprograming of pluripotent and differentiated cells to 
extraembryonic endoderm stem cells.

Wamaitha SE(1), del Valle I(1), Cho LT(1), Wei Y(2), Fogarty NM(1), Blakeley
P(1), Sherwood RI(3), Ji H(2), Niakan KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mill Hill Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW7 1AA, United
Kingdom; (2)Department of Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA; (3)Brigham and Women's
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Transcription factor-mediated reprograming is a powerful method to study cell
fate changes. In this study, we demonstrate that the transcription factor Gata6
can initiate reprograming of multiple cell types to induced extraembryonic
endoderm stem (iXEN) cells. Intriguingly, Gata6 is sufficient to drive iXEN cells
from mouse pluripotent cells and differentiated neural cells. Furthermore, GATA6 
induction in human embryonic stem (hES) cells also down-regulates pluripotency
gene expression and up-regulates extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn) genes, revealing 
a conserved function in mediating this cell fate switch. Profiling
transcriptional changes following Gata6 induction in mES cells reveals step-wise 
pluripotency factor disengagement, with initial repression of Nanog and Esrrb,
then Sox2, and finally Oct4, alongside step-wise activation of ExEn genes.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and subsequent high-throughput sequencing analysis 
shows Gata6 enrichment near pluripotency and endoderm genes, suggesting that
Gata6 functions as both a direct repressor and activator. Together, this
demonstrates that Gata6 is a versatile and potent reprograming factor that can
act alone to drive a cell fate switch from diverse cell types.

© 2015 Wamaitha et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4495396
PMID: 26109048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nat Commun. 2015 May 20;6:7155. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8155.

Proteins that bind regulatory regions identified by histone modification
chromatin immunoprecipitations and mass spectrometry.

Engelen E(1), Brandsma JH(1), Moen MJ(1), Signorile L(1), Dekkers DH(2), Demmers 
J(2), Kockx CE(3), Ozgür Z(3), van IJcken WF(3), van den Berg DL(4), Poot RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands. (3)Center for Biomics, Erasmus MC, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)1] Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC,
Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands [2] Francis Crick Institute,
Mill Hill Laboratory, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The locations of transcriptional enhancers and promoters were recently mapped in 
many mammalian cell types. Proteins that bind those regulatory regions can
determine cell identity but have not been systematically identified. Here we
purify native enhancers, promoters or heterochromatin from embryonic stem cells
by chromatin immunoprecipitations (ChIP) for characteristic histone modifications
and identify associated proteins using mass spectrometry (MS). 239 factors are
identified and predicted to bind enhancers or promoters with different levels of 
activity, or heterochromatin. Published genome-wide data indicate a high accuracy
of location prediction by ChIP-MS. A quarter of the identified factors are
important for pluripotency and includes Oct4, Esrrb, Klf5, Mycn and Dppa2,
factors that drive reprogramming to pluripotent stem cells. We determined the
genome-wide binding sites of Dppa2 and find that Dppa2 operates outside the
classical pluripotency network. Our ChIP-MS method provides a detailed read-out
of the transcriptional landscape representative of the investigated cell type.

PMCID: PMC4455091
PMID: 25990348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 8;290(19):12332-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.619098. Epub 2015
Mar 24.

Estrogen-related Receptor ß Reduces the Subnuclear Mobility of Estrogen Receptor 
a and Suppresses Estrogen-dependent Cellular Function.

Tanida T(1), Matsuda KI(2), Yamada S(2), Hashimoto T(2), Kawata M(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University 
of Medicine, Kawaramachi Hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan
t-tanida@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp. (2)From the Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi Hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto
602-8566, Japan.

Estrogen-related receptor (ERR) is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily
that has strong homology with estrogen receptor (ER) a. ERR has three subtypes
(a, ß, and <U+03B3>) expressed in estrogen-sensitive organs, including ovary, breast,
and brain. No endogenous ligands of ERRs have been identified, but these
receptors share a common DNA element with ERa and control estrogen-mediated gene 
transcription. Recent evidence suggests a role of ERRs in estrogen-related
pathophysiology, but the detailed mechanisms of ERR functions in estrogen-related
tissues are unclear. Using live-cell imaging with fluorescent protein labeling,
we found that only ERRß among the ERRs exhibits a punctate intranuclear pattern
overlapping with ERa following 17ß-estradiol (E2)-stimulation. Fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching showed significant reduction of the mobility of
ligand-activated ERa with co-expression of ERRß. Fluorescence resonance energy
transfer revealed that ERRß directly interacts with ERa. The N-terminal domain of
ERRß was identified as the region that interacts with ERa. We also found a
correlation between punctate cluster formation of ERa and interaction between the
receptors. Expression of ERRß significantly repressed ERa-mediated transactivity,
whereas that of other ERR subtypes had no effect on the transactivity of ERa.
Consistent with this finding, E2-stimulated proliferation of MCF-7 breast
carcinoma cells and bcl-2 expression was significantly inhibited by expression of
ERRß. These results provide strong evidence for a suppressive effect of ERRß on
estrogen signaling through reduction of the intranuclear mobility of ERa. The
findings further suggest a unique inhibitory role for ERRß in estrogen-dependent 
cellular function such as cancer cell proliferation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4424363 [Available on 2016-05-08]
PMID: 25805499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Vis. 2015 Feb 19;21:173-84. eCollection 2015.

Photoreceptor cells display a daily rhythm in the orphan receptor Esrrß.

Kunst S(1), Wolloscheck T(2), Grether M(2), Trunsch P(2), Wolfrum U(3), Spessert 
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Functional and Clinical Anatomy, University Medical Center of the
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany ; Department of Cell and
Matrix Biology, Institute of Zoology, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz,
Germany. (2)Institute of Functional and Clinical Anatomy, University Medical
Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany. (3)Department 
of Cell and Matrix Biology, Institute of Zoology, Johannes Gutenberg University
Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

PURPOSE: Nuclear orphan receptors are critical for the development and long-term 
survival of photoreceptor cells. In the present study, the expression of the
nuclear orphan receptor Esrrß--a transcriptional regulator of energy metabolism
that protects rod photoreceptors from dystrophy--was tested under daily
regulation in the retina and photoreceptor cells.
METHODS: The daily transcript and protein amount profiles were recorded in
preparations of the whole retina and microdissected photoreceptor cells using
quantitative PCR (qPCR) and western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Esrrß displayed a daily rhythm with elevated values at night in the
whole retina and enriched photoreceptor cells. Daily regulation of Esrrß mRNA
depended on light input but not on melatonin, and evoked a corresponding rhythm
in the Esrrß protein.
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented in this study indicate that daily regulation of
Esrrß in photoreceptor cells may contribute to their adaptation to 24-h changes
in metabolic demands.

PMCID: PMC4337357
PMID: 25737630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Nat Commun. 2015 Feb 4;6:6188. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7188.

Collaborative rewiring of the pluripotency network by chromatin and signalling
modulating pathways.

Tran KA(1), Jackson SA(2), Olufs ZP(2), Zaidan NZ(2), Leng N(3), Kendziorski
C(4), Roy S(5), Sridharan R(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 330 N.
Orchard Street, Room 2118, Wisconsin 53715, USA [2] Molecular and Cellular
Pharmacology Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 330 N. Orchard Street,
Room 2118, Wisconsin 53715, USA. (2)Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University
of Wisconsin, Madison, 330 N. Orchard Street, Room 2118, Wisconsin 53715, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 330 N. Orchard
Street, Room 2118, Wisconsin 53715, USA. (4)Department of Biostatistics and
Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 330 N. Orchard Street,
Room 2118, Wisconsin 53715, USA. (5)1] Wisconsin Institute for Discovery,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, 330 N. Orchard Street, Room 2118, Wisconsin
53715, USA [2] Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, 330 N. Orchard Street, Room 2118, Wisconsin 53715, USA. (6)1]
Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 330 N.
Orchard Street, Room 2118, Wisconsin 53715, USA [2] Department of Cell and
Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 330 N. Orchard Street,
Room 2118, Wisconsin 53715, USA.

Reprogramming of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
represents a profound change in cell fate. Here, we show that combining ascorbic 
acid (AA) and 2i (MAP kinase and GSK inhibitors) increases the efficiency of
reprogramming from fibroblasts and synergistically enhances conversion of
partially reprogrammed intermediates to the iPSC state. AA and 2i induce
differential transcriptional responses, each leading to the activation of
specific pluripotency loci. A unique cohort of pluripotency genes including Esrrb
require both stimuli for activation. Temporally, AA-dependent histone demethylase
effects are important early, whereas Tet enzyme effects are required throughout
the conversion. 2i function could partially be replaced by depletion of
components of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) and insulin growth factor
pathways, indicating that they act as barriers to reprogramming. Accordingly,
reduction in the levels of the EGF receptor gene contributes to the activation of
Esrrb. These results provide insight into the rewiring of the pluripotency
network at the late stage of reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC4347202
PMID: 25650115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Stem Cells. 2015 Apr;33(4):1089-101. doi: 10.1002/stem.1918.

Forced expression of Nanog or Esrrb preserves the ESC status in the absence of
nucleostemin expression.

Katano M(1), Ema M, Nakachi Y, Mizuno Y, Hirasaki M, Suzuki A, Ueda A, Nishimoto 
M, Takahashi S, Okazaki Y, Okuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Saitama Medical University, Yamane, Hidaka,
Saitama, Japan.

Comment in
    Stem Cells. 2015 Jul;33(7):2358-9.

Nucleostemin (NS) is a nucleolar GTP-binding protein that is involved in a
plethora of functions including ribosomal biogenesis and maintenance of telomere 
integrity. In addition to its expression in cancerous cells, the NS gene is
expressed in stem cells including embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Previous knockdown
and knockout studies have demonstrated that NS is important to preserve the
self-renewality and high expression levels of pluripotency marker genes in ESCs. 
Here, we found that forced expression of Nanog or Esrrb, but not other
pluripotency factors, resulted in the dispensability of NS expression in ESCs.
However, the detrimental phenotypes of ESCs associated with ablation of NS
expression were not mitigated by forced expression of Rad51 or a nucleolar
localization-defective NS mutant that counteracts the damage associated with loss
of NS expression in other NS-expressing cells such as neural stem/progenitor
cells. Thus, our results indicate that NS participates in preservation of the
viability and integrity of ESCs, which is distinct from that in other
NS-expressing cells.

© 2014 The Authors. STEM CELLS Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of 
AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4409032
PMID: 25522312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(1):31-45. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.972886.

ERRß splice variants differentially regulate cell cycle progression.

Heckler MM(1), Riggins RB.

Author information: 
(1)a Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center; the Department of Oncology ;
Georgetown University School of Medicine ; Washington , DC USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(10):1492-3.

Orphan receptors comprise nearly half of all members of the nuclear receptor
superfamily. Despite having broad structural similarities to the classical
estrogen receptors, estrogen-related receptors (ERRs) have their own unique DNA
response elements and functions. In this study, we focus on 2 ERRß splice
variants, short form ERRß (ERRßsf) and ERRß2, and identify their differing roles 
in cell cycle regulation. Using DY131 (a synthetic agonist of ERRß),
splice-variant selective shRNA, and exogenous ERRßsf and ERRß2 cDNAs, we
demonstrate the role of ERRßsf in mediating the G1 checkpoint through p21. We
also show ERRßsf is required for DY131-induced cellular senescence. A key novel
finding of this study is that ERRß2 can mediate a G2/M arrest in response to
DY131. In the absence of ERRß2, the DY131-induced G2/M arrest is reversed, and
this is accompanied by p21 induction and a G1 arrest. This study illustrates
novel functions for ERRß splice variants and provides evidence for splice variant
interaction.

PMCID: PMC4614362
PMID: 25496115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 10;5:5619. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6619.

An epigenomic roadmap to induced pluripotency reveals DNA methylation as a
reprogramming modulator.

Lee DS(1), Shin JY(2), Tonge PD(3), Puri MC(4), Lee S(1), Park H(1), Lee WC(2),
Hussein SM(3), Bleazard T(5), Yun JY(2), Kim J(2), Li M(3), Cloonan N(6), Wood
D(7), Clancy JL(8), Mosbergen R(9), Yi JH(10), Yang KS(11), Kim H(11), Rhee
H(12), Wells CA(13), Preiss T(14), Grimmond SM(15), Rogers IM(16), Nagy A(17),
Seo JS(18).

Author information: 
(1)1] Genomic Medicine Institute (GMI), Medical Research Center, Seoul National
University, Seoul 110-799, Korea [2] Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea [3] Department of
Biochemistry, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799,
Korea. (2)1] Genomic Medicine Institute (GMI), Medical Research Center, Seoul
National University, Seoul 110-799, Korea [2] Life Science Institute, Macrogen
Inc., Seoul 153-781, Korea. (3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X5. (4)1] Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum
Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X5 [2]
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
M5T 3H7. (5)Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester,
Manchester M13 9PT, UK. (6)1] Queensland Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute
for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland
4072, Australia [2] QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Genomic Biology
Lab, 300 Herston Road, Herston, Queensland 4006, Australia. (7)Queensland Centre 
for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of
Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia. (8)Genome Biology Department,
The John Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian National University,
Canberra, Australian Capital Territory 2601, Australia. (9)Australian Institute
for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia. (10)Genomic Medicine Institute (GMI), Medical
Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-799, Korea. (11)Life
Science Institute, Macrogen Inc., Seoul 153-781, Korea. (12)Macrogen
Bioinformatics Center, Macrogen, Seoul 153-781, Republic of Korea. (13)1]
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia [2] College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland G12 8TA,
UK. (14)1] Genome Biology Department, The John Curtin School of Medical Research,
The Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory 2601, 
Australia [2] Molecular, Structural &Computational Biology Division, Victor Chang
Cardiac Research Institute, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia. (15)1]
Queensland Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The
University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia [2] Wolfson Wohl
Cancer Research Centre, Institute for Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow,
Bearsden, Glasgow Scotland G61 1BD, UK. (16)1] Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X5 [2] Department 
of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 3H7 [3]
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5T3H7. (17)1] Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X5 [2] Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T3H7 [3] Institute
of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 3H7.
(18)1] Genomic Medicine Institute (GMI), Medical Research Center, Seoul National 
University, Seoul 110-799, Korea [2] Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea [3] Department of
Biochemistry, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea
[4] Life Science Institute, Macrogen Inc., Seoul 153-781, Korea.

Reprogramming of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells involves a
dynamic rearrangement of the epigenetic landscape. To characterize this
epigenomic roadmap, we have performed MethylC-seq, ChIP-seq (H3K4/K27/K36me3) and
RNA-Seq on samples taken at several time points during murine secondary
reprogramming as part of Project Grandiose. We find that DNA methylation gain
during reprogramming occurs gradually, while loss is achieved only at the
ESC-like state. Binding sites of activated factors exhibit focal demethylation
during reprogramming, while ESC-like pluripotent cells are distinguished by
extension of demethylation to the wider neighbourhood. We observed that genes
with CpG-rich promoters demonstrate stable low methylation and strong engagement 
of histone marks, whereas genes with CpG-poor promoters are safeguarded by
methylation. Such DNA methylation-driven control is the key to the regulation of 
ESC-pluripotency genes, including Dppa4, Dppa5a and Esrrb. These results reveal
the crucial role that DNA methylation plays as an epigenetic switch driving
somatic cells to pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC4284806
PMID: 25493341  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. FEBS J. 2015 Feb;282(4):685-99. doi: 10.1111/febs.13173. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

Vitamin C induces a pluripotent state in mouse embryonic stem cells by modulating
microRNA expression.

Gao Y(1), Han Z, Li Q, Wu Y, Shi X, Ai Z, Du J, Li W, Guo Z, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi,
China; Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Yangling,
Shaanxi, China; College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling,
Shaanxi, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a group of noncoding RNAs, function as post-transcriptional
gene regulators and control the establishment, self-renewal and differentiation
of stem cells. Vitamin C has been recognized as a reprogramming enhancer because 
of its ability to induce a blastocyst-like state in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). 
However, knowledge on the regulation of miRNAs by vitamin C in ESCs is limited.
In this study, we found that vitamin C induced miRNA expression, particularly of 
ESC-specific miRNAs. Moreover, vitamin C maintained the miRNA expression of the
Dlk1-Dio3 imprinting region. The miRNAs in this region contain identical seed
sequences, which target a class of genes, including Kdm6b, Klf13, and Sox6, and
are mainly related to cell differentiation and development. These genes were
significantly downregulated by vitamin C. Notably, miR-143 promoted self-renewal 
of mouse ESCs and suppressed expression of the de novo methyltransferase gene
Dnmt3a. Knockdown of miR-143 by use of its inhibitor counteracted the vitamin
C-induced reduction in Dnmt3a expression, showing that vitamin C repressed Dnmt3a
expression via miR-143. Vitamin C also promoted DNA demethylation, including of
pluripotency gene promoters (Tbx3, Tcl1, and Esrrb) and ESC-specific miRNA
promoters (miR-290-295 and miR-17-92 clusters), and DNA hydroxymethylation,
including of the intergenic differentially methylated region of the Dlk1-Dio3
region. These results strongly suggested that vitamin C promoted widespread DNA
demethylation in gene promoters by modulating epigenetic modifiers, including
Dnmt3a, which activated pluripotency genes and ESC-specific miRNAs. Then,
differentiation and development genes were repressed by ESC-enriched miRNAs,
which maintained the stem cell state.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 25491368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proteomics. 2015 Feb;15(4):675-87. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201400334. Epub 2015 Jan 3.

Differences in embryo quality are associated with differences in oocyte
composition: a proteomic study in inbred mice.

Pfeiffer MJ(1), Taher L, Drexler H, Suzuki Y, Makalowski W, Schwarzer C, Wang B, 
Fuellen G, Boiani M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany; Institute
for Biostatistics and Informatics in Medicine and Ageing Research, Rostock
University Medical Center, Rostock, Germany.

Current models of early mouse development assign roles to stochastic processes
and epigenetic regulation, which are considered to be as influential as the
genetic differences that exist between strains of the species Mus musculus. The
aim of this study was to test whether mouse oocytes vary from each other in the
abundance of gene products that could influence, prime, or even predetermine
developmental trajectories and features of derivative embryos. Using the paradigm
of inbred mouse strains, we quantified 2010 protein groups (SILAC LC-MS/MS) and
15205 transcripts (RNA deep sequencing) present simultaneously in oocytes of four
strains tested (129/Sv, C57Bl/6J, C3H/HeN, DBA/2J). Oocytes differed according to
donor strain in the abundance of catalytic and regulatory proteins, as confirmed 
for a subset (bromodomain adjacent to zinc finger domain, 1B [BAZ1B], heme
oxygenase 1 [HMOX1], estrogen related receptor, beta [ESRRB]) via
immunofluorescence in situ. Given a Pearson's r correlation coefficient of
0.18-0.20, the abundance of oocytic proteins could not be predicted from that of 
cognate mRNAs. Our results document that a prerequisite to generate embryo
diversity, namely the different abundances of maternal proteins in oocytes, can
be studied in the model of inbred mouse strains. Thus, we highlight the
importance of proteomic quantifications in modern embryology. All MS data have
been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001059
(http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001059).

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25367296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Syst Biol. 2014 Sep 27;8:112. doi: 10.1186/s12918-014-0112-4.

Autocrine FGF feedback can establish distinct states of Nanog expression in
pluripotent stem cells: a computational analysis.

Lakatos D, Travis ED, Pierson KE, Vivian JL, Czirok A.

BACKGROUND: The maintenance of stem cell pluripotency is controlled by a core
cluster of transcription factors, NANOG, OCT4 and SOX2 - genes that jointly
regulate each other's expression. The expression of some of these genes,
especially of Nanog, is heterogeneous in a population of undifferentiated stem
cells in culture. Transient changes in expression levels, as well as
heterogeneity of the population is not restricted to this core regulator, but
involve a large number of other genes that include growth factors, transcription 
factors or signal transduction proteins.
RESULTS: As the molecular mechanisms behind NANOG expression heterogeneity is not
yet understood, we explore by computational modeling the core transcriptional
regulatory circuit and its input from autocrine FGF signals that act through the 
MAP kinase cascade. We argue that instead of negative feedbacks within the core
NANOG-OCT4-SOX2 transcriptional regulatory circuit, autocrine signaling loops
such as the Esrrb - FGF - ERK feedback considered here are likely to generate
distinct sub-states within the "ON" state of the core Nanog switch. Thus, the
experimentally observed fluctuations in Nanog transcription levels are best
explained as noise-induced transitions between negative feedback-generated
sub-states. We also demonstrate that ERK phosphorilation is altered and being
anti-correlated with fluctuating Nanog expression - in accord with model
simulations. Our modeling approach assigns an empirically testable function to
the transcriptional regulators Klf4 and Esrrb, and predict differential
regulation of FGF family members.
CONCLUSIONS: We argue that slow fluctuations in Nanog expression likely reflect
individual cell-specific changes in parameters of an autocrine feedback loop,
such as changes in ligand capture efficiency, receptor numbers or the presence of
crosstalks within the MAPK signal transduction pathway. We proposed a model that 
operates with binding affinities of multiple transcriptional regulators of
pluripotency, and the activity of an autocrine signaling pathway. The resulting
model produces varied expression levels of several components of pluripotency
regulation, largely consistent with empirical observations reported previously
and in this present work.

PMCID: PMC4189679
PMID: 25267505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 2015 Feb;24(2):e31-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2014.06.052. Epub
2014 Sep 11.

Significant association of full-thickness rotator cuff tears and estrogen-related
receptor-ß (ESRRB).

Teerlink CC(1), Cannon-Albright LA(2), Tashjian RZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. Electronic address: craig.teerlink@utah.edu.
(2)Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; George E. Wahlen Department of Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (3)George E. Wahlen Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; Department of
Orthopaedics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

BACKGROUND: The precise etiology of rotator cuff disease is unknown, but prior
evidence suggests a role for genetic factors. Variants of estrogen-related
receptor-ß (ESRRB) have been previously associated with rotator cuff disease. The
purpose of the present study was to confirm the association between multiple
candidate genes, including ESRRB, and rotator cuff disease in an independent set 
of patients with rotator cuff tear.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The Illumina 5M (Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA, USA) single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) platform was used to genotype 175 patients with
rotator cuff tear. Genotypes were used to select a set of 2595 genetically
matched Caucasian controls available from the Illumina iControls database. Tests 
of association were performed with Genome-wide Efficient Mixed Model Association 
(GEMMA) software at 69 SNPs that fell within 20 kb of 6 candidate genes (DEFB1,
DENND2C, ESRRB, FGF3, FGF10, and FGFR1).
RESULTS: Tests of association revealed 1 significantly associated SNP occurring
in ESRRB (rs17583842; P = 4.4E-4). Another SNP within ESRRB (rs7157192) had a
nominal P value of 7.8E-3. FastPHASE software estimated 2 frequent haplotypes
among 54 individuals who carried both risk alleles at these 2 SNPs. The first
haplotype had a frequency of 13.9% (n = 15) in risk-allele carriers and only 2.2%
in controls (odds ratio, 6.9; 95% confidence interval, 3.9-2.2). The second
haplotype had a frequency of 12.9% in risk-allele carriers and only 2.7% in
controls (odds ratio, 5.3; 95% confidence interval, 3.0-9.5).
CONCLUSIONS: The significant association and the presence of high-risk haplotypes
identified in the ESRRB gene confirm the association of variants in ESRRB and
rotator cuff disease.

Copyright © 2015 Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery Board of Trustees. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25219474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 9;9(9):e107308. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107308. eCollection
2014.

Establishment of trophoblast stem cells under defined culture conditions in mice.

Ohinata Y(1), Tsukiyama T(2).

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan; Life
Science Experimental Facility, Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Yamanashi, Kofu, Yamanashi, Japan;
Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, Center for Developmental Biology,
RIKEN Kobe institute, Kobe Chuo-ku, Hyogo, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Pluripotent
Stem Cell Studies, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN Kobe institute, Kobe
Chuo-ku, Hyogo, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0121167.

The inner cell mass (ICM) and trophoblast cell lineages duet early embryonic
development in mammals. After implantation, the ICM forms the embryo proper as
well as some extraembryonic tissues, whereas the trophoectoderm (TE) exclusively 
forms the fetal portion of the placenta and the trophoblast giant cells. Although
embryonic stem (ES) cells can be derived from ICM in cultures of mouse
blastocysts in the presence of LIF and/or combinations of small-molecule chemical
compounds, and the undifferentiated pluripotent state can be stably maintained
without use of serum and feeder cells, defined culture conditions for derivation 
and maintenance of undifferentiated trophoblast stem (TS) cells have not been
established. Here, we report that addition of FGF2, activin A, XAV939, and Y27632
are necessary and sufficient for derivation of TS cells from both of E3.5
blastocysts and E6.5 early postimplantation extraembryonic ectoderm. Moreover,
the undifferentiated TS cell state can be stably maintained in chemically defined
culture conditions. Cells derived in this manner expressed TS cell marker genes, 
including Eomes, Elf5, Cdx2, Klf5, Cdh1, Esrrb, Sox2, and Tcfap2c; differentiated
into all trophoblast subtypes (trophoblast giant cells, spongiotrophoblast, and
labyrinthine trophoblast) in vitro; and exclusively contributed to trophoblast
lineages in chimeric animals. This delineation of minimal requirements for
derivation and self-renewal provides a defined platform for precise description
and dissection of the molecular state of TS cells.

PMCID: PMC4159327
PMID: 25203285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Sep 4;15(3):295-309. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.07.003.

The developmental potential of iPSCs is greatly influenced by reprogramming
factor selection.

Buganim Y(1), Markoulaki S(2), van Wietmarschen N(3), Hoke H(4), Wu T(5), Ganz
K(2), Akhtar-Zaidi B(2), He Y(6), Abraham BJ(2), Porubsky D(3), Kulenkampff E(2),
Faddah DA(4), Shi L(2), Gao Q(2), Sarkar S(2), Cohen M(2), Goldmann J(2), Nery
JR(6), Schultz MD(6), Ecker JR(6), Xiao A(5), Young RA(7), Lansdorp PM(8),
Jaenisch R(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem
91120, Israel. Electronic address: yossibug@ekmd.huji.ac.il. (2)Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (3)European Research
Institute for the Biology of Ageing, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, AV Groningen 9713, the
Netherlands. (4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA. (5)Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. 
(6)Genomic Analysis Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Salk Institute
for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (7)Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Skolkovo
Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Novaya strazha 100, Skolkovo
Moscow Region 143025, Russia. (8)European Research Institute for the Biology of
Ageing, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Antonius
Deusinglaan 1, AV Groningen 9713, the Netherlands; Skolkovo Institute of Science 
and Technology (Skoltech), Novaya strazha 100, Skolkovo Moscow Region 143025,
Russia. (9)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA;
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA; Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Novaya
strazha 100, Skolkovo Moscow Region 143025, Russia. Electronic address:
jaenisch@wi.mit.edu.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are commonly generated by transduction of 
Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and Myc (OSKM) into cells. Although iPSCs are pluripotent, they
frequently exhibit high variation in terms of quality, as measured in mice by
chimera contribution and tetraploid complementation. Reliably high-quality iPSCs 
will be needed for future therapeutic applications. Here, we show that one major 
determinant of iPSC quality is the combination of reprogramming factors used.
Based on tetraploid complementation, we found that ectopic expression of Sall4,
Nanog, Esrrb, and Lin28 (SNEL) in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) generated
high-quality iPSCs more efficiently than other combinations of factors including 
OSKM. Although differentially methylated regions, transcript number of master
regulators, establishment of specific superenhancers, and global aneuploidy were 
comparable between high- and low-quality lines, aberrant gene expression, trisomy
of chromosome 8, and abnormal H2A.X deposition were distinguishing features that 
could potentially also be applicable to human.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4170792
PMID: 25192464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Stem Cell Rev. 2015 Feb;11(1):24-38. doi: 10.1007/s12015-014-9552-x.

Generation of intermediate porcine iPS cells under culture condition favorable
for mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.

Zhang S(1), Guo Y, Cui Y, Liu Y, Yu T, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest 
A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China.

It has been demonstrated that naïve and primed pluripotency are determined by
different extracellular signals. In this study, we investigated whether
intermediate pluripotent states could be available by manipulating the culture
condition during the process of generating pig induced pluripotent stem cells
(piPSCs). By optimizing the culture condition that efficiently promotes
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET), we found that combination of three
growth factors (LIF, FGF2 and BMP4) and two inhibitors (2i: CHIR99021 and
SB431542) could generate an intermediate pluripotent state of piPSCs, which were 
named as LFB2i-piPSCs. The LFB2i-piPSCs are stable and fulfill all the criteria
of pluripotency, including expression of pluripotent genes, differentiation into 
three germ layers via embryoid bodies in vitro and teratoma in vivo. More
importantly, the mRNA-sequencing data showed that LFB2i-piPSCs had a mixed
transcriptome of naïve and primed pluripotency, which featured by expressing high
levels of SOX2, L-MYC and ESRRB and relatively low levels of POU5F1, KLF4 and
NANOG. Small RNA sequencing also demonstrated that LFB2i-piPSCs had a mixed
microRNA profile of naïve and primed pluripotency, which featured by expressing
high levels of miR-302b/367 cluster and miR-106a/363 cluster, and low levels of
most let-7 family members and miR-17/92 cluster. Altogether, the LFB2i-piPSCs
represent a stable intermediate pluripotent state with unique transcriptome and
microRNA signatures. The LFB2i-piPSCs will provide a new tool to explore the
mechanisms of pluripotency and reprogramming on pig species.

PMID: 25134796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Nov 4;230(3):375-81. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.08.012. Epub
2014 Aug 13.

Actions of methyl-, propyl- and butylparaben on estrogen receptor-a and -ß and
the progesterone receptor in MCF-7 cancer cells and non-cancerous MCF-10A cells.

Wróbel AM(1), Gregoraszczuk EL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Toxicology of Reproduction, Institute of Zoology,
Jagiellonian University in Kraków, Gronostajowa 9, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.
Electronic address: ania.wrobel@uj.edu.pl. (2)Department of Physiology and
Toxicology of Reproduction, Institute of Zoology, Jagiellonian University in
Kraków, Gronostajowa 9, 30-387 Krakow, Poland. Electronic address:
ewa.gregoraszczuk@uj.edu.pl.

Numerous studies have shown that widely used parabens possess estrogenic
properties. In the present study, we examined the effects of methyl-, propyl- and
butylparaben on the mRNA and protein expression of estrogen receptor (ER)-a
(ESR1) and -ß (ESR2) and the progesterone receptor (PGR). Human MCF-7 breast
cancer cells and MCF-10A non-transformed breast epithelial cells were exposed to 
parabens at a concentration of 20nM; 17ß-estradiol at a concentration of 10nM,
was used as a positive control. Both propyl- and butylparaben stimulated PGR mRNA
expression in MCF-7 cells, whereas methyl- and propylparaben PGR protein
expression. In MCF-10A cells, butyl- and propylparaben increased only PGR mRNA
expression. All parabens increased ESR1 gene and protein expression in MCF-7 and 
with the exception of butylparaben in MCF-10A cells. All parabens significantly
increased ESR2 mRNA and protein expression in MCF-7 cells, but in MCF-10A cells
only ESR2 protein expression. In summary, by virtue of their stimulatory action
on the expression of ESR1, ESR2 and PGR in cancer cells, parabens can be viewed
as potential contributors to breast cancer progression. Extension, the actions of
these parabens on the expression of ERs and PGR in non-cancerous cells point to
possible actions on breast cancer initiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25128701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Aug 14;10(8):e1003777. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003777. 
eCollection 2014.

Construction and validation of a regulatory network for pluripotency and
self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Xu H(1), Ang YS(2), Sevilla A(2), Lemischka IR(1), Ma'ayan A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America; Department of
Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, New York, United States of America; Black Family Stem Cell Institute,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of
America. (2)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America; Black
Family Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, United States of America. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Systems
Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United
States of America; Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America.

A 30-node signed and directed network responsible for self-renewal and
pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) was extracted from several
ChIP-Seq and knockdown followed by expression prior studies. The underlying
regulatory logic among network components was then learned using the initial
network topology and single cell gene expression measurements from mESCs cultured
in serum/LIF or serum-free 2i/LIF conditions. Comparing the learned network
regulatory logic derived from cells cultured in serum/LIF vs. 2i/LIF revealed
differential roles for Nanog, Oct4/Pou5f1, Sox2, Esrrb and Tcf3. Overall, gene
expression in the serum/LIF condition was more variable than in the 2i/LIF but
mostly consistent across the two conditions. Expression levels for most genes in 
single cells were bimodal across the entire population and this motivated a
Boolean modeling approach. In silico predictions derived from removal of nodes
from the Boolean dynamical model were validated with experimental single and
combinatorial RNA interference (RNAi) knockdowns of selected network components. 
Quantitative post-RNAi expression level measurements of remaining network
components showed good agreement with the in silico predictions. Computational
removal of nodes from the Boolean network model was also used to predict lineage 
specification outcomes. In summary, data integration, modeling, and targeted
experiments were used to improve our understanding of the regulatory topology
that controls mESC fate decisions as well as to develop robust directed lineage
specification protocols.

PMCID: PMC4133156
PMID: 25122140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 12;111(32):11870-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1406638111. Epub 2014 Jul 28.

GADD45<U+03B3> regulates the thermogenic capacity of brown adipose tissue.

Gantner ML(1), Hazen BC(1), Conkright J(2), Kralli A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
CA 92037; and. (2)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110. 
(3)Department of Chemical Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
CA 92037; and kralli@scripps.edu.

The coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1 a 
(PGC-1a) is widely considered a central transcriptional regulator of adaptive
thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue (BAT). However, mice lacking PGC-1a
specifically in adipose tissue have only mild thermogenic defects, suggesting the
presence of additional regulators. Using the activity of estrogen-related
receptors (ERRs), downstream effectors of PGC-1a, as read-out in a
high-throughput genome-wide cDNA screen, we identify here growth arrest and
DNA-damage-inducible protein 45 <U+03B3> (GADD45<U+03B3>) as a cold-induced activator of
uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) and oxidative capacity in BAT. Mice lacking Gadd45<U+03B3>
have defects in Ucp1 induction and the thermogenic response to cold. GADD45<U+03B3>
works by activating MAPK p38, which is a potent activator of ERRß and ERR<U+03B3>
transcriptional function. GADD45<U+03B3> activates ERR<U+03B3> independently of PGC-1
coactivators, yet synergizes with PGC-1a to induce the thermogenic program. Our
findings elucidate a previously unidentified GADD45<U+03B3>/p38/ERR<U+03B3> pathway that
regulates BAT thermogenesis and may enable new approaches for the stimulation of 
energy expenditure. Our study also implicates GADD45 proteins as general
metabolic regulators.

PMCID: PMC4136592
PMID: 25071184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biol Reprod. 2014 Sep;91(3):65. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.120378. Epub 2014 Jul
24.

Adrenomedullin promotes rat trophoblast stem cell differentiation.

Gao H(1), Liebenthal DA(1), Yallampalli U(1), Yallampalli C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas. (2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas cyallamp@bcm.edu.

Accumulating data suggest that adrenomedullin (ADM) regulates the trophoblast
cell growth, migration, and invasion. However, the effect of ADM on trophoblast
differentiation is poorly understood. In this study, we hypothesized that ADM
promotes the differentiation of trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) into trophoblast
giant cells (TGCs). Using rat TSCs, Rcho-1 cells, we investigated the effect of
ADM on TSC differentiation into TGCs in differentiation or stem cell media,
respectively, and explored the effect of ADM on the mechanistic target of
rapamycin (MTOR) signaling in trophoblast cell differentiation. The results
include: 1) in the presence of differentiation medium, 10<U+207B>7 M ADM, but not lower 
doses, elevated (P < 0.05) Prl3b1/Esrrb (i.e., the ratio of mRNA levels) by
1.7-fold compared to that in control; 2) the supplementation of ADM antagonist,
regardless of the concentration of ADM, reduced (P < 0.05) Prl3b1/Esrrb by
2-fold, compared to control group, while the supplementation of CGRP antagonist, 
regardless of the concentration of ADM, did not change Prl3b1/Esrrb; 3) in the
presence of stem cell medium, ADM did not alter the expression of TSC and TGC
marker genes, however, the ratio of Prl3b1/Esrrb was reduced (P < 0.05) by ADM
antagonist compared to that in control; and 4) ADM increased (P < 0.05)
phosphorylated MTOR proteins and the ratio of phosphorylated to total MTOR
proteins by 2.0- and 1.7-fold, respectively. The results indicate that ADM
promotes but does not induce the differentiation of TSCs to TGCs in a
dose-dependent manner and MTOR signaling may play a role in this process.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4435060
PMID: 25061099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Cell Sci. 2014 Sep 15;127(Pt 18):3998-4008. doi: 10.1242/jcs.150029. Epub 2014 
Jul 18.

Differential effects of Akt isoforms on somatic cell reprogramming.

Tang Y(1), Jiang Z(1), Luo Y(1), Zhao X(1), Wang L(1), Norris C(2), Tian XC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Biology, Department of Animal Science, University of
Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology/Biotechnology and Bioservices Center, University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
CT 06269, USA. (3)Center for Regenerative Biology, Department of Animal Science, 
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA xiuchun.tian@uconn.edu.

Akt plays an important role in cell growth, proliferation and survival. The
specific roles of the three Akt isoforms in somatic cell reprogramming have not
been investigated. Here we report that, during iPSC generation, enhanced Akt1
activity promotes complete reprogramming mainly through increased activation of
Stat3 in concert with leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and, to a lesser extent,
through promotion of colony formation. Akt1 augments Stat3 activity through
activation of mTOR and upregulation of LIF receptor expression. Similarly,
enhanced Akt2 or Akt3 activation also promotes reprogramming and coordinates with
LIF to activate Stat3. Blocking Akt1 or Akt3 but not Akt2 expression prohibits
cell proliferation and reprogramming. Furthermore, the halt in cell proliferation
and reprogramming caused by mTOR and Akt inhibitors can be reversed by inhibition
of GSK3. Finally, we found that expressing the GSK3ß target Esrrb overrides
inhibition of Akt and restores reprogramming. Our data demonstrated that during
reprogramming, Akt promotes establishment of pluripotency through co-stimulation 
of Stat3 activity with LIF. Akt1 and Akt3 are essential for the proliferation of 
reprogrammed cells, and Esrrb supports cell proliferation and complete
reprogramming during Akt signaling.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25037569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. BMC Med Genet. 2014 Jul 15;15:81. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-15-81.

Role of estrogen related receptor beta (ESRRB) in DFN35B hearing impairment and
dental decay.

Weber ML, Hsin HY, Kalay E, Broková DS, Shimizu T, Bayram M, Deeley K, Küchler
EC, Forella J, Ruff TD, Trombetta VM, Sencak RC, Hummel M, Briseño-Ruiz J, Revu
SK, Granjeiro JM, Antunes LS, Antunes LA, Abreu FV, Costa MC, Tannure PN,
Koruyucu M, Patir A, Poletta FA, Mereb JC, Castilla EE, Orioli IM, Marazita ML,
Ouyang H, Jayaraman T, Seymen F, Vieira AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, 614 Salk Hall, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, 3501 Terrace Street, 15261 Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
arv11@pitt.edu.

BACKGROUND: Congenital forms of hearing impairment can be caused by mutations in 
the estrogen related receptor beta (ESRRB) gene. Our initial linkage studies
suggested the ESRRB locus is linked to high caries experience in humans.
METHODS: We tested for association between the ESRRB locus and dental caries in
1,731 subjects, if ESRRB was expressed in whole saliva, if ESRRB was associated
with the microhardness of the dental enamel, and if ESRRB was expressed during
enamel development of mice.
RESULTS: Two families with recessive ESRRB mutations and DFNB35 hearing
impairment showed more extensive dental destruction by caries. Expression levels 
of ESRRB in whole saliva samples showed differences depending on sex and dental
caries experience.
CONCLUSIONS: The common etiology of dental caries and hearing impairment provides
a venue to assist in the identification of individuals at risk to either
condition and provides options for the development of new caries prevention
strategies, if the associated ESRRB genetic variants are correlated with
efficacy.

PMCID: PMC4112727
PMID: 25023176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 8;111(27):9840-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1321330111. Epub 2014 Jun 23.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and 2 are essential for accurate cell division and
the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells.

Jamaladdin S(1), Kelly RD(1), O'Regan L(1), Dovey OM(2), Hodson GE(1), Millard
CJ(1), Portolano N(1), Fry AM(1), Schwabe JW(1), Cowley SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 9HN, United
Kingdom; and. (2)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambs CB10 1SA, United
Kingdom. (3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1
9HN, United Kingdom; and smc57@le.ac.uk.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) form the core catalytic components of
corepressor complexes that modulate gene expression. In most cell types, deletion
of both Hdac1 and Hdac2 is required to generate a discernible phenotype,
suggesting their activity is largely redundant. We have therefore generated an ES
cell line in which Hdac1 and Hdac2 can be inactivated simultaneously. Loss of
HDAC1/2 resulted in a 60% reduction in total HDAC activity and a loss of cell
viability. Cell death is dependent upon cell cycle progression, because
differentiated, nonproliferating cells retain their viability. Furthermore, we
observe increased mitotic defects, chromatin bridges, and micronuclei, suggesting
HDAC1/2 are necessary for accurate chromosome segregation. Consistent with a
critical role in the regulation of gene expression, microarray analysis of
Hdac1/2-deleted cells reveals 1,708 differentially expressed genes. Significantly
for the maintenance of stem cell self-renewal, we detected a reduction in the
expression of the pluripotent transcription factors, Oct4, Nanog, Esrrb, and
Rex1. HDAC1/2 activity is regulated through binding of an inositol tetraphosphate
molecule (IP4) sandwiched between the HDAC and its cognate corepressor. This
raises the important question of whether IP4 regulates the activity of the
complex in cells. By rescuing the viability of double-knockout cells, we
demonstrate for the first time (to our knowledge) that mutations that abolish IP4
binding reduce the activity of HDAC1/2 in vivo. Our data indicate that HDAC1/2
have essential and pleiotropic roles in cellular proliferation and regulate stem 
cell self-renewal by maintaining expression of key pluripotent transcription
factors.

PMCID: PMC4103379
PMID: 24958871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 15;392(2):182-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.002. Epub 2014 
Jun 12.

Nanog co-regulated by Nodal/Smad2 and Oct4 is required for pluripotency in
developing mouse epiblast.

Sun LT(1), Yamaguchi S(1), Hirano K(1), Ichisaka T(2), Kuroda T(3), Tada T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Engineering, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (2)Department of Reprogramming Science, 
Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8507, 
Japan. (3)Laboratory of Neural Differentiation, Graduate School of Brain Science,
Doshisha University, Kyoto 619-0225, Japan. (4)Department of Stem Cell
Engineering, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan. Electronic address: ttada@frontier.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Nanog, a core pluripotency factor, is required for stabilizing pluripotency of
inner cell mass (ICM) and embryonic stem cells (ESCs), and survival of primordial
germ cells in mice. Here, we have addressed function and regulation of Nanog in
epiblasts of postimplantation mouse embryos by conditional knockdown (KD),
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) using in vivo epiblasts, and protein
interaction with the Nanog promoter in vitro. Differentiation of Nanog-KD
epiblasts demonstrated requirement for Nanog in stabilization of pluripotency.
Nanog expression in epiblast is directly regulated by Nodal/Smad2 pathway in a
visceral endoderm-dependent manner. Notably, Nanog promoters switch from
Oct4/Esrrb in ICM/ESCs to Oct4/Smad2 in epiblasts. Smad2 directly associates with
Oct4 to form Nanog promoting protein complex. Collectively, these data
demonstrate that Nanog plays a key role in stabilizing Epiblast pluripotency
mediated by Nodal/Smad2 signaling, which is involved in Nanog promoter switching 
in early developing embryos.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24929238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Jun 5;14(6):864-72. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.04.015.

Klf2 is an essential factor that sustains ground state pluripotency.

Yeo JC(1), Jiang J(2), Tan ZY(3), Yim GR(2), Ng JH(2), Göke J(2), Kraus P(4),
Liang H(2), Gonzales KA(5), Chong HC(6), Tan CP(2), Lim YS(2), Tan NS(7), Lufkin 
T(4), Ng HH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, #02-01 Genome Building,
Singapore 138672, Singapore; School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological
University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore. (2)Genome Institute of
Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, #02-01 Genome Building, Singapore 138672,
Singapore. (3)Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, #02-01 Genome
Building, Singapore 138672, Singapore; Department of Biological Sciences,
National University of Singapore, 14 Science Drive 4, Singapore 117543,
Singapore. (4)Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, #02-01 Genome
Building, Singapore 138672, Singapore; Department of Biology, Clarkson
University, Potsdam, NY 13699, USA. (5)Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis
Street, #02-01 Genome Building, Singapore 138672, Singapore; Graduate School for 
Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
117456, Singapore. (6)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological
University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore. (7)School of
Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive,
Singapore 637551, Singapore; Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis
Drive, Proteos, A(*)STAR, Singapore 138673, Singapore. (8)Genome Institute of
Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, #02-01 Genome Building, Singapore 138672,
Singapore; School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60
Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore; Department of Biological Sciences,
National University of Singapore, 14 Science Drive 4, Singapore 117543,
Singapore; Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117456, Singapore; Department of Biochemistry,
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Block MD6,
Centre for Translational Medicine, 14 Medical Drive #14-01T, Singapore 117599,
Singapore. Electronic address: nghh@gis.a-star.edu.sg.

The maintenance of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) requires LIF and serum.
However, a pluripotent "ground state," bearing resemblance to preimplantation
mouse epiblasts, can be established through dual inhibition (2i) of both
prodifferentiation Mek/Erk and Gsk3/Tcf3 pathways. While Gsk3 inhibition has been
attributed to the transcriptional derepression of Esrrb, the molecular mechanism 
mediated by Mek inhibition remains unclear. In this study, we show that
Krüppel-like factor 2 (Klf2) is phosphorylated by Erk2 and that phospho-Klf2 is
proteosomally degraded. Mek inhibition hence prevents Klf2 protein
phosphodegradation to sustain pluripotency. Indeed, while Klf2-null mESCs can
survive under LIF/Serum, they are not viable under 2i, demonstrating that Klf2 is
essential for ground state pluripotency. Importantly, we also show that ectopic
Klf2 expression can replace Mek inhibition in mESCs, allowing the culture of
Klf2-null mESCs under Gsk3 inhibition alone. Collectively, our study defines the 
Mek/Erk/Klf2 axis that cooperates with the Gsk3/Tcf3/Esrrb pathway in mediating
ground state pluripotency.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24905170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Stem Cells. 2014 Oct;32(10):2605-15. doi: 10.1002/stem.1761.

Elevated O-GlcNAc levels activate epigenetically repressed genes and delay mouse 
ESC differentiation without affecting naïve to primed cell transition.

Speakman CM(1), Domke TC, Wongpaiboonwattana W, Sanders K, Mudaliar M, van Aalten
DM, Barton GJ, Stavridis MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research Institute, College of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Nursing, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.

The differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) is controlled by the
interaction of multiple signaling pathways, typically mediated by
post-translational protein modifications. The addition of O-linked
N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) to serine and threonine residues of nuclear and
cytoplasmic proteins is one such modification (O-GlcNAcylation), whose function
in ESCs is only now beginning to be elucidated. Here, we demonstrate that the
specific inhibition of O-GlcNAc hydrolase (Oga) causes increased levels of
protein O-GlcNAcylation and impairs differentiation of mouse ESCs both in
serum-free monolayer and in embryoid bodies (EBs). Use of reporter cell lines
demonstrates that Oga inhibition leads to a reduction in the number of
Sox1-expressing neural progenitors generated following induction of neural
differentiation as well as maintained expression of the ESC marker Oct4 (Pou5f1).
In EBs, expression of mesodermal and endodermal markers is also delayed. However,
the transition of naïve cells to primed pluripotency indicated by Rex1 (Zfp42),
Nanog, Esrrb, and Dppa3 downregulation and Fgf5 upregulation remains unchanged.
Finally, we demonstrate that increased O-GlcNAcylation results in upregulation of
genes normally epigenetically silenced in ESCs, supporting the emerging role for 
this protein modification in the regulation of histone modifications and DNA
methylation.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4737245
PMID: 24898611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Food Funct. 2014 Jul 25;5(7):1594-601. doi: 10.1039/c4fo00133h.

Ameliorative effects of Schizandra chinensis on osteoporosis via activation of
estrogen receptor (ER)-a/-ß.

Kim MH(1), Choi YY, Han JM, Lee HS, Hong SB, Lee SG, Yang WM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Korean Medicine and Institute of Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, 1 Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, Korea. wmyang@khu.ac.kr.

Estrogen deficiency in menopausal women is the main cause of osteoporosis.
Phytoestrogen could be a suitable candidate for treatment of post-menopausal
osteoporosis. Recent studies showed that S. chinensis contains several lignans,
which may be phytoestrogen. In this study, we investigated the ameliorative
effects of S. chinensis on post-menopausal osteoporosis. 30% ethanol extract of
S. chinensis (SC) was administered orally for 6 weeks after 7 weeks of
ovariectomized-induced osteoporosis. Bone mineral density was significantly
increased following increased serum osteocalcin levels by SC treatment.
Histological analysis showed that SC reduced the increased growth plate of the
epiphyseal plate in femur. In addition, pores within bone marrow cells filling
the lateral and medial epicondyle were decreased. Serum estradiol concentration
was significantly increased in the SC-treated group. The expressions of estrogen 
receptor-a and -ß were increased in uterus and MCF-7 breast cancer cells by SC
treatment. And two transcriptions of proto-oncogenes, c-fos and c-Jun, were
suppressed by treatment of SC. From these data, we propose that S. chinensis
attenuates post-menopausal osteoporosis with its phytoestrogenic effects. S.
chinensis may have the potential to be used as an alternative for treatment of
osteoporosis.

PMID: 24881676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 2;9(4):e93663. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093663. eCollection 
2014.

Cell cycle-dependent expression of Dub3, Nanog and the p160 family of nuclear
receptor coactivators (NCoAs) in mouse embryonic stem cells.

van der Laan S(1), Golfetto E(1), Vanacker JM(2), Maiorano D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Surveillance and Stability laboratory, Department "Molecular Bases of
Human Diseases", CNRS-UPR1142, Institute of Human Genetics, Montpellier, France. 
(2)Physiopathology of orphan nuclear receptors, Institut de Génomique
Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(8):e105649.

Pluripotency of embryonic stem cells (ESC) is tightly regulated by a network of
transcription factors among which the estrogen-related receptor ß (Esrrb). Esrrb 
contributes to the relaxation of the G1 to S-phase (G1/S) checkpoint in mouse
ESCs by transcriptional control of the deubiquitylase Dub3 gene, contributing to 
Cdc25A persistence after DNA damage. We show that in mESCs, Dub3 gene expression 
is cell cycle regulated and is maximal prior G1/S transition. In addition,
following UV-induced DNA damage in G1, Dub3 expression markedly increases in
S-phase also suggesting a role in checkpoint recovery. Unexpectedly, we also
observed cell cycle-regulation of Nanog expression, and not Oct4, reaching high
levels prior to G1/S transition, finely mirroring Cyclin E1 fluctuations.
Curiously, while Esrrb showed only limited cell-cycle oscillations, transcript
levels of the p160 family of nuclear receptor coactivators (NCoAs) displayed
strong cell cycle-dependent fluctuations. Since NCoAs function in concert with
Esrrb in transcriptional activation, we focussed on NCoA1 whose levels
specifically increase prior onset of Dub3 transcription. Using a reporter assay, 
we show that NCoA1 potentiates Esrrb-mediated transcription of Dub3 and we
present evidence of protein interaction between the SRC1 splice variant NCoA1 and
Esrrb. Finally, we show a differential developmental regulation of all members of
the p160 family during neural conversion of mESCs. These findings suggest that in
mouse ESCs, changes in the relative concentration of a coactivator at a given
cell cycle phase, may contribute to modulation of the transcriptional activity of
the core transcription factors of the pluripotent network and be implicated in
cell fate decisions upon onset of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3973558
PMID: 24695638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Clin Exp Reprod Med. 2014 Mar;41(1):1-8. doi: 10.5653/cerm.2014.41.1.1. Epub 2014
Mar 14.

Effect of cell-penetrating peptide-conjugated estrogen-related receptor ß on the 
development of mouse embryos cultured in vitro.

Yang NJ(1), Seol DW(1), Jo J(1), Jang HM(1), Yoon SY(2), Lee DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA
University, Seoul, Korea. ; Fertility Center of CHA Gangnam Medical Center, CHA
University, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Estrogen related receptor ß (Esrrb) is a member of the orphan nuclear 
receptors and may regulate the expression of pluripotency-related genes, such as 
Oct4 and Nanog. Therefore, in the present study, we have developed a method for
delivering exogenous ESRRB recombinant protein into embryos by using
cell-penetrating peptide (CPP) conjugation and have analyzed their effect on
embryonic development.
METHODS: Mouse oocytes and embryos were obtained from superovulated mice. The
expression of Oct4 mRNA and the cell number of inner cell mass (ICM) in the in
vitro-derived and in vivo-derived blastocysts were first analyzed by real
time-reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and differential staining.
Then 8-cell embryos were cultured in KSOM media with or without 2 µg/mL CPP-ESRRB
protein for 24 to 48 hours, followed by checking their integration into embryos
during in vitro culture by Western blot and immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: Expression of Oct4 and the cell number of ICM were lower in the in
vitro-derived blastocysts than in the in vivo-derived ones (p<0.05). In the
blastocysts derived from the CPP-ESRRB-treated group, expression of Oct4 was
greater than in the non-treated groups (p<0.05). Although no difference in
embryonic development was observed between the treated and non-treated groups,
the cell number of ICM was greater in the CPP-ESRRB-treated group.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of CPP-ESRRB during cultivation could increase embryos'
expression of Oct4 and the formation rate of the ICM in the blastocyst.
Additionally, an exogenous delivery system of CPP-conjugated protein would be a
useful tool for improving embryo culture systems.

PMCID: PMC3968251
PMID: 24693491  [PubMed]


45. Anat Cell Biol. 2014 Mar;47(1):1-11. doi: 10.5115/acb.2014.47.1.1. Epub 2014 Mar 
13.

The expressions of stem cell markers: Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, nucleostemin, Bmi, Zfx, 
Tcl1, Tbx3, Dppa4, and Esrrb in bladder, colon, and prostate cancer, and certain 
cancer cell lines.

Amini S(1), Fathi F(2), Mobalegi J(3), Sofimajidpour H(4), Ghadimi T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Sanandaj Branch, Islamic Azad University, Sanandaj,
Iran. (2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Kurdistan University of Medical 
Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. (3)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine,
Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. (4)Department of
Urology, Faculty of Medicine, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj,
Iran.

Uncontrolled self-renewal plays a direct function in the progression of different
types of carcinomas. The same molecular pathway that manages self-renewal in
normal stem cells also seems to manage cancer stem cells. Here, we examine the
expressions of self-renewal regulatory factors Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, nucleostemin,
Zfx, Esrrb, Tcl1, Tbx3, and Dppa4 in tissue samples of colon, prostate, and
bladder carcinomas as well as cancer cell lines HT-29, Caco-2, HT-1376, LNCaP,
and HepG2. We used reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction to examine
expressions of the above mentioned regulatory factors in cancer cell lines HT-29,
Caco-2, HT-1376, LNCaP, and HepG2 and in 20 tumor tissue samples. Total RNA was
isolated by the ISOGEN method. RNA integrity was checked by agarose gel
electrophoresis and spectrophotometry. Expressions of Oct4 and nucleostemin at
the protein level were determined by immunocytochemistry. A significant
relationship was found between tumor grade and self-renewal gene expression.
Expressions of stem cell specific marker genes were detected in all examined
cancer cell lines, in 40% to 100% of bladder cancer samples, and in 60% to 100%
of colon and prostate cancer samples. Oct4 expressed in 100% of tumor tissue
samples. Our data show that stem cell markers Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, nucleostemin,
Bmi, Zfx, Esrrb, Tcl1, Tbx3, and Dppa4 significantly express in cancer cell lines
and cancer tissues. Hence, these markers might be useful as potential tumor
markers in the diagnosis and/or prognosis of tumors.

PMCID: PMC3968261
PMID: 24693477  [PubMed]


46. Sci Rep. 2014 Mar 14;4:4378. doi: 10.1038/srep04378.

Cell-penetrating peptide (CPP)-conjugated proteins is an efficient tool for
manipulation of human mesenchymal stromal cells.

Jo J(1), Hong S(1), Choi WY(2), Lee DR(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University, 
Seoul, Korea [2]. (2)1] Fertility Center, CHA Gangnam Medical Center, College of 
Medicine, CHA University, Seoul, Korea [2] Department of Biotechnology, Seoul
Women's University, Seoul, Korea. (3)1] Department of Biomedical Science, College
of Life Science, CHA University, Seoul, Korea [2] Fertility Center, CHA Gangnam
Medical Center, College of Medicine, CHA University, Seoul, Korea [3] CHA Stem
Cell Institute, CHA University, Seoul, Korea.

Delivery of proteins has been regarded as the safest and most useful application 
in therapeutic application of stem cells, because proteins can regulate gene
expression transiently without any genomic alteration. However, it is difficult
to accurately measure efficiency or quantity of intracellular protein uptake.
Here, we performed a comparison study of cell-penetrating peptide
(CPP)-conjugated protein delivery system using seven arginine and Streptolysin O 
(SLO)-mediated system. To compare CPP- and SLO-mediated protein delivery systems,
we used GFP and ESRRB protein, which is known to regulate pluripotency-related
genes, for delivery into human bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSCs) and human
testicular stromal cells (hTSCs). We found that CPP-conjugated protein delivery
was more efficient, lower cytotoxicity, and higher biological activity than
SLO-mediated protein delivery system. These results suggest that delivery of
CPP-conjugated proteins is an efficient tool for introducing biologically active 
proteins into cells and may have important implications in clinical cell-based
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3953728
PMID: 24625570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 20;9(1):e85089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085089. eCollection
2014.

Efficient reprogramming of naïve-like induced pluripotent stem cells from porcine
adipose-derived stem cells with a feeder-independent and serum-free system.

Zhang Y(1), Wei C(1), Zhang P(1), Li X(1), Liu T(1), Pu Y(1), Li Y(1), Cao Z(1), 
Cao H(1), Liu Y(1), Zhang X(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Provincial Laboratory for Local Livestock and Poultry Genetic Resource
Conservation and Bio-breeding, Department of Animal Science, College of Animal
Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei, Anhui, People's
Republic of China.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are somatic cells reprogrammed by ectopic 
expression of transcription factors or small molecule treatment, which resemble
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). They hold great promise for improving the generation
of genetically modified large animals. However, few porcine iPSCs (piPSCs) lines 
obtained currently can support development of cloned embryos. Here, we generated 
iPSCs from porcine adipose-derived stem cells (pADSCs), using drug-inducible
expression of defined human factors (Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc and Klf4). Reprogramming
of iPSCs from pADSCs was more efficient than from fibroblasts, regardless of
using feeder-independent or feeder-dependent manners. By addition of Lif-2i
medium containing mouse Lif, CHIR99021 and PD0325901 (Lif-2i), naïve-like piPSCs 
were obtained under feeder-independent and serum-free conditions. These
successfully reprogrammed piPSCs were characterized by short cell cycle
intervals, alkaline phosphatase (AP) staining, expression of Oct4, Sox2, Nanog,
SSEA3 and SSEA4, and normal karyotypes. The resemblance of piPSCs to naïve ESCs
was confirmed by their packed dome morphology, growth after single-cell
dissociation, Lif-dependency, up-regulation of Stella and Eras, low expression
levels of TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81 and MHC I and activation of both X chromosomes. Full
reprogramming of naïve-like piPSCs was evaluated by the significant up-regulation
of Lin28, Esrrb, Utf1 and Dppa5, differentiating into cell types of all three
germ layers in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, nuclear transfer embryos from
naïve-like piPSCs could develop to blastocysts with improved quality. Thus, we
provided an efficient protocol for generating naïve-like piPSCs from pADSCs in a 
feeder-independent and serum-free system with controlled regulation of exogenous 
genes, which may facilitate optimization of culture media and the production of
transgenic pigs.

PMCID: PMC3896366
PMID: 24465482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Pathol. 2013 Nov;231(3):301-10.

The genomic landscape of oesophagogastric junctional adenocarcinoma.

Chong IY, Cunningham D, Barber LJ, Campbell J, Chen L, Kozarewa I, Fenwick K,
Assiotis I, Guettler S, Garcia-Murillas I, Awan S, Lambros M, Starling N,
Wotherspoon A, Stamp G, Gonzalez-de-Castro D, Benson M, Chau I, Hulkki S,
Nohadani M, Eltahir Z, Lemnrau A, Orr N, Rao S, Lord CJ, Ashworth A.

The incidence of oesophagogastric junctional (OGJ) adenocarcinoma is rising
rapidly in western countries, in contrast to the declining frequency of distal
gastric carcinoma. Treatment options for adenocarcinomas involving the
oesophagogastric junction are limited and the overall prognosis is extremely
poor. To determine the genomic landscape of OGJ adenocarcinoma, exomes of eight
tumours and matched germline DNA were subjected to massively parallel DNA
sequencing. Microsatellite instability was observed in three tumours which
coincided with an elevated number of somatic mutations. In total, 117 genes were 
identified that had predicted coding alterations in more than one tumour.
Potentially actionable coding mutations were identified in 67 of these genes,
including those in CR2, HGF , FGFR4, and ESRRB. Twenty-nine genes harbouring
somatic coding mutations and copy number changes in the MSS OGJ dataset are also 
known to be altered with similar predicted functional consequence in other tumour
types. Compared with the published mutational profile of gastric cancers, 49%
(57/117) of recurrently mutated genes were unique to OGJ tumours. TP53, SYNE1,
and ARID1A were amongst the most frequently mutated genes in a larger OGJ cohort.
Our study provides an insight into the mutational landscape of OGJ
adenocarcinomas and confirms that this is a highly mutated and heterogeneous
disease. Furthermore, we have uncovered somatic mutations in therapeutically
relevant genes which may represent candidate drug targets.

2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24308032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell. 2013 Nov 7;52(3):366-79. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.10.003.

High Dub3 expression in mouse ESCs couples the G1/S checkpoint to pluripotency.

van der Laan S(1), Tsanov N, Crozet C, Maiorano D.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Surveillance and Stability Laboratory, CNRS-UPR1142, Institute of Human
Genetics, 141 Rue de la Cardonille, 34396 Cedex 5, Montpellier, France.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(9):1364-5.

The molecular mechanism underlying G1/S checkpoint bypass in mouse embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) remains unknown. DNA damage blocks S phase entry by inhibiting the
CDK2 kinase through destruction of its activator, the Cdc25A phosphatase. We
observed high Cdc25A levels in G1 that persist even after DNA damage in mouse
ESCs. We also found higher expression of Dub3, a deubiquitylase that controls
Cdc25A protein abundance. Moreover, we demonstrate that the Dub3 gene is a direct
target of Esrrb, a key transcription factor of the self-renewal machinery. We
show that Dub3 expression is strongly downregulated during neural conversion and 
precedes Cdc25A destabilization, while forced Dub3 expression in ESCs becomes
lethal upon differentiation, concomitant to cell-cycle remodeling and lineage
commitment. Finally, knockdown of either Dub3 or Cdc25A induced spontaneous
differentiation of ESCs. Altogether, these findings couple the self-renewal
machinery to cell-cycle control through a deubiquitylase in ESCs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24207026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 2014 Feb;23(2):227-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2013.07.053.
Epub 2013 Oct 12.

Evidence of genetic variations associated with rotator cuff disease.

Motta Gda R(1), Amaral MV(2), Rezende E(1), Pitta R(1), Vieira TC(3), Duarte
ME(3), Vieira AR(4), Casado PL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Center of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery,
National Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Center of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery,
National Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;
Research Division, National Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. (3)Research Division, National Institute of Traumatology and
Orthopaedics, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (4)Department of Oral Biology, School of
Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (5)Research
Division, National Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil. Electronic address: pcasado@into.saude.gov.br.

BACKGROUND: Rotator cuff disease (RCD) is a complex process influenced by a
multitude of factors, and a number of gene pathways are altered in rotator cuff
tears. Polymorphisms in these genes can lead to an extended tendon degeneration
process, which explains why subsets of patients are more susceptible to RCD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-three single-nucleotide polymorphisms within 6
genes involved in repair and degenerative processes (DEFB1, DENND2C, ESRRB, FGF3,
FGF10, and FGFR1) were investigated in 410 patients, 203 with a diagnosis of RCD 
and 207 presenting with absence of RCD. Exclusion criteria were patients older
than 60 years and younger than 45 years with a history of trauma, rheumatoid
arthritis, autoimmune syndrome, pregnancy, and use of corticosteroids. Genomic
DNA was obtained from saliva samples. Genetic markers were genotyped with TaqMan 
real-time polymerase chain reaction. The <U+03C7>(2) test compared genotypes and
haplotype differences between groups. Multivariate logistic regression analyzed
the significance of many covariates and the incidence of RCD.
RESULTS: Statistical analysis revealed female sex (P = .001; odds ratio, 2.07
[1.30-3.30]) and being white (P = .002; odds ratio, 1.88 [1.21-2.90]) to be risk 
factors for RCD development. A significant association of haplotypes CCTTCCAG in 
ESRRB (P = .05), CGACG in FGF3 (P = .01), CC in DEFB1 (P = .03), and FGFR1
rs13317 (P = .02) with RCD could be observed. Also, association between FGF10
rs11750845 (P = .03) and rs1011814 (P = .01) was observed after adjustment by
ethnic group and sex.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work clearly supports the role of DEFB1, ESRRB, FGF3, FGF10, and
FGFR1 genes in RCD. Identification of these variants can clarify causal pathways 
and provide a clue for therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2014 Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery Board of Trustees.
Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24129055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cell. 2013 Nov 7;52(3):380-92. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.09.002. Epub 2013
Oct 10.

Context-dependent wiring of Sox2 regulatory networks for self-renewal of
embryonic and trophoblast stem cells.

Adachi K(1), Nikaido I, Ohta H, Ohtsuka S, Ura H, Kadota M, Wakayama T, Ueda HR, 
Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 6500047, Japan. Electronic
address: kenjiro.adachi@mpi-muenster.mpg.de.

Sox2 is a transcription factor required for the maintenance of pluripotency. It
also plays an essential role in different types of multipotent stem cells,
raising the possibility that Sox2 governs the common stemness phenotype. Here we 
show that Sox2 is a critical downstream target of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 
signaling, which mediates self-renewal of trophoblast stem cells (TSCs).
Sustained expression of Sox2 together with Esrrb or Tfap2c can replace FGF
dependency. By comparing genome-wide binding sites of Sox2 in embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) and TSCs combined with inducible knockout systems, we found that,
despite the common role in safeguarding the stem cell state, Sox2 regulates
distinct sets of genes with unique functions in these two different yet
developmentally related types of stem cells. Our findings provide insights into
the functional versatility of transcription factors during embryogenesis, during 
which they can be recursively utilized in a variable manner within discrete
network structures.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 1;440(4):652-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.121. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Homeobox A7 stimulates breast cancer cell proliferation by up-regulating estrogen
receptor-alpha.

Zhang Y(1), Cheng JC, Huang HF, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310006, China; Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada.

Breast cancer is the most common hormone-dependent malignancy in women. Homeobox 
(HOX) transcription factors regulate many cellular functions, including cell
migration, proliferation and differentiation. The aberrant expression of HOX
genes has been reported to be associated with human reproductive cancers.
Estradiol (E2) and its nuclear receptors, estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha and
ER-beta, are known to play critical roles in the regulation of breast cancer cell
growth. However, an understanding of the potential relationship between HOXA7 and
ER in breast cancer cells is limited. In this study, our results demonstrate that
knockdown of HOXA7 in MCF7 cells significantly decreased cell proliferation and
ERa expression. In addition, HOXA7 knockdown attenuated E2-induced cell
proliferation as well as progesterone receptor (PR) expression. The stimulatory
effects of E2 on cell proliferation and PR expression were abolished by
co-treatment with ICI 182780, a selective ERa antagonist. In contrast,
overexpression of HOXA7 significantly stimulated cell proliferation and ERa
expression. Moreover, E2-induced cell proliferation, as well as PR expression,
was enhanced by the overexpression of HOXA7. Neither knockdown nor overexpression
of HOXA7 affected the ER-beta levels. Our results demonstrate a novel mechanistic
role for HOXA7 in modulating breast cancer cell proliferation via regulation of
ERa expression. This finding contributes to our understanding of the role HOXA7
plays in regulating the proliferation of ER-positive cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24099775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. BMC Physiol. 2013 Sep 22;13:10. doi: 10.1186/1472-6793-13-10.

Estrogen-related receptor ß deficiency alters body composition and response to
restraint stress.

Byerly MS(1), Swanson RD, Wong GW, Blackshaw S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA. mardibyerly@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Estrogen-related receptors (ERRs) are orphan nuclear hormone
receptors expressed in metabolically active tissues and modulate numerous
homeostatic processes. ERRs do not bind the ligand estrogen, but they are able to
bind the estrogen response element (ERE) embedded within the ERR response
elements (ERREs) to regulate transcription of genes. Previous work has
demonstrated that adult mice lacking Errß have altered metabolism and meal
patterns. To further understand the biological role of Errß, we characterized the
stress response of mice deficient for one or both alleles of Errß.
RESULTS: Sox2-Cre:Errß mice lack Errß expression in all tissues of the developing
embryo. Sox2-Cre:Errß+/lox heterozygotes were obese, had increased Npy and Agrp
gene expression in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, and secreted more
corticosterone in response to stress. In contrast, Sox2-Cre:Errßlox/lox
homozygotes were lean and, despite increased Npy and Agrp gene expression, did
not secrete more corticosterone in response to stress. Sox2-Cre:Errß+/lox and
Sox2-Cre:Errßlox/lox mice treated with the Errß and Err<U+03B3> agonist DY131
demonstrated increased corticotropin-releasing hormone (Crh) expression in the
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, although corticosterone levels were 
not affected. Nes-Cre:Errßlox/lox mice, which selectively lack Errß expression in
the nervous system, also demonstrated elevated stress response during an acoustic
startle response test and decreased expression of both Crh and
corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 2 (Crhr2).
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of Errß affects body composition, neuropeptide levels, stress
hormones, and centrally-modulated startle responses of mice. These results
indicate that Errß alters the function of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis and indicates a role for Errß in
regulating stress response.

PMCID: PMC3850731
PMID: 24053666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2013 Oct;23(5):504-11. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2013.06.003. Epub 
2013 Aug 7.

The role of pluripotency gene regulatory network components in mediating
transitions between pluripotent cell states.

Festuccia N(1), Osorno R, Wilson V, Chambers I.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School
of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh
EH16 4UU, Scotland, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
nicola.festuccia@ed.ac.uk.

Pluripotency is a property that early embryonic cells possess over a considerable
developmental time span. Accordingly, pluripotent cell lines can be established
from the pre-implantation or post-implantation mouse embryo as embryonic stem
(ES) or epiblast stem (EpiSC) cell lines, respectively. Maintenance of the
pluripotent phenotype depends on the function of specific transcription factors
(TFs) operating within a pluripotency gene regulatory network (PGRN). As cells
move from an ES cell to an EpiSC state, the PGRN changes with expression of some 
TFs reduced (e.g. Nanog) or eliminated (e.g. Esrrb). Re-expressing such TFs can
move cells back to an earlier developmental identity and is being applied to
attempt establishment of human cell lines with the properties of mouse ES cells.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3790975
PMID: 23932125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Feb;49(1):39-49. doi: 10.1007/s12035-013-8484-9. Epub 2013
Jun 16.

Targeting estrogen receptors for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Lee JH(1), Jiang Y, Han DH, Shin SK, Choi WH, Lee MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, College of Applied Sciences, Kyung Hee
University, Yongin, 446-701, Republic of Korea.

The significantly higher incidence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in women than in
men has been attributed to loss of estrogen and a variety of related mechanisms
at the molecular, cellular, and hormonal levels, which subsequently elucidate
neuroprotective roles of estrogen against AD-related pathology. Recent studies
have proposed that beneficial effects of estrogen on AD are directly linked to
its ability to reduce amyloid-ß peptides and tau aggregates, two hallmark lesions
of AD. Despite high expectations, large clinical trials with postmenopausal women
indicated that the beneficial effects of estrogen therapies were insignificant
and, in fact, elicited adverse effects. Here, we review the current status of AD 
prevention and treatment using estrogens focusing on recent understandings of
their biochemical links to AD pathophysiology. This review also discusses
development of selective ligands that specifically target either estrogen
receptor a (ERa) or ERß isoforms, which are potentially promising strategies for 
safe and efficient treatment of AD.

PMID: 23771838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. BMC Genomics. 2013 May 24;14:345. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-345.

Comparative analysis of 4C-Seq data generated from enzyme-based and
sonication-based methods.

Gao F(1), Wei Z, Lu W, Wang K.

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

BACKGROUND: Circular chromosome conformation capture, when coupled with
next-generation sequencing (4C-Seq), can be used to identify genome-wide
interaction of a given locus (a "bait" sequence) with all of its interacting
partners. Conventional 4C approaches used restriction enzyme digestion to
fragment chromatin, and recently sonication approach was also applied for this
purpose. However, bioinformatics pipelines for analyzing sonication-based 4C-Seq 
data are not well developed. In addition, data consistency as well as similarity 
between the two methods has not been explored previously. Here we present a
comparative analysis of 4C-Seq data generated by both methods, using an enhancer 
element of Pou5f1 gene in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.
RESULTS: From biological replicates, we found good correlation (r>0.6) for
inter-chromosomal interactions identified in either enzyme or sonication method. 
Compared to enzyme approach, sonication method generated less distal
intra-chromosomal interactions, possibly due to the difference in chromatin
fragmentation. From all mapped interactions, we further applied statistical
models to identify enriched interacting regions. Interestingly, data generated
from the two methods showed 30% overlap of the reproducible interacting regions. 
The interacting sites in the reproducible regions from both methods are similarly
enriched with active histone marks. In addition, the interacting sites identified
from sonication-based data are enriched with ChIP-Seq signals of transcription
factors Oct4, Klf4, Esrrb, Tcfcp2i1, and Zfx that are critical for reprogramming 
and pluripotency.
CONCLUSIONS: Both enzyme-based and sonication-based 4C-Seq methods are valuable
tools to explore long-range chromosomal interactions. Due to the nature of
sonication-based method, correlation analysis of the 4C interactions with
transcription factor binding should be more straightforward.

PMCID: PMC3679908
PMID: 23705979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Curr Mol Med. 2013 Jun;13(5):806-14.

What makes a pluripotency reprogramming factor?

Jauch R(1), Kolatkar PR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Structural Biochemistry, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research (A*STAR), Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis St, 138672,
Singapore. ralf@gibh.ac.cn

Resetting differentiated cells to a pluripotent state is now a widely applied
technology and a key step towards personalized cell replacement therapies.
Conventionally, combinations of transcription factor proteins are introduced into
a differentiated cell to convert gene expression programs and to change cell
fates. Yet, the molecular mechanism of nuclear reprogramming is only
superficially understood. Specifically, it is unclear what sets pluripotency
reprogramming factors (PRFs) molecularly apart from other transcription factor
molecules that induce, for example, lineage commitment in embryonic development. 
Ultimately, PRFs must scan the genome of a differentiated cell, target enhancers 
of pluripotency factors and initiate gene expression. This requires biochemical
properties to selectively recognize DNA sequences, either alone or by cooperating
with other PRFs. In this review, we will discuss the molecular make-up of the
prominent PRFs Sox2, Oct4, Klf4, Esrrb, Nr5a2 and Nanog and attempt to identify
unique features distinguishing them from highly homologous yet functionally
contrasting family members. Except for Klf4, the consensus DNA binding motifs are
highly conserved for PRFs when compared to non-pluripotency inducing family
members, suggesting that the individual DNA sequence preference may not be the
distinguishing factor. By contrast, variant composite DNA motifs were found in
pluripotency enhancers that lead to a differential assembly of various Sox and
Oct family members due selective protein-protein interaction platform. As a
consequence, the cooperation of PRFs on distinctly configured DNA motifs may
underlie the reprogramming process. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that Sox17
can be rationally engineered into a PRF by modulating its cooperation with Oct4. 
An in deep understanding of this phenomenon would allow rational engineering and 
optimization of PRFs. This way, the reprogramming efficiency can be enhanced and 
fine-tuned to generate optimal synthetic reagents for regenerative medicine.

PMID: 23642061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jun;41(11):5555-68. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt250. Epub 2013
Apr 16.

TherMos: Estimating protein-DNA binding energies from in vivo binding profiles.

Sun W(1), Hu X, Lim MH, Ng CK, Choo SH, Castro DS, Drechsel D, Guillemot F,
Kolatkar PR, Jauch R, Prabhakar S.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis 
St, Singapore 138672, Singapore.

Accurately characterizing transcription factor (TF)-DNA affinity is a central
goal of regulatory genomics. Although thermodynamics provides the most natural
language for describing the continuous range of TF-DNA affinity, traditional
motif discovery algorithms focus instead on classification paradigms that aim to 
discriminate 'bound' and 'unbound' sequences. Moreover, these algorithms do not
directly model the distribution of tags in ChIP-seq data. Here, we present a new 
algorithm named Thermodynamic Modeling of ChIP-seq (TherMos), which directly
estimates a position-specific binding energy matrix (PSEM) from ChIP-seq/exo tag 
profiles. In cross-validation tests on seven genome-wide TF-DNA binding profiles,
one of which we generated via ChIP-seq on a complex developing tissue, TherMos
predicted quantitative TF-DNA binding with greater accuracy than five well-known 
algorithms. We experimentally validated TherMos binding energy models for Klf4
and Esrrb, using a novel protocol to measure PSEMs in vitro. Strikingly, our
measurements revealed strong non-additivity at multiple positions within the two 
PSEMs. Among the algorithms tested, only TherMos was able to model the entire
binding energy landscape of Klf4 and Esrrb. Our study reveals new insights into
the energetics of TF-DNA binding in vivo and provides an accurate
first-principles approach to binding energy inference from ChIP-seq and ChIP-exo 
data.

PMCID: PMC3675472
PMID: 23595148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cell. 2013 Apr 11;153(2):335-47. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.012.

Exit from pluripotency is gated by intracellular redistribution of the bHLH
transcription factor Tfe3.

Betschinger J(1), Nichols J, Dietmann S, Corrin PD, Paddison PJ, Smith A.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK. jb579@cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Cell. 2013 Apr 11;153(2):281-3.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;14(6):324.

Factors that sustain self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are well
described. In contrast, the machinery regulating exit from pluripotency is ill
defined. In a large-scale small interfering RNA (siRNA) screen, we found that
knockdown of the tumor suppressors Folliculin (Flcn) and Tsc2 prevent ESC
commitment. Tsc2 lies upstream of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), whereas
Flcn acts downstream and in parallel. Flcn with its interaction partners Fnip1
and Fnip2 drives differentiation by restricting nuclear localization and activity
of the bHLH transcription factor Tfe3. Conversely, enforced nuclear Tfe3 enables 
ESCs to withstand differentiation conditions. Genome-wide location and functional
analyses showed that Tfe3 directly integrates into the pluripotency circuitry
through transcriptional regulation of Esrrb. These findings identify a
cell-intrinsic rheostat for destabilizing ground-state pluripotency to allow
lineage commitment. Congruently, stage-specific subcellular relocalization of
Tfe3 suggests that Flcn-Fnip1/2 contributes to developmental progression of the
pluripotent epiblast in vivo.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3661979
PMID: 23582324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 May;33(10):2056-66. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01520-12. Epub 2013 Mar 
18.

Dax1 associates with Esrrb and regulates its function in embryonic stem cells.

Uranishi K(1), Akagi T, Sun C, Koide H, Yokota T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Self-renewal capacity and pluripotency, which are controlled by the
Oct3/4-centered transcriptional regulatory network, are major characteristics of 
embryonic stem (ES) cells. Nuclear hormone receptor Dax1 is one of the crucial
factors in the network. Here, we identified an orphan nuclear receptor, Esrrb
(estrogen-related receptor beta), as a Dax1-interacting protein. Interaction of
Dax1 and Esrrb was mediated through LXXLL motifs of Dax1 and the activation- and 
ligand-binding domains of Esrrb. Furthermore, Esrrb enhanced the promoter
activity of the Dax1 gene via direct binding to Esrrb-binding site 1 (ERRE1,
where "ERRE" represents "Esrrb-responsive element") of the promoter. Expression
of Dax1 was suppressed followed by Oct3/4 repression; however, overexpression of 
Esrrb maintained expression of Dax1 even in the absence of Oct3/4, indicating
that Dax1 is a direct downstream target of Esrrb and that Esrrb can regulate Dax1
expression in an Oct3/4-independent manner. We also found that the
transcriptional activity of Esrrb was repressed by Dax1. Furthermore, we revealed
that Oct3/4, Dax1, and Esrrb have a competitive inhibition capacity for each
complex. These data, together with previous findings, suggest that Dax1 functions
as a negative regulator of Esrrb and Oct3/4, and these molecules form a
regulatory loop for controlling the pluripotency and self-renewal capacity of ES 
cells.

PMCID: PMC3647970
PMID: 23508100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Biol. 2013 May 1;377(1):67-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.02.014. Epub 2013
Mar 6.

Interaction between DMRT1 function and genetic background modulates signaling and
pluripotency to control tumor susceptibility in the fetal germ line.

Krentz AD(1), Murphy MW, Zhang T, Sarver AL, Jain S, Griswold MD, Bardwell VJ,
Zarkower D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, Developmental Biology
Center, and Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, 6-160 Jackson
Laboratory, 321 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Dmrt1 (doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor (1) is a regulator of
testis development in vertebrates that has been implicated in testicular germ
cell tumors of mouse and human. In the fetal mouse testis Dmrt1 regulates germ
cell pluripotency in a strain-dependent manner. Loss of Dmrt1 in 129Sv strain
mice results in a >90% incidence of testicular teratomas, tumors consisting cells
of multiple germ layers; by contrast, these tumors have never been observed in
Dmrt1 mutants of C57BL/6J (B6) or mixed genetic backgrounds. To further
investigate the interaction between Dmrt1 and genetic background we compared mRNA
expression in wild type and Dmrt1 mutant fetal testes of 129Sv and B6 mice at
embryonic day 15.5 (E15.5), prior to overt tumorigenesis. Loss of Dmrt1 caused
misexpression of overlapping but distinct sets of mRNAs in the two strains. The
mRNAs that were selectively affected included some that changed expression only
in one strain or the other and some that changed in both strains but to a greater
degree in one versus the other. In particular, loss of Dmrt1 in 129Sv testes
caused a more severe failure to silence regulators of pluripotency than in B6
testes. A number of genes misregulated in 129Sv mutant testes also are
misregulated in human testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs), suggesting similar
etiology between germ cell tumors in mouse and man. Expression profiling showed
that DMRT1 also regulates pluripotency genes in the fetal ovary, although Dmrt1
mutant females do not develop teratomas. Pathway analysis indicated disruption of
several signaling pathways in Dmrt1 mutant fetal testes, including Nodal, Notch, 
and GDNF. We used a Nanos3-cre knock-in allele to perform conditional gene
targeting, testing the GDNF coreceptors Gfra1 and Ret for effects on teratoma
susceptibility. Conditional deletion of Gfra1 but not Ret in fetal germ cells of 
animals outcrossed to 129Sv caused a modest but significant elevation in tumor
incidence. Despite some variability in genetic background in these crosses, this 
result is consistent with previous genetic mapping of teratoma susceptibility
loci to the region containing Gfra1. Using Nanos3-cre we also uncovered a strong 
genetic interaction between Dmrt1 and Nanos3, suggesting parallel functions for
these two genes in fetal germ cells. Finally, we used chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP-seq) analysis to identify a number of potentially
direct DMRT1 targets. This analysis suggested that DMRT1 controls pluripotency
via transcriptional repression of Esrrb, Nr5a2/Lrh1, and Sox2. Given the strong
evidence for involvement of DMRT1 in human TGCT, the downstream genes and
pathways identified in this study provide potentially useful candidates for roles
in the human disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3630265
PMID: 23473982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1390. doi: 10.1038/srep01390.

Systematic repression of transcription factors reveals limited patterns of gene
expression changes in ES cells.

Nishiyama A(1), Sharov AA, Piao Y, Amano M, Amano T, Hoang HG, Binder BY, Tapnio 
R, Bassey U, Malinou JN, Correa-Cerro LS, Yu H, Xin L, Meyers E, Zalzman M,
Nakatake Y, Stagg C, Sharova L, Qian Y, Dudekula D, Sheer S, Cadet JS, Hirata T, 
Yang HT, Goldberg I, Evans MK, Longo DL, Schlessinger D, Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD
21224, USA. kom@z7.keio.jp

Networks of transcription factors (TFs) are thought to determine and maintain the
identity of cells. Here we systematically repressed each of 100 TFs with shRNA
and carried out global gene expression profiling in mouse embryonic stem (ES)
cells. Unexpectedly, only the repression of a handful of TFs significantly
affected transcriptomes, which changed in two directions/trajectories: one
trajectory by the repression of either Pou5f1 or Sox2; the other trajectory by
the repression of either Esrrb, Sall4, Nanog, or Tcfap4. The data suggest that
the trajectories of gene expression change are already preconfigured by the gene 
regulatory network and roughly correspond to extraembryonic and embryonic fates
of cell differentiation, respectively. These data also indicate the robustness of
the pluripotency gene network, as the transient repression of most TFs did not
alter the transcriptomes.

PMCID: PMC3589720
PMID: 23462645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nature. 2013 Mar 21;495(7441):370-4. doi: 10.1038/nature11925. Epub 2013 Feb 10.

NANOG-dependent function of TET1 and TET2 in establishment of pluripotency.

Costa Y(1), Ding J, Theunissen TW, Faiola F, Hore TA, Shliaha PV, Fidalgo M,
Saunders A, Lawrence M, Dietmann S, Das S, Levasseur DN, Li Z, Xu M, Reik W,
Silva JC, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute,
University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Apr 4;12(4):387-8.

Molecular control of the pluripotent state is thought to reside in a core
circuitry of master transcription factors including the homeodomain-containing
protein NANOG, which has an essential role in establishing ground state
pluripotency during somatic cell reprogramming. Whereas the genomic occupancy of 
NANOG has been extensively investigated, comparatively little is known about
NANOG-associated proteins and their contribution to the NANOG-mediated
reprogramming process. Using enhanced purification techniques and a stringent
computational algorithm, we identify 27 high-confidence protein interaction
partners of NANOG in mouse embryonic stem cells. These consist of 19 previously
unknown partners of NANOG that have not been reported before, including the
ten-eleven translocation (TET) family methylcytosine hydroxylase TET1. We confirm
physical association of NANOG with TET1, and demonstrate that TET1, in synergy
with NANOG, enhances the efficiency of reprogramming. We also find physical
association and reprogramming synergy of TET2 with NANOG, and demonstrate that
knockdown of TET2 abolishes the reprogramming synergy of NANOG with a
catalytically deficient mutant of TET1. These results indicate that the physical 
interaction between NANOG and TET1/TET2 proteins facilitates reprogramming in a
manner that is dependent on the catalytic activity of TET1/TET2. TET1 and NANOG
co-occupy genomic loci of genes associated with both maintenance of pluripotency 
and lineage commitment in embryonic stem cells, and TET1 binding is reduced upon 
NANOG depletion. Co-expression of NANOG and TET1 increases
5-hydroxymethylcytosine levels at the top-ranked common target loci Esrrb and
Oct4 (also called Pou5f1), resulting in priming of their expression before
reprogramming to naive pluripotency. We propose that TET1 is recruited by NANOG
to enhance the expression of a subset of key reprogramming target genes. These
results provide an insight into the reprogramming mechanism of NANOG and uncover 
a new role for 5-methylcytosine hydroxylases in the establishment of naive
pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC3606645
PMID: 23395962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Eur J Neurosci. 2013 Apr;37(7):1033-47. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12122. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Estrogen-related receptor ß deletion modulates whole-body energy balance via
estrogen-related receptor <U+03B3> and attenuates neuropeptide Y gene expression.

Byerly MS(1), Al Salayta M, Swanson RD, Kwon K, Peterson JM, Wei Z, Aja S, Moran 
TH, Blackshaw S, Wong GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA. mardibyerly@gmail.com

Estrogen-related receptors (ERRs) a, ß and <U+03B3> are orphan nuclear hormone receptors
with no known ligands. Little is known concerning the role of ERRß in energy
homeostasis, as complete ERRß-null mice die mid-gestation. We generated two
viable conditional ERRß-null mouse models to address its metabolic function.
Whole-body deletion of ERRß in Sox2-Cre:ERRß(lox/lox) mice resulted in major
alterations in body composition, metabolic rate, meal patterns and voluntary
physical activity levels. Nestin-Cre:ERRß(lox/lox) mice exhibited decreased
expression of ERRß in hindbrain neurons, the predominant site of expression,
decreased neuropeptide Y (NPY) gene expression in the hindbrain, increased lean
body mass, insulin sensitivity, increased energy expenditure, decreased satiety
and decreased time between meals. In the absence of ERRß, increased ERR<U+03B3>
signaling decreased satiety and the duration of time between meals, similar to
meal patterns observed for both the Sox2-Cre:ERRß(lox/lox) and
Nestin-Cre:ERRß(lox/lox) strains of mice. Central and/or peripheral ERR<U+03B3>
signaling may modulate these phenotypes by decreasing NPY gene expression.
Overall, the relative expression ratio between ERRß and ERR<U+03B3> may be important in 
modulating ingestive behavior, specifically satiety, gene expression, as well as 
whole-body energy balance.

© 2013 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing
Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3618562
PMID: 23360481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jan 15;12(2):195-6. doi: 10.4161/cc.23377. Epub 2012 Jan 15.

Essential roles for the nuclear receptor coactivator Ncoa3 in pluripotency.

Percharde M, Azuara V.

PMCID: PMC3575442
PMID: 23287469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2013 Jan 1;5:591-601.

Gestational protein restriction affects trophoblast differentiation.

Gao H(1), Yallampalli U, Yallampalli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-1062, USA.

Whether and how gestational protein restriction (PR) affects placental
development and function remain unknown. To test the hypothesis that PR can
affect trophoblast differentiation in mid-and late pregnancy, rats were fed a 20%
or an isocaloric 6% protein diet from Day 1 to 14 or 18 of pregnancy and effects 
of PR on trophoblast differentiation were determined by changes in expressions of
marker gene(s) for trophoblast lineages. At Day 18 of pregnancy, PR increased
expressions of Esrrb, Id1 andId2 (trophoblast stem cell markers), decreased
expressions of Ascl2 (spongiotrophblast cell marker) and Prl2c1 (trophoblast
giant cell marker), but did not alter expressions of Gjb3 and Pcdh12(glycogen
cell markers) in the junctional zone (JZ). In the labyrinth zone (LZ), PR did not
change expressions of Prl2b1 (trophoblast giant cell marker), Gcm1 and Syna
(syncytiotrophoblast cell markers), but decrease expression of Ctsq (sinusoidal
trophoblast giant cell marker). These results indicate that PR impairs the
differentiation of trophoblast stem cell into spongiotrophoblast and trophoblast 
giant cells in JZ, and formation of sinusoidal trophoblast giant cells in LZ.

PMCID: PMC4046710
PMID: 23277015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Stem Cells. 2013 Feb;31(2):269-81. doi: 10.1002/stem.1279.

Co-motif discovery identifies an Esrrb-Sox2-DNA ternary complex as a mediator of 
transcriptional differences between mouse embryonic and epiblast stem cells.

Hutchins AP(1), Choo SH, Mistri TK, Rahmani M, Woon CT, Ng CK, Jauch R, Robson P.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Cellomics Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore. 
ahutchins@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp

Transcription factors (TF) often bind in heterodimeric complexes with each TF
recognizing a specific neighboring cis element in the regulatory region of the
genome. Comprehension of this DNA motif grammar is opaque, yet recent
developments have allowed the interrogation of genome-wide TF binding sites. We
reasoned that within this data novel motif grammars could be identified that
controlled distinct biological programs. For this purpose, we developed a novel
motif-discovery tool termed fexcom that systematically interrogates ChIP-seq data
to discover spatially constrained TF-TF composite motifs occurring over short DNA
distances. We applied this to the extensive ChIP-seq data available from mouse
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). In addition to the well-known and most prevalent
sox-oct motif, we also discovered a novel constrained spacer motif for Esrrb and 
Sox2 with a gap of between 2 and 8 bps that Essrb and Sox2 cobind in a selective 
fashion. Through the use of knockdown experiments, we argue that the Esrrb-Sox2
complex is an arbiter of gene expression differences between ESCs and epiblast
stem cells (EpiSC). A number of genes downregulated upon dual Esrrb/Sox2
knockdown (e.g., Klf4, Klf5, Jam2, Pecam1) are similarly downregulated in the ESC
to EpiSC transition and contain the esrrb-sox motif. The prototypical Esrrb-Sox2 
target gene, containing an esrrb-sox element conserved throughout eutherian and
metatherian mammals, is Nr0b1. Through positive regulation of this
transcriptional repressor, we argue the Esrrb-Sox2 complex promotes the ESC state
through inhibition of the EpiSC transcriptional program and the same trio may
also function to maintain trophoblast stem cells.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23169531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. EMBO J. 2012 Nov 14;31(22):4255-7. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.285. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Pluripotency re-centered around Esrrb.

Papp B(1), Plath K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David
Geffen School of Medicine, Molecular Biology Institute, Eli and Edythe Broad
Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

PMCID: PMC3501223
PMID: 23064149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):491-504. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.06.008.

Esrrb is a pivotal target of the Gsk3/Tcf3 axis regulating embryonic stem cell
self-renewal.

Martello G(1), Sugimoto T, Diamanti E, Joshi A, Hannah R, Ohtsuka S, Göttgens B, 
Niwa H, Smith A.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust - Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge UK.

Erratum in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 May 2;12(5):630.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):441-2.

Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (Gsk3) supports mouse embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) by modulating Tcf3, but the critical targets downstream of Tcf3 are 
unclear. We analyzed the intersection between genome localization and
transcriptome data sets to identify genes repressed by Tcf3. Among these,
manipulations of Esrrb gave distinctive phenotypes in functional assays.
Knockdown and knockout eliminated response to Gsk3 inhibition, causing extinction
of pluripotency markers and loss of colony forming capability. Conversely, forced
expression phenocopied Gsk3 inhibition or Tcf3 deletion by suppressing
differentiation and sustaining self-renewal. Thus the nuclear receptor Esrrb is
necessary and sufficient to mediate self-renewal downstream of Gsk3 inhibition.
Leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) regulates ESCs through Stat3, independently of 
Gsk3 inhibition. Consistent with parallel operation, ESCs in LIF accommodated
Esrrb deletion and remained pluripotent. These findings highlight a key role for 
Esrrb in regulating the naive pluripotent state and illustrate compensation among
the core pluripotency factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3465555
PMID: 23040478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):477-90. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.08.002.

Esrrb is a direct Nanog target gene that can substitute for Nanog function in
pluripotent cells.

Festuccia N(1), Osorno R, Halbritter F, Karwacki-Neisius V, Navarro P, Colby D,
Wong F, Yates A, Tomlinson SR, Chambers I.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School
of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh
EH16 4UU, Scotland.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):441-2.

Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal efficiency is determined by the level of
Nanog expression. However, the mechanisms by which Nanog functions remain
unclear, and in particular, direct Nanog target genes are uncharacterized. Here
we investigate ESCs expressing different Nanog levels and Nanog(-/-) cells with
distinct functionally inducible Nanog proteins to identify Nanog-responsive
genes. Surprisingly, these constitute a minor fraction of genes that Nanog binds.
Prominent among Nanog-reponsive genes is Estrogen-related receptor b (Esrrb).
Nanog binds directly to Esrrb, enhances binding of RNAPolII, and stimulates Esrrb
transcription. Overexpression of Esrrb in ESCs maintains cytokine-independent
self-renewal and pluripotency. Remarkably, this activity is retained in
Nanog(-/-) ESCs. Moreover, Esrrb can reprogram Nanog(-/-) EpiSCs and can rescue
stalled reprogramming in Nanog(-/-) pre-iPSCs. Finally, Esrrb deletion abolishes 
the defining ability of Nanog to confer LIF-independent ESC self-renewal. These
findings are consistent with the functional placement of Esrrb downstream of
Nanog.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3473361
PMID: 23040477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):441-2. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.09.005.

Pluripotency network in embryonic stem cells: maybe Leibniz was right all along.

Zwaka TP.

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):477-90.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):491-504.

The transcription factors Tcf3 and Nanog regulate many genes in embryonic stem
cells, but according to two reports in this issue of Cell Stem Cell (Festuccia et
al., 2012, Martello et al., 2012), only one, Esrrb, encoding an orphan nuclear
hormone receptor, truly matters in the maintenance of self-renewal.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23040470  [PubMed]


72. Genes Dev. 2012 Oct 15;26(20):2286-98. doi: 10.1101/gad.195545.112. Epub 2012 Sep
26.

Ncoa3 functions as an essential Esrrb coactivator to sustain embryonic stem cell 
self-renewal and reprogramming.

Percharde M(1), Lavial F, Ng JH, Kumar V, Tomaz RA, Martin N, Yeo JC, Gil J,
Prabhakar S, Ng HH, Parker MG, Azuara V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Imperial College, London,
United Kingdom.

Embryonic stem cell (ESC) pluripotency depends on a well-characterized gene
regulatory network centered on Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog. In contrast, little is
known about the identity of the key coregulators and the mechanisms by which they
may potentiate transcription in ESCs. Alongside core transcription factors, the
orphan nuclear receptor Esrrb (estrogen-related receptor ß) is vital for the
maintenance of ESC identity and furthermore is uniquely associated with the basal
transcription machinery. Here, we show that Ncoa3, an essential coactivator, is
required to mediate Esrrb function in ESCs. Ncoa3 interacts with Esrrb via its
ligand-binding domain and bridges Esrrb to RNA polymerase II complexes.
Functionally, Ncoa3 is critical for both the induction and maintenance of
pluripotency. Through chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing and
microarray experiments, we further demonstrate that Ncoa3 shares overlapping gene
regulatory functions with Esrrb and cooperates genome-wide with the
Oct4-Sox2-Nanog circuitry at active enhancers to up-regulate genes involved in
self-renewal and pluripotency. We propose an integrated model of transcriptional 
and coactivator control, mediated by Ncoa3, for the maintenance of ESC
self-renewal and somatic cell reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3475801
PMID: 23019124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jan 1;22(1):124-35. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0382. Epub 2012
Nov 2.

Derivation and characterization of sleeping beauty transposon-mediated porcine
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Kues WA(1), Herrmann D, Barg-Kues B, Haridoss S, Nowak-Imialek M, Buchholz T,
Streeck M, Grebe A, Grabundzija I, Merkert S, Martin U, Hall VJ, Rasmussen MA,
Ivics Z, Hyttel P, Niemann H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Farm Animal Genetics, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Mariensee,
Germany. wilfried.kues@fli.bund.de

The domestic pig is an important large animal model for preclinical testing of
novel cell therapies. Recently, we produced pluripotency reporter pigs in which
the Oct4 promoter drives expression of the enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP). Here, we reprogrammed Oct4-EGFP fibroblasts employing the nonviral
Sleeping Beauty transposon system to deliver the reprogramming factors Oct4,
Sox2, Klf4, and cMyc. Successful reprogramming to a pluripotent state was
indicated by changes in cell morphology and reactivation of the Oct4-EGFP
reporter. The transposon-reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells showed
long-term proliferation in vitro over >40 passages, expressed transcription
factors typical of embryonic stem cells, including OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, REX1,
ESRRB, DPPA5, and UTF1 and surface markers of pluripotency, including SSEA-1 and 
TRA-1-60. In vitro differentiation resulted in derivatives of the 3 germ layers. 
Upon injection of putative iPS cells under the skin of immunodeficient mice, we
observed teratomas in 3 of 6 cases. These results form the basis for in-depth
studies toward the derivation of porcine iPS cells, which hold great promise for 
preclinical testing of novel cell therapies in the pig model.

PMID: 22989381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell. 2012 Sep 14;150(6):1209-22. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.08.023.

Single-cell expression analyses during cellular reprogramming reveal an early
stochastic and a late hierarchic phase.

Buganim Y(1), Faddah DA, Cheng AW, Itskovich E, Markoulaki S, Ganz K, Klemm SL,
van Oudenaarden A, Jaenisch R.

Author information: 
(1)The Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):445-7.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 Nov;13(11):755.

During cellular reprogramming, only a small fraction of cells become induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Previous analyses of gene expression during
reprogramming were based on populations of cells, impeding single-cell level
identification of reprogramming events. We utilized two gene expression
technologies to profile 48 genes in single cells at various stages during the
reprogramming process. Analysis of early stages revealed considerable variation
in gene expression between cells in contrast to late stages. Expression of Esrrb,
Utf1, Lin28, and Dppa2 is a better predictor for cells to progress into iPSCs
than expression of the previously suggested reprogramming markers Fbxo15, Fgf4,
and Oct4. Stochastic gene expression early in reprogramming is followed by a late
hierarchical phase with Sox2 being the upstream factor in a gene expression
hierarchy. Finally, downstream factors derived from the late phase, which do not 
include Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, c-Myc, and Nanog, can activate the pluripotency
circuitry.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3457656
PMID: 22980981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 2;287(45):38295-304. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.373092. Epub
2012 Sep 12.

Role of nuclear receptor coactivator 3 (Ncoa3) in pluripotency maintenance.

Wu Z(1), Yang M, Liu H, Guo H, Wang Y, Cheng H, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics and
College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Nuclear receptors, including Esrrb, Dax1, and Nr5a2, have been shown to be
involved in pluripotency maintenance. Yet, the role of their coactivators in
mouse embryonic stem cells remains unexplored. Here, we demonstrated that the
nuclear receptor coactivator 3 (Ncoa3) is essential for pluripotency maintenance.
Knockdown of Ncoa3 not only compromises the expression of pluripotency markers
but also impairs in vitro and in vivo differentiation potential of mouse ESCs.
Ncoa3 binds to the Nanog promoter and recruits the histone acetyltransferase CREB
binding protein (CBP) and the histone arginine methyltransferase CARM1 to
activate Nanog expression. Moreover, glycogen synthase kinase 3 GSK3 signaling
down-regulates the Ncoa3 protein level to suppress Nanog expression. Thus, Ncoa3 
not only contributes to self-renewal by activating Nanog but also facilitates ESC
differentiation as a break point to disrupt the core transcriptional circuitry of
pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC3488098
PMID: 22977234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Nov;76(11):1681-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2012.08.006. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

DFNB35 due to a novel mutation in the ESRRB gene in a Czech consanguineous
family.

afka Broková D(1), Latuvková J, Machalová E, Lisonová J, Trková M, Seeman P.

Author information: 
(1)DNA laboratory, Department of Child Neurology, Charles University, 2nd Medical
School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
dana.brozkova@seznam.cz

OBJECTIVES: Non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) is a genetically heterogeneous
disorder with mostly autosomal recessive inheritance. So far 40 genes and the
same amount of loci with as yet unknown genes were described with autosomal
recessive NSHL.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A consanguineous Czech family with a child with NSHL was
genotyped using SNP array and homozygous regions were compared with previously
reported DFNB loci.
RESULTS: GRXCR1 and ESRRB genes associated with autosomal recessive NSHL were
located in two of the eight homozygous regions detected by SNP array genotyping. 
Mutation p.R291L in a homozygous state was found in the deaf child, the parents
were heterozygous. The entire coding region of the ESRRB gene was sequenced in
additional 39 patients of Czech origin with early NSHL and only two variants,
p.V413I and p.P386S, were found in homozygous state, but are considered to be
polymorphisms.
CONCLUSION: Homozygosity mapping is a powerful method for identification of genes
in heterogeneous recessive diseases. This is the first report of DFNB35 mutations
in the Czech Republic and it seems to be a rare cause of NSHL. Additional
mutations in ESRRB gene were reported in Pakistan, Tunisia and Turkey.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22951369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nature. 2012 Aug 30;488(7413):652-5. doi: 10.1038/nature11333.

Early-stage epigenetic modification during somatic cell reprogramming by Parp1
and Tet2.

Doege CA(1), Inoue K, Yamashita T, Rhee DB, Travis S, Fujita R, Guarnieri P,
Bhagat G, Vanti WB, Shih A, Levine RL, Nik S, Chen EI, Abeliovich A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Taub Institute for Aging, Columbia University, New
York, New York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 Aug 30;488(7413):599-600.

Somatic cells can be reprogrammed into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by 
using the pluripotency factors Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc (together referred to
as OSKM). iPSC reprogramming erases somatic epigenetic signaturesas typified by 
DNA methylation or histone modification at silent pluripotency lociand
establishes alternative epigenetic marks of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Here we 
describe an early and essential stage of somatic cell reprogramming, preceding
the induction of transcription at endogenous pluripotency loci such as Nanog and 
Esrrb. By day 4 after transduction with OSKM, two epigenetic modification factors
necessary for iPSC generation, namely poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (Parp1) and
ten-eleven translocation-2 (Tet2), are recruited to the Nanog and Esrrb loci.
These epigenetic modification factors seem to have complementary roles in the
establishment of early epigenetic marks during somatic cell reprogramming: Parp1 
functions in the regulation of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) modification, whereas Tet2 
is essential for the early generation of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) by the
oxidation of 5mC (refs 3,4). Although 5hmC has been proposed to serve primarily
as an intermediate in 5mC demethylation to cytosine in certain contexts, our
data, and also studies of Tet2-mutant human tumour cells, argue in favour of a
role for 5hmC as an epigenetic mark distinct from 5mC. Consistent with this,
Parp1 and Tet2 are each needed for the early establishment of histone
modifications that typify an activated chromatin state at pluripotency loci,
whereas Parp1 induction further promotes accessibility to the Oct4 reprogramming 
factor. These findings suggest that Parp1 and Tet2 contribute to an epigenetic
program that directs subsequent transcriptional induction at pluripotency loci
during somatic cell reprogramming.

PMID: 22902501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Exp Med. 2011 Dec 19;208(13):2675-89. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102037. Epub 2011 Dec 
5.

A genome-wide RNAi screen in mouse embryonic stem cells identifies Mp1 as a key
mediator of differentiation.

Westerman BA(1), Braat AK, Taub N, Potman M, Vissers JH, Blom M, Verhoeven E,
Stoop H, Gillis A, Velds A, Nijkamp W, Beijersbergen R, Huber LA, Looijenga LH,
van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Despite intense investigation of intrinsic and extrinsic factors that regulate
pluripotency, the process of initial fate commitment of embryonic stem (ES) cells
is still poorly understood. We used a genome-wide short hairpin RNA screen in
mouse ES cells to identify genes that are essential for initiation of
differentiation. Knockdown of the scaffolding protein Mek binding protein 1 (Mp1,
also known as Lamtor3 or Map2k1ip1) stimulated self-renewal of ES cells, blocked 
differentiation, and promoted proliferation. Fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4)
signaling is required for initial fate commitment of ES cells. Knockdown of Mp1
inhibited FGF4-induced differentiation but did not alter FGF4-driven
proliferation. This uncoupling of differentiation and proliferation was also
observed when oncogenic Ras isoforms were overexpressed in ES cells. Knockdown of
Mp1 redirected FGF4 signaling from differentiation toward pluripotency and
up-regulated the pluripotency-related genes Esrrb, Rex1, Tcl1, and Sox2. We also 
found that human germ cell tumors (GCTs) express low amounts of Mp1 in the
invasive embryonic carcinoma and seminoma histologies and higher amounts of Mp1
in the noninvasive carcinoma in situ precursor and differentiated components.
Knockdown of Mp1 in invasive GCT cells resulted in resistance to differentiation,
thereby showing a functional role for Mp1 both in normal differentiation of ES
cells and in germ cell cancer.

PMCID: PMC3244037
PMID: 22143885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Eur J Med Genet. 2011 Nov-Dec;54(6):e535-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2011.06.008.
Epub 2011 Jul 13.

A novel missense mutation in the ESRRB gene causes DFNB35 hearing loss in a
Tunisian family.

Ben Saïd M(1), Ayedi L, Mnejja M, Hakim B, Khalfallah A, Charfeddine I, Khifagi
C, Turki K, Ayadi H, Benzina Z, Ghorbel A, Castillo ID, Masmoudi S, Aifa MH.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Procédés de Criblages Moléculaires et Cellulaires, Laboratoire de
Microorganismes et de Biomolécules, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Université 
de Sfax, Tunisia.

Autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) is a genetically
heterogenous disorder with 41 genes so far identified. Among these genes, ESRRB
whose mutations are responsible for DFNB35 hearing loss in Pakistani and Turkish 
families. This gene encodes the estrogen-related receptor beta. In this study, we
report a novel mutation (p.Y305H) in the ESRRB gene in a Tunisian family with
ARNSHL. This mutation was not detected in 100 healthy individuals. Molecular
modeling showed that the p.Y305H mutation is likely to alter the conformation of 
the ligand binding-site by destabilizing the coactivator binding pocket.
Interestingly, this ligand-binding domain of the ESRRB protein has been affected 
in 5 out of 6 mutations causing DFNB35 hearing loss. Using linkage and DHPLC
analysis, no more mutations were detected in the ESRRB gene in other 127 Tunisian
families with ARNSHL indicating that DFNB35 is most likely to be a rare type of
ARNSHL in the Tunisian population.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21802533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nature. 2011 Jun 8;474(7350):225-9. doi: 10.1038/nature10106.

Direct reprogramming of somatic cells is promoted by maternal transcription
factor Glis1.

Maekawa M(1), Yamaguchi K, Nakamura T, Shibukawa R, Kodanaka I, Ichisaka T,
Kawamura Y, Mochizuki H, Goshima N, Yamanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are generated from somatic cells by the
transgenic expression of three transcription factors collectively called OSK:
Oct3/4 (also called Pou5f1), Sox2 and Klf4. However, the conversion to iPSCs is
inefficient. The proto-oncogene Myc enhances the efficiency of iPSC generation by
OSK but it also increases the tumorigenicity of the resulting iPSCs. Here we show
that the Gli-like transcription factor Glis1 (Glis family zinc finger 1) markedly
enhances the generation of iPSCs from both mouse and human fibroblasts when it is
expressed together with OSK. Mouse iPSCs generated using this combination of
transcription factors can form germline-competent chimaeras. Glis1 is enriched in
unfertilized oocytes and in embryos at the one-cell stage. DNA microarray
analyses show that Glis1 promotes multiple pro-reprogramming pathways, including 
Myc, Nanog, Lin28, Wnt, Essrb and the mesenchymal-epithelial transition. These
results therefore show that Glis1 effectively promotes the direct reprogramming
of somatic cells during iPSC generation.

PMID: 21654807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019685. Epub 2011 May 13.

Analysis of transcriptional regulatory pathways of photoreceptor genes by
expression profiling of the Otx2-deficient retina.

Omori Y(1), Katoh K, Sato S, Muranishi Y, Chaya T, Onishi A, Minami T, Fujikado
T, Furukawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, Osaka, Japan.

In the vertebrate retina, the Otx2 transcription factor plays a crucial role in
the cell fate determination of both rod and cone photoreceptors. We previously
reported that Otx2 conditional knockout (CKO) mice exhibited a total absence of
rods and cones in the retina due to their cell fate conversion to amacrine-like
cells. In order to investigate the entire transcriptome of the Otx2 CKO retina,
we compared expression profile of Otx2 CKO and wild-type retinas at P1 and P12
using microarray. We observed that expression of 101- and 1049-probe sets
significantly decreased in the Otx2 CKO retina at P1 and P12, respectively,
whereas, expression of 3- and 4149-probe sets increased at P1 and P12,
respectively. We found that expression of genes encoding transcription factors
involved in photoreceptor development, including Crx, Nrl, Nr2e3, Esrrb, and
NeuroD, was markedly down-regulated in the Otx2 CKO at both P1 and P12.
Furthermore, we identified three human retinal disease loci mapped in close
proximity to certain down-regulated genes in the Otx2 CKO retina including
Ccdc126, Tnfsf13 and Pitpnm1, suggesting that these genes are possibly
responsible for these diseases. These transcriptome data sets of the Otx2 CKO
retina provide a resource on developing rods and cones to further understand the 
molecular mechanisms underlying photoreceptor development, function and disease.

PMCID: PMC3094341
PMID: 21602925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2011 May 12;6(5):e19470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019470.

RAD21 cooperates with pluripotency transcription factors in the maintenance of
embryonic stem cell identity.

Nitzsche A(1), Paszkowski-Rogacz M, Matarese F, Janssen-Megens EM, Hubner NC,
Schulz H, de Vries I, Ding L, Huebner N, Mann M, Stunnenberg HG, Buchholz F.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany.

For self-renewal, embryonic stem cells (ESCs) require the expression of specific 
transcription factors accompanied by a particular chromosome organization to
maintain a balance between pluripotency and the capacity for rapid
differentiation. However, how transcriptional regulation is linked to chromosome 
organization in ESCs is not well understood. Here we show that the cohesin
component RAD21 exhibits a functional role in maintaining ESC identity through
association with the pluripotency transcriptional network. ChIP-seq analyses of
RAD21 reveal an ESC specific cohesin binding pattern that is characterized by
CTCF independent co-localization of cohesin with pluripotency related
transcription factors Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, Esrrb and Klf4. Upon ESC
differentiation, most of these binding sites disappear and instead new CTCF
independent RAD21 binding sites emerge, which are enriched for binding sites of
transcription factors implicated in early differentiation. Furthermore,
knock-down of RAD21 causes expression changes that are similar to expression
changes after Nanog depletion, demonstrating the functional relevance of the
RAD21--pluripotency transcriptional network association. Finally, we show that
Nanog physically interacts with the cohesin or cohesin interacting proteins STAG1
and WAPL further substantiating this association. Based on these findings we
propose that a dynamic placement of cohesin by pluripotency transcription factors
contributes to a chromosome organization supporting the ESC expression program.

PMCID: PMC3093395
PMID: 21589869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Bioinformatics. 2011 Jun 15;27(12):1653-9. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr261.
Epub 2011 May 4.

DREME: motif discovery in transcription factor ChIP-seq data.

Bailey TL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
QLD 4072, Australia. t.bailey@uq.edu.au

MOTIVATION: Transcription factor (TF) ChIP-seq datasets have particular
characteristics that provide unique challenges and opportunities for motif
discovery. Most existing motif discovery algorithms do not scale well to such
large datasets, or fail to report many motifs associated with cofactors of the
ChIP-ed TF.
RESULTS: We present DREME, a motif discovery algorithm specifically designed to
find the short, core DNA-binding motifs of eukaryotic TFs, and optimized to
analyze very large ChIP-seq datasets in minutes. Using DREME, we discover the
binding motifs of the the ChIP-ed TF and many cofactors in mouse ES cell (mESC), 
mouse erythrocyte and human cell line ChIP-seq datasets. For example, in mESC
ChIP-seq data for the TF Esrrb, we discover the binding motifs for eight cofactor
TFs important in the maintenance of pluripotency. Several other commonly used
algorithms find at most two cofactor motifs in this same dataset. DREME can also 
perform discriminative motif discovery, and we use this feature to provide
evidence that Sox2 and Oct4 do not bind in mES cells as an obligate heterodimer. 
DREME is much faster than many commonly used algorithms, scales linearly in
dataset size, finds multiple, non-redundant motifs and reports a reliable measure
of statistical significance for each motif found. DREME is available as part of
the MEME Suite of motif-based sequence analysis tools (http://meme.nbcr.net).

PMCID: PMC3106199
PMID: 21543442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nature. 2011 May 19;473(7347):398-402. doi: 10.1038/nature10008. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Dynamic regulation of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in mouse ES cells and during
differentiation.

Ficz G(1), Branco MR, Seisenberger S, Santos F, Krueger F, Hore TA, Marques CJ,
Andrews S, Reik W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2011 May 19;473(7347):293-4.

Methylation at the 5' position of cytosine in DNA has important roles in genome
function and is dynamically reprogrammed during early embryonic and germ cell
development. The mammalian genome also contains 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC),
which seems to be generated by oxidation of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) by the TET
family of enzymes that are highly expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells. Here we
use antibodies against 5hmC and 5mC together with high throughput sequencing to
determine genome-wide patterns of methylation and hydroxymethylation in mouse
wild-type and mutant ES cells and differentiating embryoid bodies. We find that
5hmC is mostly associated with euchromatin and that whereas 5mC is
under-represented at gene promoters and CpG islands, 5hmC is enriched and is
associated with increased transcriptional levels. Most, if not all, 5hmC in the
genome depends on pre-existing 5mC and the balance between these two
modifications is different between genomic regions. Knockdown of Tet1 and Tet2
causes downregulation of a group of genes that includes pluripotency-related
genes (including Esrrb, Prdm14, Dppa3, Klf2, Tcl1 and Zfp42) and a concomitant
increase in methylation of their promoters, together with an increased propensity
of ES cells for extraembryonic lineage differentiation. Declining levels of TETs 
during differentiation are associated with decreased hydroxymethylation levels at
the promoters of ES cell-specific genes together with increased methylation and
gene silencing. We propose that the balance between hydroxymethylation and
methylation in the genome is inextricably linked with the balance between
pluripotency and lineage commitment.

PMID: 21460836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Genet Res Int. 2011;2011:368915. doi: 10.4061/2011/368915. Epub 2011 Sep 25.

A Novel ESRRB Deletion Is a Rare Cause of Autosomal Recessive Nonsyndromic
Hearing Impairment among Pakistani Families.

Lee K(1), Khan S, Ansar M, Santos-Cortez RL, Ahmad W, Leal SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Tx 77030, USA.

Mutations in the estrogen-related receptor beta (ESRRB) gene is the underlying
cause of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing impairment (ARNSHI) due to the 
DFNB35 locus which maps to 14q24.3. A genome scan of a large consanguineous
Pakistani pedigree with ARNSHI established linkage with a maximum multipoint LOD 
score of 4.2 to the 14q24 region and the region of homozygosity contained the
ESRRB gene. Sequencing of the ESRRB gene using DNA samples from hearing-impaired 
family members uncovered a novel three-nucleotide deletion c.1018_1020delGAG
(p.Glu340del). The deletion segregates with hearing impairment in the pedigree
and was not observed in 500 control chromosomes. The deletion of glutamic acid
residue occurs in the ligand-binding domain of ESRRB protein. It is expected that
the deletion affects the ligand-binding activity of the domain in ESRRB, which
leads to the ARNSHI.

PMCID: PMC3335572
PMID: 22567352  [PubMed]


86. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 10;5(12):e15165. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015165.

The PluriNetWork: an electronic representation of the network underlying
pluripotency in mouse, and its applications.

Som A(1), Harder C, Greber B, Siatkowski M, Paudel Y, Warsow G, Cap C, Schöler H,
Fuellen G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biostatistics and Informatics in Medicine and Ageing Research,
University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Analysis of the mechanisms underlying pluripotency and reprogramming 
would benefit substantially from easy access to an electronic network of genes,
proteins and mechanisms. Moreover, interpreting gene expression data needs to
move beyond just the identification of the up-/downregulation of key genes and of
overrepresented processes and pathways, towards clarifying the essential effects 
of the experiment in molecular terms.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have assembled a network of 574 molecular
interactions, stimulations and inhibitions, based on a collection of research
data from 177 publications until June 2010, involving 274 mouse genes/proteins,
all in a standard electronic format, enabling analyses by readily available
software such as Cytoscape and its plugins. The network includes the core circuit
of Oct4 (Pou5f1), Sox2 and Nanog, its periphery (such as Stat3, Klf4, Esrrb, and 
c-Myc), connections to upstream signaling pathways (such as Activin, WNT, FGF,
BMP, Insulin, Notch and LIF), and epigenetic regulators as well as some other
relevant genes/proteins, such as proteins involved in nuclear import/export. We
describe the general properties of the network, as well as a Gene Ontology
analysis of the genes included. We use several expression data sets to condense
the network to a set of network links that are affected in the course of an
experiment, yielding hypotheses about the underlying mechanisms.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We have initiated an electronic data repository that
will be useful to understand pluripotency and to facilitate the interpretation of
high-throughput data. To keep up with the growth of knowledge on the fundamental 
processes of pluripotency and reprogramming, we suggest to combine Wiki and
social networking software towards a community curation system that is easy to
use and flexible, and tailored to provide a benefit for the scientist, and to
improve communication and exchange of research results. A PluriNetWork tutorial
is available at http://www.ibima.med.uni-rostock.de/IBIMA/PluriNetWork/.

PMCID: PMC3003487
PMID: 21179244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Mar 15;20(6):1074-83. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq550. Epub 2010 Dec 
21.

Parkin degrades estrogen-related receptors to limit the expression of monoamine
oxidases.

Ren Y(1), Jiang H, Ma D, Nakaso K, Feng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

Parkin, whose mutations cause Parkinson disease (PD), controls oxidative stress
by limiting the expression of monoamine oxidases (MAO)--mitochondrial enzymes
responsible for the oxidative de-amination of dopamine. Here, we show that parkin
performed this function by increasing the ubiquitination and degradation of
estrogen-related receptors (ERR), orphan nuclear receptors that play critical
roles in the transcription regulation of many nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
proteins. All three ERRs (a, ß and <U+03B3>) increased the transcription of MAOs A and
B; the effects were abolished by parkin, but not by its PD-linked mutants. Parkin
bound to ERRs and increased their ubiquitination and degradation. In fibroblasts 
from PD patients with parkin mutations or brain slices from parkin knockout mice,
degradation of ERRs was significantly attenuated. The results reveal the
molecular mechanism by which parkin suppresses the transcription of MAOs to
control oxidative stress induced by dopamine oxidation.

PMCID: PMC3043659
PMID: 21177257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Jan;123(1-2):46-57. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2010.11.001. Epub 2010 Nov 5.

Transcriptional activity of estrogen-related receptor <U+03B3> (ERR<U+03B3>) is stimulated by
the phytoestrogen equol.

Hirvonen J(1), Rajalin AM, Wohlfahrt G, Adlercreutz H, Wähälä K, Aarnisalo P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of
Helsinki, Finland.

Estrogen-related receptor <U+03B3> (ERR<U+03B3>) is an orphan nuclear receptor lacking
identified natural ligands. The synthetic estrogen receptor ligands
4-hydroxytamoxifen and diethylstilbestrol have, however, been shown to bind to
and abolish the constitutive transcriptional activity of ERR<U+03B3>. Certain
phytoestrogens were recently reported to act as agonists of the related ERRa. We 
investigated whether phytoestrogens also modulated the transcriptional activity
of ERR<U+03B3>. We analyzed a selection of phytoestrogens for their potential agonistic 
or antagonistic activity on ERR<U+03B3>. In transiently transfected PC-3 and U2-OS cells
equol stimulated the transcriptional activity of ERR<U+03B3> and enhanced its
interaction with the coactivator GRIP1. The agonistic effect of equol was
abolished by 4-hydroxytamoxifen. Equol induced a conformational change in the
ERR<U+03B3> ligand-binding domain. Based on structural models of the ERR<U+03B3> ligand-binding
domain, we were able to introduce mutations that modulated the agonistic
potential of equol. Finally, equol enhanced the growth inhibitory effect of ERR<U+03B3> 
on the prostate cancer PC-3 cells. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the
phytoestrogen equol acts as an ERR<U+03B3> agonist.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21056663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2010;75:237-44. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2010.75.003.
Epub 2010 Nov 3.

Transcription factors for the modulation of pluripotency and reprogramming.

Heng JC(1), Orlov YL, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672.

Pluripotency and self-renewal are the defining traits of embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) and this status quo is maintained by the core transcription factors Oct4, 
Sox2, and Nanog. Genome-wide mapping of the binding sites of these pivotal
factors and other ESC transcriptional regulators has unraveled the
transcriptional network governing pluripotency. Strikingly, a sizeable fraction
of the binding sites of Oct4 and Nanog are not conserved in mouse and human ESCs.
Binding site turnover and the presence of species-specific transposable elements 
are some of the factors contributing to this disp arity. Hence, comparing human
and mouse ESCs will shed new light on the design of transcriptional regulatory
networks for pluripotency. Despite the significant differences among pluripotent 
mammalian stem cells, the same set of transcription factors (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4,
and c-Myc) can be used to reprogram human and mouse somatic cells into induced
pluripotent stem cells. Recent works also demonstrate that there are multiple
ways of imparting pluripotency. For instance, the nuclear receptors Nr5a2 and
Esrrb can, respectively, substitute for Oct4 and Klf4 in reprogramming. This
chapter summarizes the different roles of transcription factors in the modulation
of pluripotent states and in the induction of pluripotent phenotypes.

PMID: 21047904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Bioinformatics. 2010 Dec 1;26(23):2944-51. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq561.
Epub 2010 Sep 30.

Network-based comparison of temporal gene expression patterns.

Huang W(1), Cao X, Zhong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL, USA.

MOTIVATION: In the pursuits of mechanistic understanding of cell differentiation,
it is often necessary to compare multiple differentiation processes triggered by 
different external stimuli and internal perturbations. Available methods for
comparing temporal gene expression patterns are limited to a gene-by-gene
approach, which ignores co-expression information and thus is sensitive to
measurement noise.
METHODS: We present a method for co-expression network based comparison of
temporal expression patterns (NACEP). NACEP compares the temporal patterns of a
gene between two experimental conditions, taking into consideration all of the
possible co-expression modules that this gene may participate in. The NACEP
program is available at http://biocomp.bioen.uiuc.edu/nacep.
RESULTS: We applied NACEP to analyze retinoid acid (RA)-induced differentiation
of embryonic stem (ES) cells. The analysis suggests that RA may facilitate neural
differentiation by inducing the shh and insulin receptor pathways. NACEP was also
applied to compare the temporal responses of seven RNA inhibition (RNAi)
experiments. As proof of concept, we demonstrate that the difference in the
temporal responses to RNAi treatments can be used to derive interaction
relationships of transcription factors (TFs), and therefore infer regulatory
modules within a transcription network. In particular, the analysis suggested a
novel regulatory relationship between two pluripotency regulators, Esrrb and
Tbx3, which was supported by in vivo binding of Esrrb to the promoter of Tbx3.
AVAILABILITY: The NACEP program and the supplementary documents are available at 
http://biocomp.bioen.uiuc.edu/nacep.
CONTACT: szhong@illinois.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC2982154
PMID: 20889495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Placenta. 2010 Jul;31(7):630-40. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.05.001. Epub 2010
May 31.

New insights for Ets2 function in trophoblast using lentivirus-mediated gene
knockdown in trophoblast stem cells.

Odiatis C(1), Georgiades P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, University Campus,
Nicosia, Cyprus.

Mouse trophoblast stem (TS) cells represent a unique in vitro system that
provides an unlimited supply of TS cells for the study of trophoblast
differentiation and TS cell self-renewal. Although the mouse transcription factor
Ets2 is required for TS cell self-renewal, its role in this and in TS cell
differentiation has not been explored fully, partly due to the early lethality of
Ets2 null mice. To address this, we developed a novel lentivirus-based system
that resulted in efficient Ets2 knockdown in the overwhelming majority of TS
cells. This system enables functional studies in TS cells, especially for genes
required for TS cell self-renewal because TS cell derivation using gene-knockout 
embryos for such genes depends on TS cell self-renewal. Using
morphological/morphometric criteria and gene expression analysis, we show that
the requirement for Ets2 in self-renewal of TS cells cultured in 'stem cell
medium' (SCM) involves maintenance of the expression of genes that inhibit TS
cell differentiation in SCM, such as Cdx2 and Esrrb, and preservation of the
undifferentiated TS cell morphology. During TS cell differentiation caused by
Cdx2/Esrrb downregulation, due to either Ets2 knockdown in SCM or culture in
differentiation medium (DM), Ets2 is also required for the promotion of
trophoblast giant cell (TGC) and junctional zone trophoblast (JZT)
differentiation. This TGC differentiation involves Ets2-dependent expression of
Hand1, a gene required for the differentiation of all TGC types. This study
uncovers new roles for Ets2 in TS cell self-renewal and differentiation and
demonstrates the usefulness of this lentivirus system for gene function studies
in TS cells.

PMID: 20569982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Exp Eye Res. 2010 Aug;91(2):186-94. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2010.04.017. Epub 2010
May 4.

A 350 bp region of the proximal promoter of Rds drives cell-type specific gene
expression.

Cai X(1), Conley SM, Cheng T, Al-Ubaidi MR, Naash MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940
Stanton L. Young Blvd, BMSB 781, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

RDS (retinal degeneration slow) is a photoreceptor-specific tetraspanin protein
required for the biogenesis and maintenance of rod and cone outer segments.
Mutations in the Rds gene are associated with multiple forms of rod- and
cone-dominant retinal degeneration. To gain more insight into the mechanisms
underlying the regulation of this gene, the identification of regulatory
sequences within the promoter of Rds was undertaken. A 3.5 kb fragment of the 5' 
flanking region of the mouse Rds gene was isolated and binding sites for Crx,
Otx2, Nr2e3, RXR family members, Mef2C, Esrrb, NF1, AP1, and SP1 in addition to
several E-boxes, GC-boxes and GAGA-boxes were identified. Crx binding sequences
were conserved in all mammalian species examined. Truncation expression analysis 
of the Rds promoter region in Y-79 retinoblastoma cells showed maximal activity
in the 350 bp proximal promoter region. We also show that inclusion of more
distal fragments reduced promoter activity to the basal level, and that the
promoter activities are cell-type and direction specific. Co-transfection with
Nrl increased promoter activity, suggesting that this gene positively regulates
Rds expression. Based on these findings, a relatively small fragment of the Rds
promoter may be useful in future gene transfer studies to drive gene expression
in photoreceptors.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2937571
PMID: 20447394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(13):6308-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00321-10. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Productive infection and bICP0 early promoter activity of bovine herpesvirus 1
are stimulated by E2F1.

Workman A(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences and Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln Fair Street at East Campus Loop,
Lincoln, NE 68583-0905, USA.

Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) is an important viral pathogen of cattle. Like
other members of the subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae, BoHV-1 establishes latency in 
sensory neurons and has the potential to reactivate from latency. Dexamethasone
(DEX) treatment of latently infected calves or rabbits consistently leads to
reactivation from latency. The BoHV-1 transcript encoding the infected cell
protein 0 (bICP0) is consistently detected during reactivation from latency, in
part because the bICP0 early promoter is activated by DEX. During DEX-induced
reactivation from latency, cyclin expression is stimulated in infected sensory
neurons. Cyclin-dependent kinase activity phosphorylates Rb (retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor gene product) family proteins and consequently releases the E2F family
of transcription factors, suggesting that E2F family members stimulate productive
infection and/or reactivation from latency. In this study, we provide evidence
that repression of E2F1 by a specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) reduced
productive infection approximately 5-fold. E2F1 or E2F2 stimulated bICP0 early
promoter activity at least 100-fold in transient transfection assays. Two
E2F-responsive regions (ERR) were identified within the early promoter, with one 
adjacent to the TATA box (ERR1) and one approximately 600 bp upstream from the
TATA box (ERR2). Mobility shift assays suggested that E2F interacts with ERR1 and
ERR2. E2F1 protein levels were increased at late times after infection, which
correlated with enhanced binding to a consensus E2F binding site, ERR1, or ERR2. 
Collectively, these studies suggest that E2F1 stimulates productive infection and
bICP0 early promoter activity, in part because E2F family members interact with
ERR1 and ERR2.

PMCID: PMC2903271
PMID: 20410283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Apr 2;6(4):369-81. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.02.014.

An Oct4-centered protein interaction network in embryonic stem cells.

van den Berg DL(1), Snoek T, Mullin NP, Yates A, Bezstarosti K, Demmers J,
Chambers I, Poot RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Apr 2;6(4):291-2.

Transcription factors, such as Oct4, are critical for establishing and
maintaining pluripotent cell identity. Whereas the genomic locations of several
pluripotency transcription factors have been reported, the spectrum of their
interaction partners is underexplored. Here, we use an improved affinity protocol
to purify Oct4-interacting proteins from mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
Subsequent purification of Oct4 partners Sall4, Tcfcp2l1, Dax1, and Esrrb
resulted in an Oct4 interactome of 166 proteins, including transcription factors 
and chromatin-modifying complexes with documented roles in self-renewal, but also
many factors not previously associated with the ESC network. We find that Esrrb
associated with the basal transcription machinery and also detect interactions
between transcription factors and components of the TGF-beta, Notch, and Wnt
signaling pathways. Acute depletion of Oct4 reduced binding of Tcfcp2l1, Dax1,
and Esrrb to several target genes. In conclusion, our purification protocol
allowed us to bring greater definition to the circuitry controlling pluripotent
cell identity.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2860243
PMID: 20362541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genetika. 2010 Feb;46(2):282-6.

[Expression of early developmental genes in vole Microtus rossiaemeridionalis].

[Article in Russian]

Sorokin MA, Medvedev SP, Shevchenko AI, Slyn'ko NM, Zakiian SM.

The expression of genes Sox2, Klf4, Myc, Sall4, Gata6, Foxa2, Hnf4a, Cdx2, Esrrb,
Hand1 in cultivated cells, embryos and organs of adult voles Microtus
rossiaemeridionalis was studied. High resemblance of the expression patterns of
these genes in the organs of adult voles, mice and humans was demonstrated. It
was established that genes Gata6, Foxa2 and Hnf4a were specifically expressed in 
vole extraembryonic endoderm cells, while Cdx2 and Handl genes, in trophoblast
stem cells. This shows that these genes can be used markers for corresponding
vole cell lines. Indirect confirmation pointing to the fact that Oct4 gene is a
marker gene for epiblast cells both in the vole and mouse was obtained.

PMID: 20297663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell Reprogram. 2010 Feb;12(1):3-13. doi: 10.1089/cell.2009.0033.

Master stem cell transcription factors and signaling regulation.

Li YQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Laboratory, Marine College, Shandong University at Weihai, Shandong,
People's Republic of China. yuqiangl@sdu.edu.cn

The present article reviews master stem cell transcription factors, their
expression regulation network, and related signaling pathways with the aim of
understanding the molecular mechanisms of pluripotent cell fate decisions. Oct4, 
Sox2, and Nanog are master transcription factors for maintenance of the
undifferentiated state and self-renewal of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). In the
mouse, they form a regulatory circuitry with coregulators, such as beta-catenin, 
Stat3, Myc, Klfs, Sall4, and Esrrb to control the expression of
pluripotency-related genes including themselves. The threshold expression of
Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog for sustaining ESC properties depends on the synergistic
effects among Stat3, beta-catenin, and Smad signaling pathway under the specific 
conditions of the ESC cytoplasmic microenvironment. Some of the salient
differences in human ESC signaling pathways affecting their fate commitment are
highlighted.

PMID: 20132009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cancer Sci. 2010 Mar;101(3):646-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01451.x. Epub
2009 Nov 27.

Differential expression of estrogen-related receptors beta and gamma (ERRbeta and
ERRgamma) and their clinical significance in human prostate cancer.

Fujimura T(1), Takahashi S, Urano T, Ijichi N, Ikeda K, Kumagai J, Murata T,
Takayama K, Horie-Inoue K, Ouchi Y, Muramatsu M, Homma Y, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

Estrogen-related receptor (ERR) is a nuclear receptor that modulates the
estrogen-signaling pathway. Here, we investigated the expression of both ERRbeta 
and ERRgamma in human prostate tissues. Using original rabbit polyclonal
anti-ERRbeta and anti-ERRgamma antibodies, the expression of ERRbeta and ERRgamma
was evaluated by immunohistochemical analysis of cancerous lesions (n = 107) and 
benign foci (n = 92), obtained by radical prostatectomy. Stained slides were
evaluated for the proportion of immunoreactive cells and their staining
intensity. Total immunoreactivity scores (IR scores; range, 0-8) were calculated 
as the sum of the proportion and intensity scores. The relationship between the
clinicopathological characteristics of the patients and the expression of the
three ERRs (ERRalpha, ERR beta, and ERR gamma) was evaluated. IR scores for
ERRbeta and ERRgamma were significantly lower in cancerous lesions than that in
benign foci (P < 0.0001, for both). Clinicopathological analyses revealed that
the patients with low ERRgamma IR scores (<or=4) tended to show poor
cancer-specific survival (P = 0.07). Then, we used data from our previous study
(Fujimura T., Int J Cancer, 2007; 120: 2325-30). Patients with a high IR score
for ERRalpha and a low score for ERRgamma showed significantly poorer
cancer-specific survival than those with a low IR score for ERRalpha and a high
score for ERRgamma (P = 0.0003). We demonstrated the differential expression of
ERRbeta and ERRgamma in prostate tissue. The combined evaluation of the
expression of ERRalpha and ERRgamma could be a significant prognostic factor for 
prostate cancer.

PMID: 20128821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21521-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904863106. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

ChIP-Seq of transcription factors predicts absolute and differential gene
expression in embryonic stem cells.

Ouyang Z(1), Zhou Q, Wong WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Next-generation sequencing has greatly increased the scope and the resolution of 
transcriptional regulation study. RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) and ChIP-Seq
experiments are now generating comprehensive data on transcript abundance and on 
regulator-DNA interactions. We propose an approach for an integrated analysis of 
these data based on feature extraction of ChIP-Seq signals, principal component
analysis, and regression-based component selection. Compared with traditional
methods, our approach not only offers higher power in predicting gene expression 
from ChIP-Seq data but also provides a way to capture cooperation among
regulators. In mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), we find that a remarkably high 
proportion of variation in gene expression (65%) can be explained by the binding 
signals of 12 transcription factors (TFs). Two groups of TFs are identified.
Whereas the first group (E2f1, Myc, Mycn, and Zfx) act as activators in general, 
the second group (Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, Smad1, Stat3, Tcfcp2l1, and Esrrb) may serve
as either activator or repressor depending on the target. The two groups of TFs
cooperate tightly to activate genes that are differentially up-regulated in ESCs.
In the absence of binding by the first group, the binding of the second group is 
associated with genes that are repressed in ESCs and derepressed upon early
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2789751
PMID: 19995984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. DNA Res. 2009 Oct;16(5):261-73. doi: 10.1093/dnares/dsp014. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Exhaustive search for over-represented DNA sequence motifs with CisFinder.

Sharov AA(1), Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genomics and Aging Section, Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

We present CisFinder software, which generates a comprehensive list of motifs
enriched in a set of DNA sequences and describes them with position frequency
matrices (PFMs). A new algorithm was designed to estimate PFMs directly from
counts of n-mer words with and without gaps; then PFMs are extended over gaps and
flanking regions and clustered to generate non-redundant sets of motifs. The
algorithm successfully identified binding motifs for 12 transcription factors
(TFs) in embryonic stem cells based on published chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing data. Furthermore, CisFinder successfully identified alternative
binding motifs of TFs (e.g. POU5F1, ESRRB, and CTCF) and motifs for known and
unknown co-factors of genes associated with the pluripotent state of ES cells.
CisFinder also showed robust performance in the identification of motifs that
were only slightly enriched in a set of DNA sequences.

PMCID: PMC2762409
PMID: 19740934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Reproduction. 2010 Jan;139(1):35-44. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0024.

The genetics of induced pluripotency.

Ralston A(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The flurry of recent publications regarding reprogramming of mature cell types to
induced pluripotent stem cells raises the question: what exactly is pluripotency?
A functional definition is provided by examination of the developmental potential
of pluripotent stem cell types. Defining pluripotency at the molecular level,
however, can be a greater challenge. Here, we examine the emerging list of genes 
associated with induced pluripotency, with particular attention to their
functional requirement in the mouse embryo. Knowledge of the requirement for
these genes in the embryo and in embryonic stem cells will advance our
understanding of how to reverse the developmental clock for therapeutic benefit.

PMID: 19605512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Stem Cells. 2009 Apr;27(4):764-75. doi: 10.1002/stem.3.

Characterization of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent transcriptome in
murine embryonic stem cells: identification of novel regulators of pluripotency.

Storm MP(1), Kumpfmueller B, Thompson B, Kolde R, Vilo J, Hummel O, Schulz H,
Welham MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Centre for Regenerative Medicine,
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-dependent signaling has been implicated in the
regulation of embryonic stem (ES) cell fate. To gain further insight into the
mechanisms regulated by PI3Ks in murine ES cells, we have performed expression
profiling using Affymetrix GeneChips to characterize the transcriptional changes 
that arise as a result of inhibition of PI3K-dependent signaling. Using filtering
of greater than 1.5-fold change in expression and an analysis of variance
significance level of p < .05, we have defined a dataset comprising 646 probe
sets that detect changes in transcript expression (469 down and 177 up) on
inhibition of PI3Ks. Changes in expression of selected genes have been validated 
by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Gene ontology
analyses reveal significant over-representation of transcriptional regulators
within our dataset. In addition, several known regulators of ES cell
pluripotency, for example, Nanog, Esrrb, Tbx3, and Tcl-1, are among the
downregulated genes. To evaluate the functional involvement of selected genes in 
regulation of ES cell self-renewal, we have used short interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown. These studies identify genes not previously associated with control of
ES cell fate that are involved in regulating ES cell pluripotency, including the 
protein tyrosine phosphatase Shp-1 and the Zscan4 family of zinc finger proteins.
Further gain-of-function analyses demonstrate the importance of Zscan4c in
regulation of ES cell pluripotency.

PMID: 19350676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;11(2):197-203. doi: 10.1038/ncb1827. Epub 2009 Jan 11.

Reprogramming of fibroblasts into induced pluripotent stem cells with orphan
nuclear receptor Esrrb.

Feng B(1), Jiang J, Kraus P, Ng JH, Heng JC, Chan YS, Yaw LP, Zhang W, Loh YH,
Han J, Vega VB, Cacheux-Rataboul V, Lim B, Lufkin T, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street,
#02-01, Genome Building, Singapore 138672.

The dominant effect of transcription factors in imparting expanded potency is
best exemplified by the reprogramming of fibroblasts to pluripotent cells using
retrovirus-mediated transduction of defined transcription factors. In the murine 
system, Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc and Klf4 are sufficient to convert fibroblasts to
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells that have many characteristics of embryonic 
stem (ES) cells. Here we show that the orphan nuclear receptor Esrrb functions in
conjunction with Oct4 and Sox2 to mediate reprogramming of mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) to iPS cells. Esrrb-reprogrammed cells share similar
expression and epigenetic signatures as ES cells. These cells are also
pluripotent and can differentiate in vitro and in vivo into the three major
embryonic cell lineages. Furthermore, these cells contribute to mouse chimaeras
and are germline transmissible. In ES cells, Esrrb targets many genes involved in
self-renewal and pluripotency. This suggests that Esrrb may mediate reprogramming
through the upregulation of ES-cell-specific genes. Our findings also indicate
that it is possible to reprogram MEFs without exogenous Klf transcription factors
and link a nuclear receptor to somatic cell reprogramming.

PMID: 19136965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 19;283(51):35825-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803481200. Epub 2008
Oct 28.

Esrrb activates Oct4 transcription and sustains self-renewal and pluripotency in 
embryonic stem cells.

Zhang X(1), Zhang J, Wang T, Esteban MA, Pei D.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Cancer Biology Group, Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South 
China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou
Institute of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510663, China.

The genetic program of embryonic stem (ES) cells is orchestrated by a core of
transcription factors that has OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG as master regulators.
Protein levels of these core factors are tightly controlled by autoregulatory and
feed-forward transcriptional mechanisms in order to prevent early
differentiation. Recent studies have shown that knockdown of Esrrb
(estrogen-related-receptor beta), a member of the nuclear orphan receptor family,
induces differentiation of mouse ES cells cultured in the presence of leukemia
inhibitory factor. It was however not known how knocking down Esrrb exerts this
effect. Herein we have identified two ESRRB binding sites in the proximal
5'-untranslated region of the mouse Oct4 gene, one of which is in close proximity
to a NANOG binding site. Both ESRRB and NANOG are necessary for maintaining the
activity of this promoter in ES cell lines. We have also demonstrated that the
two transcription factors interact through their DNA binding domains. This
interaction reciprocally modulates their transcriptional activities and may be
important to fine-tune ES cell pluripotency. Supporting all of these data, stable
transfection of Esrrb in ES cell lines proved sufficient to sustain their
characteristics in the absence of leukemia-inhibitory factor. In summary, our
experiments help to understand how Esrrb coordinates with Nanog and Oct4 to
activate the internal machinery of ES cells.

PMID: 18957414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Hum Reprod. 2008 Dec;23(12):2782-90. doi: 10.1093/humrep/den298. Epub 2008 Sep 4.

Estrogen receptor related beta is expressed in human endometrium throughout the
normal menstrual cycle.

Bombail V(1), MacPherson S, Critchley HO, Saunders PT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, Centre for Reproductive Biology, The
Queen's Medical Research Institute, Edinburgh, UK.

BACKGROUND: Estrogen receptor related beta (ERRbeta, ESRRB/NR3B2) is an orphan
receptor that shares significant sequence homology with estrogen receptors
ERalpha and ERbeta. ERR family members are reported to exhibit constitutive
transcriptional activity; however, little is known about the biological function 
of ERRbeta. In an attempt to delineate its role, we examined expression of
ERRbeta in normal human endometrium, a tissue that undergoes cyclic remodelling
under the influence of estrogen and progesterone.
METHODS: Well-characterized endometrial tissue (n = 31), including full-thickness
biopsies, was obtained from women with regular menstrual cycles. RT-PCR was used 
to measure mRNA encoding ERRbeta, the peroxisome proliferator activated receptor 
gamma coactivators (PGC)-1alpha and beta and to determine whether ERRbeta splice 
variant mRNAs were expressed. ERRbeta was immunolocalized using both single and
double antibody immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Total ERRbeta mRNA appeared higher in proliferative phase samples but
results did not reach significance. Transcripts corresponding to the long- and
short-splice variants of ERRbeta as well as PGC1alpha and beta were detected but 
ERRbetaDelta10 was absent. ERRbeta protein was localized to cell nuclei within
multiple endometrial cell types including the glands, stroma, endothelium and
immune cells, including uterine natural killer (uNK) cells and macrophages.
Fluorescent immunohistochemistry revealed that some cells co-expressed ERRbeta
and ERalpha or ERbeta, for example, endothelial and uNK cells were
ERRbeta+/ERbeta+.
CONCLUSIONS: ERRbeta mRNA and protein are expressed in healthy human endometrium.
Further studies are warranted to characterize the functional impact of ERRbeta on
endometrial biology.

PMCID: PMC2583942
PMID: 18775884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;28(19):5986-95. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00301-08. Epub 2008 Jul 
28.

Estrogen-related receptor beta interacts with Oct4 to positively regulate Nanog
gene expression.

van den Berg DL(1), Zhang W, Yates A, Engelen E, Takacs K, Bezstarosti K, Demmers
J, Chambers I, Poot RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, 3015GE
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Embryonic stem (ES) cell self-renewal is regulated by transcription factors,
including Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog. A number of additional transcriptional
regulators of ES cell self-renewal have recently been identified, including the
orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor beta (Esrrb). However, the mode
of action of Esrrb in ES cells is unknown. Here, using an Oct4 affinity screen,
we identify Esrrb as an Oct4 partner protein. Esrrb can interact with Oct4
independently of DNA. Esrrb is recruited near the Oct-Sox element in the Nanog
proximal promoter, where it positively regulates Nanog expression. Esrrb
recruitment to the Nanog promoter requires both the presence of Oct4 and a
degenerate estrogen-related receptor DNA element. Consistent with its role in
Nanog regulation, expression of the Esrrb protein within the Oct4-positive ES
cell population is mosaic and correlates with the mosaic expression of the Nanog 
protein. Together with previous reports that Nanog may regulate Esrrb gene
expression, our results suggest that Esrrb and Nanog act as part of a feedback
regulatory circuit that modulates the fluctuating self-renewal capacity of ES
cell populations.

PMCID: PMC2547019
PMID: 18662995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Toxicol Lett. 2008 Jul 30;180(1):59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2008.06.005. Epub
2008 Jun 8.

Combined in utero and juvenile exposure of mice to arsenate and atrazine in
drinking water modulates gene expression and clonogenicity of myeloid
progenitors.

Cimino-Reale G(1), Ferrario D, Casati B, Brustio R, Diodovich C, Collotta A,
Vahter M, Gribaldo L.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Research Centre, Physical and Chemical Exposure Unit (PCE), Institute
for the Health and Consumer Protection, via E. Fermi 1, 21020 Ispra (VA), Italy. 
graziella.cimino@jrc.it

The effects of arsenate (As) and atrazine (Atr) on myeloid progenitors
(colony-forming unit-granulocyte/macrophage, CFU-GM) cells derived from bone
marrow were studied in male and female mice after combined in utero and juvenile 
exposure. Female adult mice were treated with arsenate in drinking water during
gestation. Then, separate groups of males and females' offspring were exposed for
4 months to atrazine, to additional arsenate or to co-exposure of atrazine and
arsenate together in drinking water. In male mice, arsenate and the combined
exposure did not modulate the percentage of CFU-GM progenitors, whereas atrazine 
significantly decreases the clonogenicity of myeloid cells. In females, the
percentage of CFU-GM significantly decreased after atrazine exposure did not
change with arsenate treatment, but dramatically increased after the combined
exposure. The expression of estrogen receptors alpha (ERalpha) and beta (ERbeta) 
in bone marrow cells was investigated, and an up-regulation of receptor beta was 
observed in both genders. A gene expression profile was generated using nylon
membranes spotted with 1185 cancer-related genes. Results from microarrays
indicate that atrazine alone did not stimulate the expression of any of the genes
analysed in both male and female. Arsenic induced gene expression modulation only
in female. Major significant changes on the gene expression resulted following
the co-exposure to arsenic and atrazine in both male and female.

PMID: 18585445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell. 2008 Jun 13;133(6):1106-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.04.043.

Integration of external signaling pathways with the core transcriptional network 
in embryonic stem cells.

Chen X(1), Xu H, Yuan P, Fang F, Huss M, Vega VB, Wong E, Orlov YL, Zhang W,
Jiang J, Loh YH, Yeo HC, Yeo ZX, Narang V, Govindarajan KR, Leong B, Shahab A,
Ruan Y, Bourque G, Sung WK, Clarke ND, Wei CL, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672.

Transcription factors (TFs) and their specific interactions with targets are
crucial for specifying gene-expression programs. To gain insights into the
transcriptional regulatory networks in embryonic stem (ES) cells, we use
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with ultra-high-throughput DNA sequencing
(ChIP-seq) to map the locations of 13 sequence-specific TFs (Nanog, Oct4, STAT3, 
Smad1, Sox2, Zfx, c-Myc, n-Myc, Klf4, Esrrb, Tcfcp2l1, E2f1, and CTCF) and 2
transcription regulators (p300 and Suz12). These factors are known to play
different roles in ES-cell biology as components of the LIF and BMP signaling
pathways, self-renewal regulators, and key reprogramming factors. Our study
provides insights into the integration of the signaling pathways into the
ES-cell-specific transcription circuitries. Intriguingly, we find specific
genomic regions extensively targeted by different TFs. Collectively, the
comprehensive mapping of TF-binding sites identifies important features of the
transcriptional regulatory networks that define ES-cell identity.

PMID: 18555785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov. 2008 Jun;3(2):100-4.

Molecularly targeted therapy in breast cancer: the new generation.

Nahleh ZA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University, 4100 John R, 4HWCRC, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. nahlehz@karmanos.org

Breast cancer management has become increasingly complex, requiring the
integration of data not only from the patient's history and imaging modalities
but also from specific tumor biomarkers and gene expression. Targeted and
biologic therapies in breast cancer continue to evolve rapidly. The field of
molecular targeted therapy has emerged. Its ultimate goal is to personalize and
simplify treatment as well as minimize toxicity. This review aims at highlighting
the current state-of-the-art in novel molecular targeted therapies for breast
cancer based on multi-targeted small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI).
The first two agents in this group entering clinic, Lapatinib (GW572016; Tykerb) 
and SUNITINIB (SU11248; Sutent) are discussed. This review article also includes 
relevant patents.

PMID: 18537752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Stem Cells. 2008 Aug;26(8):1951-60. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0229. Epub 2008
May 15.

Tcf3 functions as a steady-state limiter of transcriptional programs of mouse
embryonic stem cell self-renewal.

Yi F(1), Pereira L, Merrill BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 900 South Ashland Avenue, Molecular Biology Research Building, Chicago, 
Illinois 60607, USA.

Elucidating the underlying transcriptional control of pluripotent cells is
necessary for the development of new methods of inducing and maintaining
pluripotent cells in vitro. Three transcription factors, Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2,
have been reported to form a feedforward circuit promoting pluripotent cell
self-renewal in embryonic stem cells (ESC). Previously, we found that a
transcriptional repressor activity of Tcf3, a DNA-binding effector of Wnt
signaling, reduced Nanog promoter activity and Nanog levels in mouse embryonic
stem cells (mESC). The objective of this study was to determine the scope of Tcf3
effects on gene expression and self-renewal beyond the regulation of Nanog
levels. We show that Tcf3 acts broadly on a genome-wide scale to reduce the
levels of several promoters of self-renewal (Nanog, Tcl1, Tbx3, Esrrb) while not 
affecting other ESC genes (Oct4, Sox2, Fgf4). Comparing effects of Tcf3 ablation 
with Oct4 or Nanog knockdown revealed that Tcf3 counteracted effects of both
Nanog and Oct4. Interestingly, the effects of Tcf3 were more strongly correlated 
with Oct4 than with Nanog, despite the normal levels of Oct4 in TCF3-/- mESC. The
deranged gene expression allowed TCF3-/- mESC self-renewal even in the absence of
leukemia inhibitory factor and delayed differentiation in embryoid bodies. These 
findings identify Tcf3 as a cell-intrinsic inhibitor of pluripotent cell
self-renewal that functions by limiting steady-state levels of self-renewal
factors. Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of
this article.

PMCID: PMC2743928
PMID: 18483421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Rejuvenation Res. 2008 Apr;11(2):379-86. doi: 10.1089/rej.2008.0674.

Characterization and genetic manipulation of human umbilical cord vein
mesenchymal stem cells: potential application in cell-based gene therapy.

Kermani AJ(1), Fathi F, Mowla SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University,
Tehran, Iran.

Stem cells are defined by two main characteristics: self-renewal capacity and
commitment to multi-lineage differentiation. The cells have a great therapeutic
potential in repopulating damaged tissues as well as being genetically
manipulated and used in cell-based gene therapy. Umbilical cord vein is a readily
available and inexpensive source of stem cells that are capable of generating
various cell types. Despite the recent isolation of human umbilical cord vein
mesenchymal stem cells (UVMSC), the self-renewal capacity and the potential
clinical application of the cells are not well known. In the present study, we
have successfully isolated and cultured human UVMSCs. Our data further revealed
that the isolated cells express the self-renewal genes Oct-4, Nanog, ZFX, Bmi-1, 
and Nucleostemin; but not Zic-3, Hoxb-4, TCL-1, Tbx-3 and Esrrb. In addition, our
immunocytochemistry results revealed the expression of SSEA-4, but not SSEA-3,
TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81 embryonic stem cell surface markers in the cells. Also, we
were able to transfect the cells with a reporter, enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP), and a therapeutic human brain-derived neurotrophic factor (hBDNF)
gene by means of electroporation and obtained a stable cell line, which could
constantly express both transgenes. The latter data provide further evidence on
the usefulness of umbilical cord vein mesenchymal stem cells as a readily
available source of stem cells, which could be genetically manipulated and used
in cell-based gene therapy applications.

PMID: 18399786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Maturitas. 2008 Mar 20;59(3):219-25. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2008.01.004. Epub
2008 Mar 6.

Estrogen receptor (ER) and ER-related receptor expression in normal and atrophic 
human vagina.

Cavallini A(1), Dinaro E, Giocolano A, Caringella AM, Ferreri R, Tutino V,
Loverro G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Institute for Digestive Diseases,
I.R.C.C.S. Saverio de Bellis Via Della Resistenza - 70013 Castellana Grotte,
Bari, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The estrogen level decline in menopausal status is involved in
physiological alterations of different human tissues including vaginal mucosa. In
this study, we have evaluated the estrogen receptor (ER) and estrogen
receptor-related receptor (ERR) expression in tissue samples of posterior vaginal
wall obtained from pre- and post-menopausal women.
METHODS: The nuclear receptor expression was determined by quantitative real-time
PCR (qPCR).
RESULTS: The qPCR results showed the presence of the three isoforms of the ERR
family (ERRalpha, ERRbeta and ERRgamma) that were coexpressed with ERs in all
vaginal tissue samples examined. The ERRalpha and ERRgamma mRNA levels decreased 
from normal vagina of the pre-menopausal women to atrophic vaginal tissue in
post-menopausal women. This trend was also observed for the ERbeta subtype.
CONCLUSIONS: The ERRs, such as ERs, are present in human vagina at the mRNA level
and the cessation of ovarian estrogen secretion, that is the key event during the
post-menopause, may be linked to ERbeta, ERRalpha and ERRgamma mRNA decline in
human vaginal mucosa. These findings may provide a biological rationale for the
clinical susceptibility of the post-menopausal vagina to local estrogen
treatment.

PMID: 18328649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jan;82(1):125-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.09.008.

Mutations of ESRRB encoding estrogen-related receptor beta cause
autosomal-recessive nonsyndromic hearing impairment DFNB35.

Collin RW(1), Kalay E, Tariq M, Peters T, van der Zwaag B, Venselaar H, Oostrik
J, Lee K, Ahmed ZM, Caylan R, Li Y, Spierenburg HA, Eyupoglu E, Heister A,
Riazuddin S, Bahat E, Ansar M, Arslan S, Wollnik B, Brunner HG, Cremers CW,
Karaguzel A, Ahmad W, Cremers FP, Vriend G, Friedman TB, Riazuddin S, Leal SM,
Kremer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In a large consanguineous family of Turkish origin, genome-wide homozygosity
mapping revealed a locus for recessive nonsyndromic hearing impairment on
chromosome 14q24.3-q34.12. Fine mapping with microsatellite markers defined the
critical linkage interval to a 18.7 cM region flanked by markers D14S53 and
D14S1015. This region partially overlapped with the DFNB35 locus. Mutation
analysis of ESRRB, a candidate gene in the overlapping region, revealed a
homozygous 7 bp duplication in exon 8 in all affected individuals. This
duplication results in a frame shift and premature stop codon. Sequence analysis 
of the ESRRB gene in the affected individuals of the original DFNB35 family and
in three other DFNB35-linked consanguineous families from Pakistan revealed four 
missense mutations. ESRRB encodes the estrogen-related receptor beta protein, and
one of the substitutions (p.A110V) is located in the DNA-binding domain of ESRRB,
whereas the other three are substitutions (p.L320P, p.V342L, and p.L347P) located
within the ligand-binding domain. Molecular modeling of this nuclear receptor
showed that the missense mutations are likely to affect the structure and
stability of these domains. RNA in situ hybridization in mice revealed that Esrrb
is expressed during inner-ear development, whereas immunohistochemical analysis
showed that ESRRB is present postnatally in the cochlea. Our data indicate that
ESRRB is essential for inner-ear development and function. To our knowledge, this
is the first report of pathogenic mutations of an estrogen-related receptor gene.

PMCID: PMC2253958
PMID: 18179891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Feb;8(3):181-98. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2007.10.009. Epub
2007 Nov 4.

An in situ hybridization-based screen for heterogeneously expressed genes in
mouse ES cells.

Carter MG(1), Stagg CA, Falco G, Yoshikawa T, Bassey UC, Aiba K, Sharova LV,
Shaik N, Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genomics and Aging Section, Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

We previously reported that Zscan4 showed heterogeneous expression patterns in
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. To identify genes that show similar expression
patterns, we carried out high-throughput in situ hybridization assays on ES cell 
cultures for 244 genes. Most of the genes are involved in transcriptional
regulation, and were selected using microarray-based comparisons of gene
expression profiles in ES and embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells versus
differentiated cell types. Pou5f1 (Oct4, Oct3/4) and Krt8 (EndoA) were used as
controls. Hybridization signals were detected on ES cell colonies for 147 genes
(60%). The majority (136 genes) of them showed relatively homogeneous expression 
in ES cell colonies. However, we found that two genes unequivocally showed
Zscan4-like spotted expression pattern (spot-in-colony pattern; Whsc2 and Rhox9).
We also found that nine genes showed relatively heterogeneous expression pattern 
(mosaic-in-colony pattern: Zfp42/Rex1, Rest, Atf4, Pa2g4, E2f2, Nanog,
Dppa3/Pgc7/Stella, Esrrb, and Fscn1). Among these genes, Zfp42/Rex1 showed
unequivocally heterogeneous expression in individual ES cells prepared by the
CytoSpin. These results show the presence of different types or states of cells
within ES cell cultures otherwise thought to be undifferentiated and homogeneous,
suggesting a previously unappreciated complexity in ES cell cultures.

PMCID: PMC2238805
PMID: 18178135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 16;104(42):16438-43. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

A gene regulatory network in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Zhou Q(1), Chipperfield H, Melton DA, Wong WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, 8125 Math
Science Building, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

We analyze new and existing expression and transcription factor-binding data to
characterize gene regulatory relations in mouse ES cells (ESC). In addition to
confirming the key roles of Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog, our analysis identifies
several genes, such as Esrrb, Stat3, Tcf7, Sall4, and LRH-1, as statistically
significant coregulators. The regulatory interactions among 15 core regulators
are used to construct a gene regulatory network in ESC. The network encapsulates 
extensive cross-regulations among the core regulators, highlights how they may
control epigenetic processes, and reveals the surprising roles of nuclear
receptors. Our analysis also provides information on the regulation of a large
number of putative target genes of the network.

PMCID: PMC2034259
PMID: 17940043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2006 Mar-Apr;16(2):827-33.

Expression of estrogen receptor-related receptor isoforms and clinical
significance in endometrial adenocarcinoma.

Gao M(1), Sun P, Wang J, Zhao D, Wei L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing,
People's Republic of China.

Estrogen receptor-related receptors (ERRs) are members of orphan nuclear
receptors closely related to the estrogen receptors (ERs). Researches showed that
the ERRs bound to estrogen response elements and interfered in the ER signal
pathway. Therefore, it might be associated with estrogen-dependent diseases. The 
purpose of this study was to explore whether ERRs were involved in the
tumorigenesis of endometrial adenocarcinoma. We examined the expression of ERRs
in endometrial adenocarcinoma and normal endometrium using semiquantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
Clinicopathologic features including FIGO stage, histologic grade, myometrial
invasion, and nodal metastasis were reviewed. Results showed that messenger RNA
(mRNA) levels of ERRalpha, ERRbeta, and ERRgamma were positively associated with 
the immunoreactivities (P= 0.009, P= 0.014, and P= 0.001, respectively). The
expression rate and relative level of ERRalpha mRNA in ERalpha-positive
endometrial adenocarcinomas were lower than in normal endometriums (P= 0.049 and 
P= 0.023), whereas the relative level of ERRgamma mRNA in ERalpha-positive
endometrial adenocarcinomas was higher than in normal endometriums (P= 0.014).
Expression of ERRalpha mRNA was positively correlated with FIGO stage (P= 0.019) 
and myometrial invasion (P= 0.043). A negative correlation was observed between
expression of ERRgamma mRNA and nodal metastasis (P= 0.021). Results suggested
that ERRalpha and ERRgamma might participate in the tumorigenesis of endometrial 
adenocarcinoma. ERRalpha and ERRgamma are promising to be new prognostic factors 
in endometrial adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 16681769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 May;20(5):1035-47. Epub 2006 Jan 26.

Receptor-interacting protein 140 differentially regulates estrogen
receptor-related receptor transactivation depending on target genes.

Castet A(1), Herledan A, Bonnet S, Jalaguier S, Vanacker JM, Cavaillès V.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 540,
Endocrinologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire des Cancers and Université de
Montpellier I, 60 rue de Navacelles, 34090 Montpellier, France.

We have investigated the effects of receptor-interacting protein 140 (RIP140) on 
transcriptional regulation by estrogen receptor-related receptors (ERRs). We
first show that RIP140 inhibits transactivation by ERRalpha, beta, and gamma on
natural or artificial reporter genes containing different types of response
elements. This repression correlates with a strong in vitro binding between
several regions of RIP140 and the three ERR isoforms. Surprisingly, although
RIP140 inhibits transactivation of the thyroid hormone receptor-alpha gene by
ERRbeta, it significantly increases its regulation by ERRalpha and ERRgamma.
Mutagenesis and transient transfections in SL2 cells indicate that thyroid
hormone receptor-alpha promoter expression involved Sp1 sites. In support of this
observation, we demonstrate that RIP140 also positively regulates ERRs
transactivation of other known Sp1 targets such as the p21 gene. This effect
requires the two proximal Sp1 binding sites of the promoter and is partially
dependent on the activation function 2 domain of ERRs. Finally, we provide
evidences for a role of histone deacetylases in the regulation of p21 promoter by
RIP140. Altogether, these data indicate that RIP140 differentially regulates ERR 
activity depending on the target sequence on the promoters.

PMID: 16439465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Feb;91(2):569-79. Epub 2005 Dec 6.

Identification and characterization of two novel splicing isoforms of human
estrogen-related receptor beta.

Zhou W(1), Liu Z, Wu J, Liu JH, Hyder SM, Antoniou E, Lubahn DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri Center for Phytonutrient
and Phytochemical Studies, Room 110A ASRC, 920 East Campus Drive, Columbia, MO
65211, USA.

CONTEXT: Estrogen-related receptor beta (ERRbeta) was one of the first two orphan
nuclear receptors reported and is believed to play important roles in
estrogen-regulated pathways. Embryo lethality of ERRbeta-null mice indicated that
ERRbeta is essential for embryo development.
OBJECTIVE: Two novel splicing isoforms of human (h) ERRbeta, hERRbeta2-Delta10
and short-form hERRbeta, were identified during the cloning of previously
reported hERRbeta-hERRbeta2. We aim to investigate the functional differences of 
these three human ERRbeta-splicing isoforms.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: A genomic sequence comparison within and flanking the
ERRbeta genes of eight species demonstrated that short-form hERRbeta lacks an F
domain and is the matched homolog of mouse and rat ERRbeta proteins in humans.
However, hERRbeta2-Delta10 and the previously reported hERRbeta2 isoforms are
primate specific. RT-PCR analysis showed that short-form hERRbeta has a wide
distribution in the 24 of 27 human tissues and cell lines tested, whereas
hERRbeta2 and hERRbeta2-Delta10 were only expressed in testis and kidney. The
three human ERRbeta-splicing isoforms have different transcriptional activities
when measured on an estrogen response element-driven luciferase reporter in
transfection assays. The localization of a nuclear localization signal of
short-form hERRbeta was also determined. Interestingly, the F domain of hERRbeta2
alters the function of the nuclear localization signal. Therefore, the ERRbeta
isoforms are likely to have diverse biological functions in vivo, and
characterizing the three isoforms of ERRbeta will lead to an understanding of the
multiple levels of gene regulation involved in steroid receptor-signaling
pathways in humans and may provide novel therapeutic targets for human diseases.

PMID: 16332939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Mol Med (Berl). 2005 Jun;83(6):457-67. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

Expression of estrogen receptor-related receptors, a subfamily of orphan nuclear 
receptors, as new tumor biomarkers in ovarian cancer cells.

Sun P(1), Sehouli J, Denkert C, Mustea A, Könsgen D, Koch I, Wei L, Lichtenegger 
W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University People's Hospital, 
Peking University Health Science Center, 100044, Beijing, People's Republic of
China.

A subfamily of orphan receptors, estrogen receptor-related receptors (ERRs), has 
been demonstrated to modulate the transcription of some estrogen responsive genes
via variant estrogen response elements (EREs). This study was conducted to
determine whether human ERRalpha, ERRbeta, and ERRgamma might be involved in the 
tumorigenesis of ovarian cancer. RT-PCR was performed to analyze the expression
of hERRalpha, hERRbeta, hERRbeta-2, and hERRgamma mRNA in five ovarian cancer
cell lines as well as 33 samples of ovarian cancer and 12 samples of normal
ovary. Serum CA-125 levels were also analyzed in all samples by ELISA.
Progression-free survival and overall survival of patients with different
expression of ERRs were analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method. To analyze the
subcellular localization of ERRalpha, a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-reporter 
plasmid of hERRalpha was constructed and transfected into the ovarian cancer cell
line OVCAR-3. Expression of hERRalpha-GFP fusion protein was observed in the
nucleus of OVCAR-3 ovarian cancer cell lines. We observed increased expression of
hERRalpha mRNA (P = 0.020) and hERRgamma mRNA (P = 0.045) in ovarian cancers
compared to normal ovaries. In contrast, hERRbeta was only observed in 9.1% of
ovarian cancers. We found a positive correlation between the serum CA-125 levels 
and hERRalpha expression (P = 0.012), but not hERRbeta and hERRgamma expression. 
Survival analysis showed that the hERRalpha-positive group has a reduced overall 
survival (P = 0.015), and the ERRgamma-positive group has a longer
progression-free survival (P = 0.020). In multivariate analysis, expression of
hERRalpha was an independent prognostic factor for poor survival (relative risk, 
3.032; 95% CI, 1.27-6.06). Based on our results, ERRs may play an important role 
in ovarian cancer. hERRalpha may represent a biomarker of poor prognosis, and
hERRgamma may be a new therapeutic target in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 15770498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biochemistry. 2005 Mar 22;44(11):4196-203.

Inhibition of DNA binding by human estrogen-related receptor 2 and estrogen
receptor alpha with minor groove binding polyamides.

Gearhart MD(1), Dickinson L, Ehley J, Melander C, Dervan PB, Wright PE,
Gottesfeld JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Human estrogen-related receptor 2 (hERR2, ESRRB, ERRbeta, NR3B2) belongs to a
class of nuclear receptors that bind DNA through sequence-specific interactions
with a 5'-AGGTCA-3' estrogen response element (ERE) half-site in the major groove
and an upstream 5'-TNA-3' site in the minor groove. This minor groove interaction
is mediated by a C-terminal extension (CTE) of the DNA binding domain and is
unique to the estrogen-related receptors. We have used synthetic
pyrrole-imidazole polyamides, which bind specific sequences in the minor groove, 
to demonstrate that DNA binding by hERR2 is sensitive to the presence of
polyamides in both the upstream minor groove CTE site and the minor groove of the
ERE half-site. Thus, polyamides can inhibit hERR2 by two mechanisms, by direct
steric blockage of minor groove DNA contacts mediated by the CTE and by changing 
the helical geometry of DNA such that major groove interactions are weakened. To 
confirm the generality of the latter approach, we show that the dimeric human
estrogen receptor alpha (hERalpha, ESR1, NR3A1), which binds in the major groove 
of the ERE, can be inhibited by a polyamide bound in the opposing minor groove of
the ERE. These results highlight two mechanisms for inhibition of protein-DNA
interactions and extend the repertoire of DNA recognition motifs that can be
inhibited by polyamides. These molecules may thus be useful for controlling
expression of hERR2- or hERalpha-responsive genes.

PMID: 15766247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Mar 1;15(5):1311-3.

Identification of an agonist ligand for estrogen-related receptors ERRbeta/gamma.

Yu DD(1), Forman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene regulation and Drug Discovery, The Beckman Research
Institute, The City of Hope National Medical Center, The Gonda Diabetes and
Genetic Research Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

In order to develop agonist ligands that are specific for the estrogen-related
receptors ERRbeta/gamma, a hydrazone with a 4-hydroxy group at one phenyl ring
and a 4-diethylamino moiety at the other phenyl ring was synthesized. We
demonstrate that compound 3 (DY131;
N'-{(1E)-[4-(diethylamino)phenyl]methylene}-4-hydroxybenzohydrazide) effectively 
and selectively activates ERRbeta/gamma. DY131 had no effect on the structurally 
related receptors ERRalpha or the estrogen receptors alpha and beta
(ERalpha/beta). This work defines a convenient synthesis for a novel and
selective pharmacologic tool that can be used to elucidate the biological
activities of ERRbeta/gamma.

PMID: 15713377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 6;279(32):33639-46. Epub 2004 May 24.

Structural basis for the deactivation of the estrogen-related receptor gamma by
diethylstilbestrol or 4-hydroxytamoxifen and determinants of selectivity.

Greschik H(1), Flaig R, Renaud JP, Moras D.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie et Génomique Structurales, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 1 rue Laurent Fries, B. P. 10142, 67404
Illkirch, France.

The estrogen-related receptor (ERR) gamma behaves as a constitutive activator of 
transcription. Although no natural ligand is known, ERRgamma is deactivated by
the estrogen receptor (ER) agonist diethylstilbestrol and the selective ER
modulator 4-hydroxytamoxifen but does not significantly respond to estradiol or
raloxifene. Here we report the crystal structures of the ERRgamma ligand binding 
domain (LBD) complexed with diethylstilbestrol or 4-hydroxytamoxifen. Antagonist 
binding to ERRgamma results in a rotation of the side chain of Phe-435 that
partially fills the cavity of the apoLBD. The new rotamer of Phe-435 displaces
the "activation helix" (helix 12) from the agonist position observed in the
absence of ligand. In contrast to the complexes of the ERalpha LBD with
4-hydroxytamoxifen or raloxifene, helix 12 of antagonist-bound ERRgamma does not 
occupy the coactivator groove but appears to be completely dissociated from the
LBD body. Comparison of the ligand-bound LBDs of ERRgamma and ERalpha reveals
small but significant differences in the architecture of the ligand binding
pockets that result in a slightly shifted binding position of diethylstilbestrol 
and a small rotation of 4-hydroxytamoxifen in the cavity of ERRgamma relative to 
ERalpha. Our results provide detailed molecular insight into the conformational
changes occurring upon binding of synthetic antagonists to the constitutive
orphan receptor ERRgamma and reveal structural differences with ERs that explain 
why ERRgamma does not bind estradiol or raloxifene and will help to design new
selective antagonists.

PMID: 15161930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mech Dev. 2004 Mar;121(3):237-46.

Loss of PGC-specific expression of the orphan nuclear receptor ERR-beta results
in reduction of germ cell number in mouse embryos.

Mitsunaga K(1), Araki K, Mizusaki H, Morohashi K, Haruna K, Nakagata N, Giguère
V, Yamamura K, Abe K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Division of Developmental
Genetics, Kumamoto University, 4-24-1 Kuhonji, Kumamoto 862-0976, Japan.

Estrogen related receptor beta (ERR-beta) is an orphan nuclear receptor
specifically expressed in a subset of extra-embryonic ectoderm of
post-implantation embryos. ERR-beta is essential for placental development since 
the ERR-beta null mutants die at 10.5dpc due to the placenta abnormality. Here,
we show that the ERR-beta is specifically expressed in primordial germ cells
(PGC), obviously another important cell type for reproduction. Expression of the 
ERR-beta mRNA in embryonic germ cells started at E11.5 as soon as PGC reached
genital ridges, and persisted until E15-E16 in both sexes. Immunostaining with
anti-ERR-beta antibody revealed that the ERR-beta protein is exclusively
expressed in germ cells in both male and female gonads from E11.5 to E16. 5. To
study function of the ERR-beta in PGC, we complemented placental defects of the
ERR-beta null mutants with wild-type tetraploid embryos, and analyzed germ cell
development in the rescued embryos. It was found that development of gonad and
PGC was not apparently affected, but number of germ cells was significantly
reduced in male and female gonads, suggesting that the ERR-beta appears to be
involved in proliferation of gonadal germ cells. The rescued embryos could
develop to term and grow up to adulthood. The rescued ERR-beta null male were
found to be fertile, but both male and female null mutants exhibited behavioural 
abnormalities, implying that the ERR-beta plays important roles in wider
biological processes than previously thought.

PMID: 15003627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cancer Res. 2003 Nov;1(13):981-91.

Flavone and isoflavone phytoestrogens are agonists of estrogen-related receptors.

Suetsugi M(1), Su L, Karlsberg K, Yuan YC, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Research and Division of Information Sciences, Beckman 
Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

While estrogen-related receptors (ERRalpha, ERRbeta, and ERRgamma) share a high
amino acid sequence homology with estrogen receptors (ERs), estrogens are not
ligands of ERRs. Structure-function studies from this and other laboratories have
revealed that ERRs have small ligand-binding pockets and have provided evidence
to show that these receptors can activate gene transcription in a constitutive
manner. To address the question as to whether there is any agonist for ERRs, our 
laboratory recently performed virtual ligand screening on ERRalpha that predicted
flavone and isoflavone phytoestrogens to be ligands of this receptor. Our
mammalian cell transfection and mammalian two-hybrid experiments revealed that
three isoflavones (genistein, daidzein, and biochanin A) and one flavone
(6,3',4'-trihydroxyflavone) behaved as agonists of ERRs. These phytoestrogens
induced the activity of ERRalpha at concentrations that are comparable to those
for the activation of ERalpha and ERbeta. In this study, we also used the results
of ERRalpha ligand-binding site mutant, F232A, to verify our ERRalpha
hypothetical computer model. Our recent ERR research has determined for the first
time that flavone and isoflavone phytoestrogens are agonists of ERRs. In
addition, our studies have demonstrated that an approach that combines
structure-based virtual screening and receptor functional assays can identify
novel ligands of orphan nuclear receptors.

PMID: 14638870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Mol Biol. 2003 Apr 4;327(4):819-32.

Monomeric complex of human orphan estrogen related receptor-2 with DNA: a
pseudo-dimer interface mediates extended half-site recognition.

Gearhart MD(1), Holmbeck SM, Evans RM, Dyson HJ, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

While most nuclear receptors bind DNA as homo or heterodimers, the human estrogen
related receptors (hERRs) are members of a subfamily of orphan receptors that
bind DNA as monomers. We have determined the solution structure of the DNA
binding domain (DBD) of hERR2 bound to its cognate DNA. The structure and base
interactions of the core DBD are similar to those of other nuclear receptors.
However, high-affinity, sequence-specific DNA binding as a monomer necessitates
formation of additional base contacts outside the core DBD. This is accomplished 
using a modified guanosine-binding "AT-hook" within the C-terminal extension
(CTE) flanking the DBD, which makes base-specific minor groove interactions. The 
structure of the CTE is stabilized both by interactions with the DNA and by
packing against a region of the core DBD normally reserved for dimerization. This
pseudo-dimer interface provides a basis for the expansion of DNA recognition and 
suggests a mechanism through which dimerization may have evolved from an
ancestral monomeric receptor.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12654265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(1):238-49.

LXXLL-related motifs in Dax-1 have target specificity for the orphan nuclear
receptors Ad4BP/SF-1 and LRH-1.

Suzuki T(1), Kasahara M, Yoshioka H, Morohashi K, Umesono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki 444-8585, Japan.

The orphan receptor Ad4BP/SF-1 (NR5A1) is a constitutive activator, and its
activity is repressed by another orphan receptor, Dax-1 (NR0B1). In the present
study, we investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying this repression by
Dax-1. Yeast two-hybrid and transient-transfection assays confirmed the necessity
of three LXXLL-related motifs in Dax-1 for interaction with and repression of
Ad4BP/SF-1. In vitro pull-down experiments confirmed that Dax-1 interacts with
Ad4BP/SF-1 and also with LRH-1 (NR5A2). The target specificity of the
LXXLL-related motifs was indicated by the observations that Ad4BP/SF-1, ERalpha
(NR3A1), LRH-1, ERR2 (NR3B2), and fly FTZ-F1 (NR5A3) interacted through their
ligand binding domains with all the LXXLL-related motifs in Dax-1 whereas HNF4
(NR2A1) and RORalpha (NR1F1) did not. Transcriptional activities of the receptors
whose DNA binding domains (DBDs) were replaced by the GAL4 DBD were repressed by 
Dax-1 to various levels, which correlated with the strength of interaction. Amino
acid substitutions revealed that Ad4BP/SF-1 and LRH-1 preferentially interact
with L(+1)XXLL-related motifs containing serine, tyrosine, serine, and threonine 
at positions -2, +2, +3, and +6, respectively. Taken together, our results
indicate that the specificities of LXXLL-related motifs in Dax-1 based on their
amino acid sequences play an important role in regulation of orphan receptors.

PMCID: PMC140654
PMID: 12482977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Dec 20;299(5):872-9.

PGC-1 and PERC, coactivators of the estrogen receptor-related receptor gamma.

Hentschke M(1), Süsens U, Borgmeyer U.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, Institut für Entwicklungsneurobiologie, 
Universität Hamburg, Martinistrasse 52, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany.

The mouse nuclear receptor ERRgamma (estrogen receptor-related receptor gamma) is
highly expressed in heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, and brain, as well as in the 
developing nervous system. We found that the expression of the coactivators PGC-1
(PGC-1alpha) and PERC (PGC-1beta) in mammalian cells augmented potently the
transcriptional activation by ERRgamma. The constitutive activation function 2
(AF-2) of the orphan receptor was important for the synergistic enhancement.
Functional receptor truncation analysis revealed an additional amino-terminal
activation function, specific for the ERRgamma2 isoform and PGC-1. In vitro
experiments showed a direct interaction of ERRgamma with both coactivators. Our
findings suggest distinct regulatory functions for PGC-1 and PERC as
tissue-specific coactivators for ERRgamma.

PMID: 12470660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jul;13(5):220-5.

To ERR in the estrogen pathway.

Giguère V(1).

Author information: 
(1)McGill University Health Center, 687 Pine Avenue West, Montréal, Québec,
Canada H3A 1A1. vgiguere@dir.molonc.mcgill.ca

Estrogens control a variety of physiological and disease-linked processes, most
notably reproduction, bone remodeling and breast cancer, and their effects are
transduced through classic unclear receptors referred to as estrogen
receptor-alpha (ER alpha) and ER beta. Recent results obtained using the
estrogen-related receptors (ERR alpha, -beta and -gamma), a subfamily of orphan
nuclear receptors closely related to the ERs, have shown that the ERRs share
target genes, coregulatory proteins, ligands and sites of action with the ERs. In
addition, the ERRs can actively influence the estrogenic response, suggesting
that pharmacological modulation of ERR activity will be clinically useful to
prevent and/or treat a variety of conditions related to women's health.

PMID: 12185669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 18;277(3):1739-48. Epub 2001 Nov 8.

Differential regulation of the orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner 
(SHP) gene promoter by orphan nuclear receptor ERR isoforms.

Sanyal S(1), Kim JY, Kim HJ, Takeda J, Lee YK, Moore DD, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hormone Research Center, Chonnam National University,
Kwangju, 500-757, Republic of Korea.

The orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner (SHP; NR0B2) interacts with
a wide array of nuclear receptors and represses their transcriptional activity.
SHP expression is regulated by several other members of the nuclear receptor
superfamily, including the orphan receptors SF-1 and LRH-1, and the bile acid
receptor FXR. We have found that the SHP promoter is also activated by the
estrogen receptor-related receptor gamma (ERRgamma) but not the related ERRalpha 
and ERRbeta isoforms. SHP and ERRgamma mRNAs are coexpressed in several tissues, 
including pancreas, kidney, and heart, confirming the potential relevance of this
transactivation. ERRgamma transactivation is dependent on only one of five
previously characterized DNA-binding sites for SF-1, and this element differs
from previously reported ERR response elements. However, treatment with the
histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A significantly increased ERRalpha and
ERRbeta activity on this element indicating that the lack of activity of ERRalpha
and -beta may depend on their association with co-repressor in vivo. Furthermore,
using protease sensitivity assays on DNA bound receptors it was demonstrated that
DNA sequence of different response elements may cause allosteric modulation of
ERR proteins, which in turn may be responsible for the differential activities of
these receptors on different response elements. SHP inhibits ERRgamma
transactivation and physically interacts with all three members of ERR subfamily,
as demonstrated by both yeast two-hybrid and biochemical assays. As with other
SHP targets, this interaction is dependent on the AF-2 coactivator-binding site
of ERRgamma and the previously described N-terminal receptor interaction domain
of SHP. Several recently described SHP mutations associated with moderate obesity
in humans block the inhibition of ERRgamma activity. Overall, these results
identify a new autoregulatory loop controlling SHP gene expression and
significantly extend the potential functional roles of the three ERRs.

PMID: 11705994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Endocrinology. 2001 Oct;142(10):4572-5.

4-Hydroxytamoxifen is an isoform-specific inhibitor of orphan
estrogen-receptor-related (ERR) nuclear receptors beta and gamma.

Tremblay GB(1), Bergeron D, Giguere V.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Development Unit, SignalGene Inc., Montréal, Québec, Canada H2M 2N9.

Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) are synthetic molecules that
exhibit tissue-specific activities. 4-hydroxytamoxifen (OHT) is a first
generation SERM that functions as an antagonist in breast cancer cells but
displays estrogen-like activities in the uterus and bone. The
estrogen-receptor-related receptors (ERR) alpha, beta and gamma are orphan
members of the superfamily of nuclear receptors. While the ERRs do not respond to
natural estrogens, these receptors recognize the estrogen response element and
have been shown to activate and repress gene expression in the absence of
exogenously added ligand. Here we show that OHT disrupts the interaction between 
the orphan estrogen-receptor-related (ERR) receptors beta and gamma and a
coregulator protein and abolishes the constitutive transcriptional activity of
these receptors in transient transfection assays. In contrast, OHT has no effect 
on coregulator/ERR alpha interaction or its transcriptional activity. These
results demonstrate the existence of a novel nuclear receptor-based
pharmacological pathway that may contribute to the tissue-specific activities of 
OHT.

PMID: 11564725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Res. 2001 Sep 15;61(18):6755-61.

Transcriptional regulation of the estrogen-inducible pS2 breast cancer marker
gene by the ERR family of orphan nuclear receptors.

Lu D(1), Kiriyama Y, Lee KY, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec,
H3A 1A1 Canada.

The estrogen-receptor-related receptors (ERRs) alpha, beta, and gamma are orphan 
nuclear hormone receptors that share significant homology with the estrogen
receptors (ERs) but are not activated by natural estrogens. In contrast, the ERRs
display constitutive transcriptional activity in the absence of exogenously added
ligand. However, the ERRs bind to the estrogen response element and to the
extended half-sites of which a subset can also be recognized by ERalpha,
suggesting that ERRs and ERs may control overlapping regulatory pathways. To test
this hypothesis, we explored the possibility that ERRs could regulate the
expression of the estrogen-inducible pS2 gene, a human breast cancer prognostic
marker. Transfection studies show that all of the ERR isoforms can activate the
pS2 promoter in a variety of cell types, including breast cancer cell lines.
Surprisingly, sequence analysis combined with mutational studies revealed that,
in addition to the well-characterized estrogen response element, the presence of 
a functional extended half-site within the pS2 promoter is also required for
complete response to both ER and ERR pathways. We show that ERR transcriptional
activity on the pS2 promoter is considerably enhanced in the presence of all
three members of the steroid receptor coactivator family but is completely
abolished on treatment with the synthetic estrogen diethylstilbestrol, a recently
described inhibitor of ERR function. Finally, we demonstrate that ERRalpha is the
major isoform expressed in human breast cancer cell lines and that
diethylstilbestrol can inhibit the growth of both ER-positive and -negative cell 
lines. Taken together, these results demonstrate that estrogen-inducible genes
such as pS2 can be ERR targets and suggest that pharmacological modulation of
ERRalpha activity may have therapeutic value in the treatment of breast cancer.

PMID: 11559547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Genes Dev. 2001 Apr 1;15(7):833-8.

Diethylstilbestrol regulates trophoblast stem cell differentiation as a ligand of
orphan nuclear receptor ERR beta.

Tremblay GB(1), Kunath T, Bergeron D, Lapointe L, Champigny C, Bader JA, Rossant 
J, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development, SignalGene, Inc., Montréal, Québec H2M
2N9, Canada.

The orphan nuclear receptor ERR beta is expressed in undifferentiated trophoblast
stem cell lines and extraembryonic ectoderm, and genetic ablation of ERR beta
results in abnormal trophoblast proliferation and precocious differentiation
toward the giant cell lineage. Here, we show that the synthetic estrogen
diethylstilbestrol (DES) promotes coactivator release from ERR beta and inhibits 
its transcriptional activity. Strikingly, treatment of trophoblast stem cells
with DES led to their differentiation toward the polyploid giant cell lineage. In
addition, DES-treated pregnant mice exhibited abnormal early placenta development
associated with an overabundance of trophoblast giant cells and an absence of
diploid trophoblast. These results define a novel pathway for DES action and
provide evidence for steroidlike control of trophoblast development.

PMCID: PMC312665
PMID: 11297507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Endocr Regul. 2000 Dec;34(4):203-18.

Intracellular estrogen receptors, their characterization and function (Review).

Rollerova E(1), Urbancikova M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive and Clinical Medicine, Department of Toxicology and
Xenobiotics, Limbova 14, 833 01 Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

PMID: 11137980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Dec;13(12):2151-62.

Constitutive activation of transcription and binding of coactivator by
estrogen-related receptors 1 and 2.

Xie W(1), Hong H, Yang NN, Lin RJ, Simon CM, Stallcup MR, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

In this report, we demonstrate that, in contrast to most previously characterized
nuclear receptors, hERR1 and hERR2 (human estrogen receptor-related protein 1 and
-2) are constitutive activators of the classic estrogen response element (ERE) as
well as the palindromic thyroid hormone response element (TRE(pal)) but not the
glucocorticoid response element (GRE). This intrinsically activated state of
hERR1 and hERR2 resides in the ligand-binding domains of the two genes and is
transferable to a heterologous receptor. In addition, we show that members of the
p160 family of nuclear receptor coactivators, ACTR (activator of thyroid and
retinoic acid receptors), GRIP1 (glucocorticoid receptor interacting protein 1), 
and SRC-1 (steroid receptor coactivator 1), potentiate the transcriptional
activity by hERR1 and hERR2 in mammalian cells, and that both orphan receptors
bind the coactivators in a ligand-independent manner. Together, these results
suggest that hERR1 and hERR2 activate gene transcription through a mechanism
different from most of the previously characterized steroid hormone receptors.

PMID: 10598588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 6;274(32):22618-26.

Hormone-independent transcriptional activation and coactivator binding by novel
orphan nuclear receptor ERR3.

Hong H(1), Yang L, Stallcup MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90033, USA.

Orphan nuclear receptors share sequence homology with members of the nuclear
receptor superfamily, but ligands are unknown or unnecessary. A novel orphan
receptor, estrogen receptor-related protein 3 (ERR3), was identified by yeast
two-hybrid screening, using the transcriptional coactivator glucocorticoid
receptor interacting protein 1 (GRIP1) as bait. The putative full-length mouse
ERR3 contains 458 amino acids and is closely related to two known orphan
receptors ERR1 and ERR2. All the ERR family members share an almost identical
DNA-binding domain, which has 68% amino acid identity with that of estrogen
receptor. ERR3 bound specifically to an estrogen response element and activated
reporter genes controlled by estrogen response elements, both in yeast and in
mammalian cells, in the absence of any added ligand. A conserved AF-2 activation 
domain located in the hormone-binding domain of ERR3 was primarily responsible
for transcriptional activation. The ERR3 AF-2 domain bound GRIP1 in a
ligand-independent manner both in vitro and in vivo, through the LXXLL motifs of 
GRIP1, and GRIP1 functioned as a transcriptional coactivator for ERR3 in both
yeast and mammalian cells. Expression of ERR3 in adult mouse was restricted;
highest expression was observed in heart, kidney, and brain. In the mouse embryo 
no expression was observed at day 7, and highest expression occurred around the
11-15 day stages. Although ERR3 is much more closely related to ERR2 than to
ERR1, the expression pattern for ERR3 was similar to that of ERR1 and distinct
from that for ERR2, suggesting a unique role for ERR3 in development.

PMID: 10428842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Dev Dyn. 1999 Apr;214(4):303-11.

Murine Gcm1 gene is expressed in a subset of placental trophoblast cells.

Basyuk E(1), Cross JC, Corbin J, Nakayama H, Hunter P, Nait-Oumesmar B, Lazzarini
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

The gcm gene of Drosophila melanogaster encodes a transcription factor that is an
important component in cell fate specification within the nervous system. In the 
absence of a functional gcm gene, progenitor cells differentiate into neurons,
whereas when the gene is ectopically expressed the cells produce excess glial
cells at the expense of neuronal differentiation. Recent searches of databases
have uncovered high sequence similarity between the Drosophila gem gene and an
anonymous human placental cDNA clone (Altschuller et al., 1996; this
communication). Here we report the molecular organization of the murine Gcm1, its
spatio-temporal pattern of expression in developing placenta, and its map
position at E1-E3 on murine chromosome 9. The murine gene is composed of at least
6 exons. The promoter region contains an "initiation sequence" and is GC rich,
characteristics of the promoters of several transcription factors. The mRNA has a
modest 5'UTR (ca. 200 bases) but an extensive 3' UTR (ca. 2 kb). Northern blot
and mRNA in situ hybridization studies showed that Gcm1 expression was readily
detectable only in the placenta. It began at embryonic day 7.5 within trophoblast
cells of the chorion and continued to about embryonic day 17.5 within a subset of
labyrinthine trophoblast cells. Comparison with other transcription factors
revealed that Gcm1 expression defines a unique subset of trophoblast cells.

PMID: 10213386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Gene. 1999 Mar 4;228(1-2):101-9.

Identification of two hERR2-related novel nuclear receptors utilizing
bioinformatics and inverse PCR.

Chen F(1), Zhang Q, McDonald T, Davidoff MJ, Bailey W, Bai C, Liu Q, Caskey CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, PA
19486, USA. fang_chen@merck.com

Identification of novel nuclear receptors based on the highly conserved
DNA-binding domain (DBD) has previously depended mainly on low stringency
hybridization of cDNA libraries and degenerate PCR. Establishment of the
expressed sequence tag (EST) database in recent years has provided an alternative
approach for the discovery of novel members of gene families. The rate-limiting
step is the conversion of ESTs to full-length cDNA. This article describes the
identification of two novel nuclear receptors (hERRbeta2 and hERRgamma2) related 
to human estrogen-receptor-related receptor 2 (hERR2) by mining the EST database 
and retrieving of full-length cDNA via inverse PCR on subdivided primary cDNA
library pools. The deduced protein sequences of hERRbeta2 and hERRgamma2 contain 
500 and 458 amino acid (aa) residues respectively. Sequence analysis revealed
that hERRbeta2 and hERRgamma2 respectively share 95% and 77% overall aa sequence 
identity with hERR2. However, the extra C-terminal domain in hERRbeta2 and extra 
N-terminal domain in hERRgamma2 are not present in the closely related hERR2 or
mouse ERR2 (mERR2). Extensive sequence verification revealed that hERR2
previously reported as a human gene is actually a rat gene, whereas hERRbeta2 is 
the true human ortholog of hERR2 and mERR2. Tissue distribution studies showed
that hERRgamma2 was expressed in a broader panel of tissues at a higher level
than hERRbeta2. hERRbeta2 was mapped to cytogenetic locus 14q24.3 approximately
-14q31, a region containing multiple loci involved in genetic diseases, including
Alzheimer and diabetes. hERRgamma2 was mapped to 1q32. Given the high sequence
homology between hERRbeta2 and mERR2, the two receptors may have similar
biological function in vivo.

PMID: 10072763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Development. 1999 Mar;126(6):1247-58.

Mrj encodes a DnaJ-related co-chaperone that is essential for murine placental
development.

Hunter PJ(1), Swanson BJ, Haendel MA, Lyons GE, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Departments of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, and Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.

We have identified a novel gene in a gene trap screen that encodes a protein
related to the DnaJ co-chaperone in E. coli. The gene, named Mrj (mammalian
relative of DnaJ) was expressed throughout development in both the embryo and
placenta. Within the placenta, expression was particularly high in trophoblast
giant cells but moderate levels were also observed in trophoblast cells of the
chorion at embryonic day 8.5, and later in the labyrinth which arises from the
attachment of the chorion to the allantois (a process called chorioallantoic
fusion). Insertion of the ROSAbetageo gene trap vector into the Mrj gene created 
a null allele. Homozygous Mrj mutants died at mid-gestation due to a failure of
chorioallantoic fusion at embryonic day 8.5, which precluded formation of the
mature placenta. At embryonic day 8.5, the chorion in mutants was morphologically
normal and expressed the cell adhesion molecule beta4 integrin that is known to
be required for chorioallantoic fusion. However, expression of the chorionic
trophoblast-specific transcription factor genes Err2 and Gcm1 was significantly
reduced. The mutants showed no abnormal phenotypes in other trophoblast cell
types or in the embryo proper. This study indicates a previously unsuspected role
for chaperone proteins in placental development and represents the first genetic 
analysis of DnaJ-related protein function in higher eukaryotes. Based on a survey
of EST databases representing different mouse tissues and embryonic stages, there
are 40 or more DnaJ-related genes in mammals. In addition to Mrj, at least two of
these genes are also expressed in the developing mouse placenta. The specificity 
of the developmental defect in Mrj mutants suggests that each of these genes may 
have unique tissue and cellular activities.

PMID: 10021343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Genomics. 1998 Jun 15;50(3):382-4.

Isolation of a gene encoding a novel member of the nuclear receptor superfamily
from the critical region of Usher syndrome type IIa at 1q41.

Eudy JD(1), Yao S, Weston MD, Ma-Edmonds M, Talmadge CB, Cheng JJ, Kimberling WJ,
Sumegi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha 68198, USA.

PMID: 9676434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Genomics. 1997 Oct 15;45(2):320-6.

Chromosomal mapping of the human and murine orphan receptors ERRalpha (ESRRA) and
ERRbeta (ESRRB) and identification of a novel human ERRalpha-related pseudogene.

Sladek R(1), Beatty B, Squire J, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Victoria Hospital, Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, 687
Pine Avenue West, Montr-eal, Quebec, H3A 1A1, Canada.

The estrogen-related receptors ERRalpha and ERRbeta (formerly ERR1 and ERR2) form
a subgroup of the steroid/thyroid/retinoid receptor family. ERRalpha and ERRbeta 
are homologous to the estrogen receptor and bind similar DNA targets; however,
they are unable to activate gene transcription in response to estrogens. We have 
used interspecific backcross analysis to map the murine Estrra locus to
chromosome 19 and Estrrb to mouse chromosome 12. Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization, we have mapped the human ESRRA gene to chromosome 11q12-q13 and
the human ESRRB gene to chromosome 14q24.3. In addition, we report the isolation 
of a processed human ERRalpha pseudogene mapping to chromosome 13q12.1. To our
knowledge, this represents the first report of a pseudogene associated with a
member of the nuclear receptor superfamily.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9344655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 18;272(29):18038-43.

NMR spectroscopic studies of the DNA-binding domain of the monomer-binding
nuclear orphan receptor, human estrogen related receptor-2. The carboxyl-terminal
extension to the zinc-finger region is unstructured in the free form of the
protein.

Sem DS(1), Casimiro DR, Kliewer SA, Provencal J, Evans RM, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Unlike steroid and retinoid receptors, which associate with DNA as dimers, human 
estrogen related receptor-2 (hERR2) belongs to a growing subclass of nuclear
hormone receptors that bind DNA with high affinity as monomers. A
carboxyl-terminal extension (CTE) to the zinc-finger domain has been implicated
to be responsible for determining the stoichiometry of binding by a nuclear
receptor to its response element. To better understand the mechanism by which DNA
specificity is achieved, the solution structure of the DNA-binding domain of
hERR2 (residues 96-194) consisting of the two putative zinc fingers and the
requisite 26-amino acid CTE was analyzed by multidimensional heteronuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The highly conserved zinc-finger region
(residues 103-168) has a fold similar to those reported for steroid and retinoid 
receptors, with two helices that originate from the carboxyl-terminal ends of the
two zinc fingers and that pack together orthogonally, forming a hydrophobic core.
The CTE element of hERR2 is unstructured and highly flexible, exhibiting nearly
random coil chemical shifts, extreme sensitivity of the backbone amide protons to
solvent presaturation, and reduced heteronuclear (1H-15N) nuclear Overhauser
effect values. This is in contrast to the dimer-binding retinoid X and thyroid
hormone receptors, where, in each case, a helix has been observed within the CTE.
The implications of this property of the hERR2 CTE are discussed.

PMID: 9218433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Jun;11(7):905-16.

The ERR-1 orphan receptor is a transcriptional activator expressed during bone
development.

Bonnelye E(1), Vanacker JM, Dittmar T, Begue A, Desbiens X, Denhardt DT, Aubin
JE, Laudet V, Fournier B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 319, Mécanismes du développement et de la Cancérisation, Institut de 
Biologie de Lille, France.

We studied the expression of estrogen-related receptor ERR-1 during mouse
embryonic development. ERR-1 mRNA is present in bones formed by both the
endochondral and intramembranous routes, and the onset of its expression
coincides with bone formation. By RT-PCR experiments, we found that ERR-1, but
not the related receptor ERR-2, is expressed in osteoblastic osteosarcoma cell
lines as well as in primary osteoblastic cell populations derived from normal
human bone. By gel shift analysis we found that ERR-1 binds as a monomer
specifically to the SFRE sequence (SF-1-responsive-element; TCAAGGTCA). Mutation 
analysis revealed that both the core AGGTCA motif and the TCA 5'-extension are
required for efficient ERR-1 binding. In transient transfection assays, ERR-1
acts as a potent transactivator through the SFRE sequence. This effect is
cell-specific since ERR-1 activates transcription in the rat osteosarcoma cell
line ROS 17.2/8 as well as in HeLa, NB-E, and FREJ4 cells but not in COS1 and
HepG2 cells. Notably, the osteopontin (a protein expressed by osteoblasts and
released in the bone matrix) gene promoter is a target for ERR-1 transcriptional 
regulation. Our findings suggest a role for ERR-1 in bone development and
metabolism.

PMID: 9178750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 26;271(17):9879-82.

Nuclear orphan receptor as a repressor of glucocorticoid receptor transcriptional
activity.

Trapp T(1), Holsboer F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Clinical
Institute, 80804 Munich, Germany.

Nuclear orphan receptors belong to the superfamily of ligand-activated
transcription factors that show a close structural relationship and sequence
homology. Ligands and functions of most of the orphan receptors have not yet been
identified. The first nuclear orphan receptors that were cloned displayed a high 
degree of amino acid identity with the human estrogen receptor and were termed
estrogen receptor-related (ERR) 1 and 2. In the present study, we show that ERR2 
functions as a potent repressor of transcriptional activity mediated by the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Transient transfection of different cell lines with
a steroid-responsive reporter plasmid and receptor expression plasmids revealed
that transcriptional activity mediated by GR in response to agonists was strongly
suppressed by coexpression of ERR2. The orphan receptor displayed no promoter
activity when expressed without GR. The inhibitory activity of ERR2 is
cell-specific and also receptor-specific because transactivation mediated by the 
progesterone receptor is unaffected by ERR2. Our observations provide evidence
that the nuclear orphan receptor ERR2 acts as an endogenous modulator of GR
transcriptional activity.

PMID: 8626619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mech Dev. 1996 Feb;54(2):211-23.

Expression of a novel member of estrogen response element-binding nuclear
receptors is restricted to the early stages of chorion formation during mouse
embryogenesis.

Pettersson K(1), Svensson K, Mattsson R, Carlsson B, Ohlsson R, Berkenstam A.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institute, Department of Medical Nutrition, F60 NOVUM, Huddinge,
Sweden.

Members of the nuclear hormone receptor gene family of transcription factors have
been shown to be expressed in characteristic patterns during mouse organogenesis 
and postnatal development. Using an RT-PCR based screening assay, we have
identified nuclear receptors expressed in embryonal carcinoma stem cells. One of 
the cDNAs characterized, mERR-2, was found to be expressed exclusively during a
narrow developmental window in trophoblast progenitor cells between days 6.5 and 
7.5 post coitum (p.c.). From 8.5 days p.c. and onwards, the mERR-2 gene activity 
evaded detection as analysed by in situ hybridization. We also show that the
mERR-2 gene product and the estrogen receptor share a common target DNA-sequence 
recognition specificity unique among members of the gene family. Furthermore,
efficient homodimerization and DNA-binding of the orphan receptor mERR-2 was
found to be dependent on interaction with the heat shock protein 90, a molecular 
chaperone hitherto recognized to interact only with the steroid hormone receptor 
subgroup of nuclear receptors. Based on our results we suggest that the mouse
orphan receptor mERR-2 has the potential to regulate overlapping gene networks
with the estrogen receptor and may participate in signal transduction pathways
during a short developmental period coinciding with the formation of the chorion.

PMID: 8652414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


