
1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Mar 2. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4960. [Epub ahead of print]

Endothelin-1 induces oncostatin M expression in osteoarthritis osteoblasts by
trans-activating the oncostatin M gene promoter via Ets-1.

Wu R(1), Wang W(1), Huang G(1), Mao X(1), Chen Y(1), Tang Q(1), Liao L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, P.R. China.

Oncostatin M (OSM) contributes to cartilage degeneration in osteoarthritis (OA)
and was demonstrated to be expressed in OA osteoblasts. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is
implicated in the degradation of OA articular cartilage, and osteoblast
proliferation and bone development. In the present study, the effects of ET-1 on 
OSM expression in human OA osteoblasts were investigated, to the best of our
knowledge, for the first time. Primary human OA osteoblasts were treated with
ET-1 (1, 5, 10, 20 and 30 nM) for 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and 4 h with or without the
selective ETA receptor (ETAR) antagonist, BQ123, ETB receptor antagonist, BQ788
or the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, BKM120. ET-1 treatment
induced OSM mRNA expression, and the intracellular and secreted protein levels of
OA osteoblasts in a dose-dependent manner. This effect was suppressed by BQ123
and BKM120, but not BQ788 administration. In combination with electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, deletional and mutational analyses on the activity of a
human OSM promoter/luciferase reporter demonstrated that ET-1 induced OSM
expression in OA osteoblasts by trans-activating the OSM gene promoter through
specific binding of Ets-1 to an Ets-1 binding site in the OSM promoter in an
ETAR- and PI3K-dependent manner. Furthermore, ET-1 treatment increased the
expression of Ets-1 in a dose-dependent manner, however the knockdown of Ets-1
suppressed the ET1-induced expression of OSM in OA osteoblasts. In conclusion,
the present study demonstrated that ET-1 induces the expression of OSM in
OA osteoblasts by trans-activating the OSM gene promoter primarily through
increasing the expression level of Ets-1 in an ETAR- and PI3K-dependent manner.
The current study suggested novel insights into the mechanistic role of ET-1 in
the pathophysiology of OA.

PMID: 26934912  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Mol Med (Berl). 2016 Feb 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeted next-generation sequencing for molecular diagnosis of
endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer.

Er TK(1,)(2), Su YF(3), Wu CC(4), Chen CC(5), Wang J(6), Hsieh TH(7),
Herreros-Villanueva M(8), Chen WT(4), Chen YT(3,)(4), Liu TC(2,)(9), Chen HS(7), 
Tsai EM(10,)(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutrition Biotechnology, College of Medical and
Health Science, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan. (2)Division of Molecular
Diagnostics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute 
of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (4)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Institute of Medical Science and Technology, National Sun
Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (6)Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (7)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. (8)Department of Gastroenterology, 
Hospital Donostia/Instituto Biodonostia, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Universidad del País Vasco
UPV/EHU, San Sebastián, Spain. (9)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department
of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(10)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. tsaieing@yahoo.com. (11)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. tsaieing@yahoo.com. (12)Research Center for
Environmental Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
tsaieing@yahoo.com.

Recent molecular and pathological studies suggest that endometriosis may serve as
a precursor of ovarian cancer (endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer, EAOC),
especially of the endometrioid and clear cell subtypes. Accordingly, this study
had two cardinal aims: first, to obtain mutation profiles of EAOC from Taiwanese 
patients; and second, to determine whether somatic mutations present in EAOC can 
be detected in preneoplastic lesions. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissues were obtained from ten endometriosis patients with malignant
transformation. Macrodissection was performed to separate four different types of
cells from FFPE sections in six patients. The four types of samples included
normal endometrium, ectopic endometriotic lesion, atypical endometriosis, and
carcinoma. Ultra-deep (>1000×) targeted sequencing was performed on 409
cancer-related genes to identify pathogenic mutations associated with EAOC. The
most frequently mutated genes were PIK3CA (6/10) and ARID1A (5/10). Other
recurrently mutated genes included ETS1, MLH1, PRKDC (3/10 each), and AMER1,
ARID2, BCL11A, CREBBP, ERBB2, EXT1, FANCD2, MSH6, NF1, NOTCH1, NUMA1, PDE4DIP,
PPP2R1A, RNF213, and SYNE1 (2/10 each). Importantly, in five of the six patients,
identical somatic mutations were detected in atypical endometriosis and tumor
lesions. In two patients, genetic alterations were also detected in ectopic
endometriotic lesions, indicating the presence of genetic alterations in
preneoplastic lesion. Genetic analysis in preneoplastic lesions may help to
identify high-risk patients at early stage of malignant transformation and also
shed new light on fundamental aspects of the molecular pathogenesis of EAOC.KEY
MESSAGES: Molecular characterization of endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer
genes by targeted NGS. Candidate genes predictive of malignant transformation
were identified. Chromatin remodeling, PI3K-AKT-mTOR, Notch signaling, and
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway may promote cell malignant transformation.

PMID: 26920370  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 14. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7379. [Epub ahead of print]

SOX9 indirectly regulates CEACAM1 expression and immune resistance in melanoma
cells.

Ashkenazi S(1,)(2), Ortenberg R(1), Besser M(1,)(2), Schachter J(1), Markel
G(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ella Lemelbaum Institute of Melanoma, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel. (3)Talpiot Medical Leadership program,
Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.

As melanoma cells are immunogenic, they instigate an adaptive immune response and
production of anti-tumor T-cells. A central factor in this interaction is CEACAM1
(carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion molecule 1), a transmembrane glycoprotein
previously shown in our lab to protect melanoma cells from T cell-mediated
killing. In this study, we examine the role of transcription factor SOX9 in the
regulation of CEACAM1 expression and immune resistance in melanoma cells.
Knockdown of endogenous SOX9 results in CEACAM1 up-regulation, while its
overexpression leads to the opposite effect. We show that SOX9 controls CEACAM1
expression at a transcriptional level, but in an indirect manner, as regulation
of the CEACAM1 promoter remains intact even when all eight potential SOX9-binding
sites are abolished. A series of promoter truncations localizes the
SOX9-controlled area to the proximal 200bp of the promoter. Point mutations in
putative Sp1 and ETS1 binding sites identify these transcription factors as the
primary SOX9-controlled mediators. Co-immunoprecipitation studies show that SOX9 
and Sp1 physically interact in melanoma cells, while silencing of SOX9
down-regulates ETS1, but not Sp1, in the same cells. Finally, knockdown of SOX9
indeed renders melanoma cells resistant to T cell-mediated killing, in line with 
the increased CEACAM1 expression. In conclusion, we show that SOX9 regulates
CEACAM1 expression in melanoma cells, and thereby their immune resistance. As
CEACAM1 is a pivotal protein in melanoma biology and immune crosstalk, further
understanding of its regulation can provide new insights and contribute to the
development of novel approaches to therapy.

PMID: 26885752  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Stem Cells. 2016 Mar;34(3):720-31. doi: 10.1002/stem.2314. Epub 2016 Feb 22.

Lgr5 Marks Neural Crest Derived Multipotent Oral Stromal Stem Cells.

Boddupally K(1,)(2), Wang G(1,)(2), Chen Y(3), Kobielak A(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Norris Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA. (3)Norris Medical Library,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA. (4)Centre of New
Technologies, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

It has been suggested that multipotent stem cells with neural crest (NC) origin
persist into adulthood in oral mucosa. However their exact localization and role 
in normal homeostasis is unknown. In this study, we discovered that Lgr5 is
expressed in NC cells during embryonic development, which give rise to the
dormant stem cells in the adult tongue and oral mucosa. Those Lgr5 positive oral 
stromal stem cells display properties of NC stem cells including clonal growth
and multipotent differentiation. RNA sequencing revealed that adult Lgr5+ oral
stromal stem cells express high number of neural crest related markers like Sox9,
Twist1, Snai1, Myc, Ets1, Crabp1, Epha2, and Itgb1. Using lineage-tracing
experiments, we show that these cells persist more than a year in the ventral
tongue and some areas of the oral mucosa and give rise to stromal progeny. In
vivo transplantation demonstrated that these cells reconstitute the stroma. Our
studies show for the first time that Lgr5 is expressed in the NC cells at
embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) and is maintained during embryonic development and
postnataly in the stroma of the ventral tongue, and some areas of the oral mucosa
and that Lgr5+ cells participate in the maintenance of the stroma. Stem Cells
2016;34:720-731.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26865184  [PubMed - in process]


5. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 5;6:20500. doi: 10.1038/srep20500.

Norcantharidin Suppresses Colon Cancer Cell Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition by 
Inhibiting the avß6-ERK-Ets1 Signaling Pathway.

Peng C(1), Li Z(1), Niu Z(1), Niu W(1), Xu Z(2), Gao H(1), Niu W(1), Wang J(1),
He Z(1), Gao C(1), Lin P(1), Agrez M(3), Zhang Z(1), Niu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong, China. (2)Department of Hepatic Oncology, Jiangxi Provincial Cancer
Hospital, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (3)Newcastle Bowel Cancer Research
Collaborative, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales,
Australia.

Norcantharidin (NCTD) is an efficacious anti-cancer drug that has been used in
China for many years, but its underlying mechanism of action is still not fully
understood. In the present study, we found that NCTD could induce morphological
changes in colon cancer cells, causing a transition from a spindle-shaped
morphology to a typical round or oval shape, which was indicative of a
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) process. Next, we investigated the
mechanism by which NCTD induced the MET process. Using a transwell assay, we
found that NCTD could suppress the migratory and invasive ability of colon cancer
cells in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, NCTD suppressed the expression of
integrin avß6, MMP-3, and MMP-9 as well as the polymerization of F-actin, further
supporting its suppressive effect on migratory and invasive ability. Furthermore,
the expression of avß6, N-cadherin, vimentin and phosphorylated ERK was
decreased, while the expression of E-cadherin was up-regulated. We verified that 
phosphorylated Ets1 was down-regulated substantially after treatment with NCTD.
Taken together, our data demonstrated that NCTD could inhibit the EMT process of 
colon cancer cells by inhibiting the avß6-ERK-Ets1 signaling pathway. This study 
revealed part of the mechanism through which NCTD could reverse the EMT process
in colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC4742802
PMID: 26846153  [PubMed - in process]


6. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Mar;43(6):697-704. doi: 10.1111/apt.13542. Epub 2016
Jan 24.

Genetic basis of TNF-a antagonist associated psoriasis in inflammatory bowel
diseases: a genotype-phenotype analysis.

Vedak P(1), Kroshinsky D(1), St John J(1), Xavier RJ(2), Yajnik V(2),
Ananthakrishnan AN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Anti-tumour necrosis factor (anti-TNF) biologic associated psoriasis 
has been reported in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients. However, little
is known regarding its pathogenesis.
AIM: To identify potential genetic predispositions to anti-TNF associated
psoriasis in IBD patients.
METHODS: This retrospective chart review included IBD patients enrolled in a
prospective registry. Cases of anti-TNF associated psoriasis and idiopathic
psoriasis unrelated to anti-TNF exposure were confirmed by an expert
dermatologist. All patients were genotyped on the Illumina Immunochip. A weighted
genetic risk score ascertaining genetic pre-disposition towards psoriasis was
calculated and overall genetic pre-disposition as well as differential
distribution of individual polymorphisms was compared across the three groups.
RESULTS: Our study included 724 IBD patients who initiated anti-TNF therapy and
did not develop psoriasis, 35 patients with anti-TNF associated psoriasis, and 38
patients with idiopathic psoriasis. Anti-TNF users who developed psoriasis had a 
modest but statistically significantly greater psoriasis genetic risk score than 
anti-TNF controls (mean 0.64 vs. 0.61, P = 0.04), and had a similar genetic risk 
score as those with idiopathic psoriasis (0.64 vs. 0.62, P = 0.22). Two loci
associated with NOS2 and ETS1 genes achieved P < 0.05 when comparing anti-TNF
associated psoriasis to anti-TNF controls. Three loci were significantly
different between anti-TNF associated psoriasis and idiopathic psoriasis
including a polymorphism near NOS2 encoding for inducible nitric oxide synthase
that is produced by dendritic cells in skin lesions in psoriasis.
CONCLUSION: Patients with anti-TNF associated psoriasis had a modestly greater
genetic pre-disposition towards psoriasis but no single causative polymorphism
was identified.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4755796 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26806281  [PubMed - in process]


7. Int J Oncol. 2016 Mar;48(3):1155-64. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3319. Epub 2016 Jan 5.

Downregulation of ß3 integrin by miR-30a-5p modulates cell adhesion and invasion 
by interrupting Erk/Ets-1 network in triple-negative breast cancer.

Li W(1), Liu C(2), Zhao C(3), Zhai L(1), Lv S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong 261053,
P.R. China. (2)The Third Department of Health Care, Weifang People's Hospital,
Weifang, Shandong 261053, P.R. China. (3)Department of Medical Biology, Weifang
Medical University, Weifang, Shandong 261053, P.R. China.

Integrins are adhesion receptors involved in bidirectional signaling and are
crucial for various cellular responses during normal homeostasis and pathological
conditions, such as cancer progression and metastasis. In the present study, we
demonstrated that blockage of ß3 integrin-mediated cell- extracellular matrix
interactions restrained triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) growth, and elevated
ß3 integrin can trigger the rewiring of Erk/Ets-1 signaling pathways, thereby
enhancing cell growth and invasion. Ectopic expression of miRNA has been
implicated in the deregulation of integrin expression and activity, blocking of
cancer tumor development and progression, and acquisition of metastatic
phenotype. miR-30a-5p expression has been implicated in the progression of breast
cancer. Overexpression of miR-30a-5p suppressed the proliferation, migration and 
invasion of breast cancer cells. On the contrary, inhibition of miR-30a-5p
promoted the proliferation, migration, and invasion of TNBC cells by suppressing 
the expression of ERK/Ets-1 signal. An inverse correlation was found between the 
mRNA expressions of miR-30a-5p and ß3 integrin in TNBC samples. Furthermore,
bioinformatics analysis revealed the putative miR-30 binding sites in the 3'-UTR 
of ß3 integrin. Results of luciferase assay revealed a strong repression of
luciferase activity after transfection with miR-30a-5p and wild-type 3'-UTR of ß3
integrin. In TNBC cells, miR-30a-5p promoted an epithelial phenotype and
suppressed invasion by specifically targeting ß3 integrin subunit to subsequently
interdict the ß3 integrin/Erk/Ets-1 network.

PMID: 26781040  [PubMed - in process]


8. Oncogene. 2016 Jan 18. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.499. [Epub ahead of print]

Enhanced MAPK signaling drives ETS1-mediated induction of miR-29b leading to
downregulation of TET1 and changes in epigenetic modifications in a subset of
lung SCC.

Taylor MA(1), Wappett M(1), Delpuech O(1), Brown H(2), Chresta CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca, R&D Oncology iMed, Alderley Park, Macclesfield, UK.
(2)Personalised Healthcare and Biomarkers, AstraZeneca, Alderley Park,
Macclesfield, UK.

Non-small-cell lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide and is 
comprised of several histological subtypes, the two most common being
adenocarcinoma (AC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Targeted therapies have
successfully improved response rates in patients with AC tumors. However, the
majority of SCC tumors lack specific targetable mutations, making development of 
new treatment paradigms for this disease challenging. In the present study, we
used iterative non-negative matrix factorization, an unbiased clustering method, 
on mRNA expression data from the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) and a panel of 24 SCC
cell lines to classify three disease segments within SCC. Analysis of gene set
enrichment and drug sensitivity identified an immune-evasion subtype that showed 
increased sensitivity to nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) inhibition, a replication-stress associated subtype that showed increased 
sensitivity to ataxia telangiectasia inhibition, and a neuroendocrine-associated 
subtype that showed increased sensitivity to phosphoinositide 3-kinase and
fibroblast growth factor receptor inhibition. Additionally, each of these
subtypes exhibited a unique microRNA expression profile. Focusing on the
immune-evasion subtype, bioinformatic analysis of microRNA promoters revealed
enrichment for binding sites for the MAPK-driven ETS1 transcription factor.
Indeed, we found that knockdown of ETS1 led to upregulation of eight microRNAs
and downregulation of miR-29b in the immune-evasion subtype. Mechanistically, we 
found that miR-29b targets the DNA-demethylating enzyme, TET1, for downregulation
resulting in decreased 5-hmC epigenetic modifications. Moreover, inhibition of
MAPK signaling by gefitinib led to decreased ETS1 and miR-29b expression with a
corresponding increase in TET1 expression and increase in 5-hmC. Collectively,
our work identifies three subtypes of lung SCC that differ in drug sensitivity
and shows a novel mechanism of miR-29b regulation by MAPK-driven ETS1 expression 
which leads to downstream changes in TET1-mediated epigenetic
modifications.Oncogene advance online publication, 18 January 2016;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.499.

PMID: 26776158  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Evodevo. 2016 Jan 11;7:2. doi: 10.1186/s13227-015-0039-x. eCollection 2016.

Large-scale gene expression study in the ophiuroid Amphiura filiformis provides
insights into evolution of gene regulatory networks.

Dylus DV(1), Czarkwiani A(2), Stångberg J(3), Ortega-Martinez O(4), Dupont S(4), 
Oliveri P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College
London, Room 426, Darwin Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT UK ;
CoMPLEX/SysBio, UCL, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT UK ; Department of Ecology
and Evolution, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (2)Research
Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London,
Room 426, Darwin Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT UK. (3)Research
Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London,
Room 426, Darwin Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT UK ; Research
Department of Animal Ecology, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala University,
Norbyvägen 18D, 752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. (4)Department of Biological and
Environmental Sciences, Sven Lovén Centre for Marine Sciences, University of
Gothenburg, Kristineberg 566, 451 78 Fiskebäckskil, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The evolutionary mechanisms involved in shaping complex gene
regulatory networks (GRN) that encode for morphologically similar structures in
distantly related animals remain elusive. In this context, echinoderm larval
skeletons found in brittle stars and sea urchins provide an ideal system. Here,
we characterize for the first time the development of the larval skeleton in the 
ophiuroid Amphiura filiformis and compare it systematically with its counterpart 
in sea urchin.
RESULTS: We show that ophiuroids and euechinoids, that split at least 480 Million
years ago (Mya), have remarkable similarities in tempo and mode of skeletal
development. Despite morphological and ontological similarities, our
high-resolution study of the dynamics of genetic regulatory states in A.
filiformis highlights numerous differences in the architecture of their
underlying GRNs. Importantly, the A.filiformis pplx, the closest gene to the sea 
urchin double negative gate (DNG) repressor pmar1, fails to drive the
skeletogenic program in sea urchin, showing important evolutionary differences in
protein function. hesC, the second repressor of the DNG, is co-expressed with
most of the genes that are repressed in sea urchin, indicating the absence of
direct repression of tbr, ets1/2, and delta in A. filiformis. Furthermore, the
absence of expression in later stages of brittle star skeleton development of key
regulatory genes, such as foxb and dri, shows significantly different regulatory 
states.
CONCLUSION: Our data fill up an important gap in the picture of larval mesoderm
in echinoderms and allows us to explore the evolutionary implications relative to
the recently established phylogeny of echinoderm classes. In light of recent
studies on other echinoderms, our data highlight a high evolutionary plasticity
of the same nodes throughout evolution of echinoderm skeletogenesis. Finally,
gene duplication, protein function diversification, and cis-regulatory element
evolution all contributed to shape the regulatory program for larval
skeletogenesis in different branches of echinoderms.

PMCID: PMC4709884
PMID: 26759711  [PubMed]


10. Blood. 2016 Mar 24;127(12):1587-97. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-10-674531. Epub 2016 
Jan 7.

High-dose dexamethasone corrects impaired myeloid-derived suppressor cell
function via Ets1 in immune thrombocytopenia.

Hou Y(1), Feng Q(1), Xu M(2), Li GS(3), Liu XN(2), Sheng Z(2), Zhou H(2), Ma
J(4), Wei Y(2), Sun YX(2), Yu YY(2), Qiu JH(2), Shao LL(2), Liu XG(2), Hou M(5), 
Peng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Immunohematology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China; (2)Department
of Hematology and. (3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Immunohematology,
Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China; (4)Department of Internal
Medicine, Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute, Jinan, China; and.
(5)Department of Hematology and Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and
Function Research, Chinese Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, 
Jinan, China.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are heterogeneous immature cells and
natural inhibitors of adaptive immunity. In this study, the MDSC population was
evaluated in adult patients with primary immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), where
cell-mediated immune mechanisms are involved in platelet destruction. Our data
demonstrated that both the numbers and suppressive functions of MDSCs were
impaired in the peripheral blood and spleens of patients with ITP compared with
healthy control patients. High-dose dexamethasone (HD-DXM) treatment rescued MDSC
numbers in patients with ITP. And DXM modulation promoted the suppressive
function of MDSCs induced in vitro. Moreover, the expression of interleukin 10
and transforming growth factor ß was significantly upregulated in DXM-modulated
MDSCs compared with the unmodulated cultures. DXM-modulated MDSCs inhibited
autologous CD4(+)T-cell proliferation and significantly attenuated cytotoxic T
lymphocyte-mediated platelet lysis, further indicating enhanced control over
T-cell responses. Elevated expression of the transcription factor Ets1 was
identified in DXM-modulated MDSCs. Transfection of Ets-1 small interfering RNA
efficiently blocked regulatory effects of MDSCs, which almost offset the
augmentation of MDSC function by DXM. Meanwhile, splenocytes from CD61 knockout
mice immunized with CD61(+)platelets were transferred into severe combined
immunodeficient (SCID) mouse recipients (C57/B6 background) to induce a murine
model of severe ITP. We passively transferred the DXM-modulated MDSCs induced
from bone marrow of wild-type C57/B6 mice into the SCID mouse recipients, which
significantly increased platelet counts in vivo compared with those receiving
splenocyte engraftment alone. These findings suggested that impaired MDSCs are
involved in the pathogenesis of ITP, and that HD-DXM corrected MDSC functions via
a mechanism underlying glucocorticoid action and Ets1.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26744458  [PubMed - in process]


11. Int J Biometeorol. 2015 Dec 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Seventeen-year trends in spring and autumn phenophases of Betula pubescens in a
boreal environment.

Poikolainen J(1), Tolvanen A(2,)(3), Karhu J(1), Kubin E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Natural Resources Institute Finland, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 413,
FI-90014, Oulu, Finland. (2)Natural Resources Institute Finland, University of
Oulu, P.O. Box 413, FI-90014, Oulu, Finland. anne.tolvanen@luke.fi. (3)Department
of Ecology, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 413, FI-90014, Oulu, Finland.
anne.tolvanen@luke.fi.

Trends in the timing of spring and autumn phenophases of Betula pubescens were
investigated in the southern, middle, and northern boreal zones in Finland. The
field observations were carried out at 21 sites in the Finnish National
Phenological Network in 1997-2013. The effective temperature sum of the thermal
growth period, i.e. the sum of the positive differences between diurnal mean
temperatures and 5 °C (ETS1), increased annually on average by 6-7 degree day
units. Timing of bud burst remained constant in the southern and middle boreal
zones but advanced annually by 0.5 day in the northern boreal zone. The effective
temperature sum at bud burst (ETS2) showed no trend in the southern and middle
boreal zones, whereas ETS2 increased on average from 20-30 to 50 degree day units
in the northern boreal zone, almost to the same level as in the other zones.
Increase in ETS2 indicates that the trees did not start their growth in very
early spring despite warmer spring temperatures. The timing of leaf colouring and
leaf fall remained almost constant in the southern boreal zones, whereas these
advanced annually by 0.3 and 0.6 day in the middle boreal zone and by 0.6 and
0.4 day in the northern boreal zone, respectively. The duration of the growth
period remained constant in all boreal zones. The results indicate high buffering
capacity of B. pubescens against temperature changes. The study also shows the
importance of the duration of phenological studies: some trends in spring
phenophases had levelled out, while new trends in autumn phases had emerged after
earlier studies in the same network for a shorter observation period.

PMID: 26686678  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Dec 15. pii: gkv1475. [Epub ahead of print]

Dynamic recruitment of Ets1 to both nucleosome-occupied and -depleted enhancer
regions mediates a transcriptional program switch during early T-cell
differentiation.

Cauchy P(1), Maqbool MA(2), Zacarias-Cabeza J(3), Vanhille L(4), Koch F(3),
Fenouil R(3), Gut M(5), Gut I(5), Santana MA(3), Griffon A(4), Imbert J(4),
Moraes-Cabé C(6), Bories JC(6), Ferrier P(3), Spicuglia S(7), Andrau JC(8).

Author information: 
(1)CIML CNRS UMR7280, Case 906, Campus de Luminy, Marseille F-13009, France CIML 
INSERM U1104, Case 906, Campus de Luminy, Marseille F-13009, France Aix-Marseille
University, 58 Boulevard Charles Livon, Marseille F-13284, France Inserm U1090,
Technological Advances for Genomics and Clinics (TAGC), Marseille F-13009, France
Aix-Marseille University UMR-S 1090, TAGC, Marseille F-13009, France. (2)Institut
de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, CNRS UMR5535, 1919 Route de Mende,
Montpellier F-34293, France. (3)CIML CNRS UMR7280, Case 906, Campus de Luminy,
Marseille F-13009, France CIML INSERM U1104, Case 906, Campus de Luminy,
Marseille F-13009, France Aix-Marseille University, 58 Boulevard Charles Livon,
Marseille F-13284, France. (4)Inserm U1090, Technological Advances for Genomics
and Clinics (TAGC), Marseille F-13009, France Aix-Marseille University UMR-S
1090, TAGC, Marseille F-13009, France. (5)Centre Nacional D'Anàlisi Genòmica,
Parc Científic de Barcelona, Baldiri i Reixac 4, Barcelona ES-08028, Spain.
(6)INSERM UMR 1126 Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis,
Paris F-75475, France. (7)Inserm U1090, Technological Advances for Genomics and
Clinics (TAGC), Marseille F-13009, France Aix-Marseille University UMR-S 1090,
TAGC, Marseille F-13009, France salvatore.spicuglia@inserm.fr. (8)Institut de
Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, CNRS UMR5535, 1919 Route de Mende,
Montpellier F-34293, France jean-christophe.andrau@igmm.cnrs.fr.

Ets1 is a sequence-specific transcription factor that plays an important role
during hematopoiesis, and is essential for the transition of CD4(-)/CD8(-) double
negative (DN) to CD4(+)/CD8(+) double positive (DP) thymocytes. Using genome-wide
and functional approaches, we investigated the binding properties,
transcriptional role and chromatin environment of Ets1 during this transition. We
found that while Ets1 binding at distal sites was associated with active genes at
both DN and DP stages, its enhancer activity was attained at the DP stage, as
reflected by levels of the core transcriptional hallmarks H3K4me1/3, RNA
Polymerase II and eRNA. This dual, stage-specific ability reflected a switch from
non-T hematopoietic toward T-cell specific gene expression programs during the
DN-to-DP transition, as indicated by transcriptome analyses of Ets1(-/-) thymic
cells. Coincidentally, Ets1 associates more specifically with Runx1 in DN and
with TCF1 in DP cells. We also provide evidence that Ets1 predominantly binds
distal nucleosome-occupied regions in DN and nucleosome-depleted regions in DP.
Finally and importantly, we demonstrate that Ets1 induces chromatin remodeling by
displacing H3K4me1-marked nucleosomes. Our results thus provide an original model
whereby the ability of a transcription factor to bind nucleosomal DNA changes
during differentiation with consequences on its cognate enhancer activity.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26673693  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Dec 14. doi: 10.1002/art.39548. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of a systemic lupus erythematosus risk locus spanning ATG16L2,
FCHSD2, and P2RY2 in Koreans.

Lessard CJ(1), Sajuthi S(2), Zhao J(3), Kim K(4), Ice JA(1), Li H(1,)(5),
Ainsworth H(2), Rasmussen A(1), Kelly JA(1), Marion M(2), Bang SY(4), Bin Joo
Y(4), Choi J(4), Lee HS(4), Kang YM(6), Suh CH(7), Chung WT(8), Lee SK(9), Choe
JY(10), Shim SC(11), Oh JH(12), Kim YJ(12), Han BG(12), Shen N(13,)(14), Howe
HS(15), Wakeland EK(16), Li QZ(16), Song YW(17), Gaffney PM(1), Alarcón-Riquelme 
ME(1,)(18), Criswell LA(19), Jacob CO(20), Kimberly RP(21), Vyse TJ(22), Harley
JB(23,)(24), Sivils KL(1,)(5), Bae SC(4), Langefeld CD(2), Tsao BP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. (2)Center for Public Health Genomics
and Department of Biostatistical Sciences, Wake Forest University Health
Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157-106, USA. (3)Division of Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA,
90095, USA. (4)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for
Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, 133-792, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,
73014, USA. (6)Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu, 700-721, Republic
of Korea. (7)Ajou University Hospital, Suwon, 443-380, Republic of Korea.
(8)Dong-A University Hospital, Busan, 602-715, Republic of Korea. (9)Department
of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, 120-749,
Republic of Korea. (10)Department of Internal Medicine, Catholic University of
Daegu School of Medicine, Daegu, 705-718, Republic of Korea. (11)Daejeon
Rheumatoid & Degenerative Arthritis Center, Chungnam National University
Hospital, Daejeon, 305-764, Republic of Korea. (12)Korea National Institute of
Health, Osong, 361-709, Republic of Korea. (13)Shanghai Institute of
Rheumatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai, China, 200001. (14)Shanghai JiaoTong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China, 200025. (15)Department of
Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, 308433. 
(16)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101,
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Republic of Korea. (18)Centro de Genomica e
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Pfizer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucia,
Granada, 18100, Spain. (19)Rosalind Russell/Ephraim P. Engleman Rheumatology
Research Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
94117, USA. (20)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, 90095. (21)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology
and Rheumatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35294,
USA. (22)Divisions of Genetics and Molecular Medicine and Immunology, Infection
and Inflammatory Disease, King's College London, London, UK, WC2R 2LS.
(23)Division of Rheumatology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. (24)US Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45220, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disorder
whose etiology is incompletely understood, but likely involves environmental
triggers in genetically susceptible individuals. We sought to identify the
genetic loci associated with SLE in a Korean population by performing an unbiased
genome-wide association scan.
METHODS: A total of 1,174 Korean SLE cases and 4,248 population controls were
genotyped with strict quality control measures and analyzed for association. For 
select variants, replication was tested in an independent set of 1,412 SLE cases 
and 1,163 population controls of Korean and Chinese ancestries.
RESULTS: Eleven regions outside the HLA exceeded genome-wide significance
(P<5x10(-8) ). A novel SNP-SLE association was identified between FCHSD2 and
P2RY2 peaking at rs11235667 (P = 1.0x10(-8) , odds ratio (OR) = 0.59) on a 33kb
haplotype upstream to ATG16L2. Replication for rs11235667 resulted in Pmeta-rep
=0.001 and Pmeta-overall =6.67x10(-11) (OR=0.63). Within the HLA region,
association peaked in the Class II region at rs116727542 with multiple
independent effects. Classical HLA allele imputation identified HLA-DRB1*1501 and
HLA-DQB1*0602, both highly correlated, as most strongly associated with SLE. We
replicated ten previously established SLE risk loci: STAT1-STAT4, TNFSF4,
TNFAIP3, IKZF1, HIP1, IRF5, BLK, WDFY4, ETS1 and IRAK1-MECP2. Of these loci, we
identified previously unreported independent second effects in TNFAIP3 and TNFSF4
as well as differences in the association for a putative causal variant in the
WDFY4 region.
CONCLUSIONS: Further studies are needed to identify true SLE risk effects in
other suggestive loci and to identify the causal variant(s) in the regions of
ATG16L2, FCHSD2, and P2RY2. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 26663301  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. J Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Dec 9. pii: mjv065. [Epub ahead of print]

PAR2-SMAD3 in microvascular endothelial cells is indispensable for vascular
stability via tissue factor signaling.

Arderiu G(1), Espinosa S(2), Peña E(2), Aledo R(2), Badimon L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center (CSIC-ICCC), Hospital de Sant Pau (UAB) and
IIB-Sant Pau, 08025 Barcelona, Spain garderiu@csic-iccc.org
lbadimon@csic-iccc.org. (2)Cardiovascular Research Center (CSIC-ICCC), Hospital
de Sant Pau (UAB) and IIB-Sant Pau, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Tissue factor (TF) signaling regulates gene expression and protein synthesis
leading to the modulation of cell function. Recently, we have demonstrated in
microvascular endothelial cells (mECs) that TF signaling induces activation of
ETS1 transcription factor. Because combinatorial control is a characteristic
property of ETS family members, involving the interaction between ETS1 and other 
transcription factors, here we investigate whether additional transcription
factors are involved in TF-induced angiogenesis. We show by in vitro and in vivo 
experiments that in addition to ETS1, SMAD3 contributes to tube-like
stabilization induced by TF in mECs. Whereas the ability of TF-overexpressing
cells to induce gene expression through ETS1 is dependent on AKT signaling, SMAD3
induces ETS1 by an alternative AKT-independent pathway. Moreover, while
TF-AKT-ETS1 pathway to induce CCL2 is PAR2-independent, PAR2 is required for
TF-SMAD3-induced CCL2 expression. PAR2-dependent activation of SMAD3 is mediated 
by PKC phosphorylation. In addition, disruption of SMAD3 expression in mECs
reduces ERK1/2 phosphorylation and decreases target gene promoter activity. In
conclusion, in mECs TF-induced angiogenesis seems to be the result of two
signaling pathways: TF-induced microvessel formation is regulated through ß1
integrin-AKT-ETS1; and TF-induced microvessel stabilization is regulated via
PAR2-SMAD3 that is indispensable for the maintenance of vascular integrity.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26658897  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 14;10(12):e0144877. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144877.
eCollection 2015.

Luteolin Inhibits Ischemia/Reperfusion-Induced Myocardial Injury in Rats via
Downregulation of microRNA-208b-3p.

Bian C(1), Xu T(2), Zhu H(2), Pan D(2), Liu Y(1), Luo Y(2), Wu P(1), Li D(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Disease Research, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, 
Jiangsu, P. R. China. (2)Cardiology of Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical
College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Luteolin (LUT), a kind of flavonoid which is extracted from a variety
of diets, has been reported to convey protective effects of various diseases.
Recent researches have suggested that LUT can carry out cardioprotective effects 
during ischemia/reperfusion (I/R). However, there have no reports on whether LUT 
can exert protective effects against myocardial I/R injury through the actions of
specific microRNAs (miRs). The purpose of this study was to determine which miRs 
and target genes LUT exerted such function through.
METHODS: Expression of various miRs in perfused rat hearts was detected using a
gene chip. Target genes were predicted with TargetScan, MiRDB and MiRanda.
Anoxia/reoxygenation was used to simulate I/R. Cells were transfected by
miR-208b-3p mimic, inhibitor and small interfering RNA of Ets1 (avian
erythroblastosis virus E26 (v ets) oncogene homolog 1). MiR-208b-3p and Ets1 mRNA
were quantified by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction. The
percentage of apoptotic cells was detected by annexin V-fluorescein
isothiocyanate/propidium iodide dyeing and flow cytometry. The protein expression
levels of cleaved caspase-3, Bcl-2, Bax, and Ets1 were examined by western blot
analysis. A luciferase reporter assay was used to verify the combination between 
miR-208b-3p and the 3'-untranslated region of Ets1.
RESULTS: LUT pretreatment reduced miR-208b-3p expression in myocardial tissue, as
compared to the I/R group. And LUT decreased miR-208b-3p expression and apoptosis
caused by I/R. However, overexpression of miR-208b-3p further aggravated the
changes caused by I/R and blocked all the effects of LUT. Knockdown of
miR-208b-3p expression also attenuated apoptosis, while knockdown of Ets1
promoted apoptosis. Further, the luciferase reporter assay showed that
miR-208b-3p could inhibit Ets1 expression.
CONCLUSION: LUT pretreatment conveys anti-apoptotic effects after myocardial I/R 
injury by decreasing miR-208b-3p and increasing Ets1 expression levels.

PMCID: PMC4685996
PMID: 26658785  [PubMed - in process]


16. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 12;7(2):1741-53. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6480.

Epigenetic regulation of ZEB1-RAB25/ESRP1 axis plays a critical role in
phenylbutyrate treatment-resistant breast cancer.

Kikuchi M(1), Yamashita K(1,)(2), Waraya M(1), Minatani N(1), Ushiku H(1), Kojo
K(1), Ema A(1), Kosaka Y(1), Katoh H(1), Sengoku N(1), Enomoto T(1), Tanino H(1),
Sawanobori M(2), Watanabe M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa,
Japan. (2)Epigenetic Treatment Research Group, Japan.

Phenylbutyrate (PB) is a histone deacetylase antagonist that also exhibits
antitumor activity. In this study, we used 7 breast cancer cell lines to identify
biomarker candidates that predict PB sensitivity in breast cancer.Comprehensive
gene expression profiles were compared using microarrays, and the importance of
the identified genes to PB sensitivity was confirmed in gene transfection
experiments. CRL and MDAMB453 cells were identified as PB-sensitive, while
MDAMB231 cells were PB-resistant.RAB25 and ESRP1 were identified as key
regulators of PB sensitivity, while ANKD1, ETS1, PTRF, IFI16 and KIAA1199 acted
as PB resistance-related genes. Expression of these genes was dramatically
altered by DNA demethylation treatments. RAB25 expression inhibited IFI16 and
PTRF, while ESRP1 expression suppressed ANKRD1, ETS1, and KIAA1199. Both RAB25
and ESRP1 were suppressed by ZEB1, which was in turn regulated via epigenetic
mechanisms. Thus, PB sensitivity is influenced by epigenetic expression
alteration of ZEB1. The genes associated with PB sensitivity are downstream
targets of ZEB1. Epigenetic regulation of ZEB1 may prove valuable as a critical
biomarker for predicting resistance to breast cancer therapies.

PMID: 26646320  [PubMed - in process]


17. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):2629-45. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6380.

Novel variants in MLL confer to bladder cancer recurrence identified by
whole-exome sequencing.

Wu S(1,)(2), Yang Z(3,)(4), Ye R(5), An D(5), Li C(3), Wang Y(2,)(6), Wang Y(7), 
Huang Y(2), Liu H(5), Li F(5), He L(3), Sun D(5), Yu Y(5), Li Q(5), Huang P(5),
Zhang M(6), Zhao X(5), Bi T(5), Zhuang X(5), Zhang L(5), Lu J(2), Sun X(2), Zhou 
F(7), Liu C(8), Yang G(9), Hou Y(5), Fan Z(3), Cai Z(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Affiliated Luohu Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen Luohu Hospital 
Group, Shenzhen, China. (2)Department of Urological Surgery, Shenzhen Second
People's Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University,
Shenzhen, China. (3)CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institute of
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (4)CAS Key Laboratory of
Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (5)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. (6)Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, China. (7)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (8)Department of Urology, Zhujiang
Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (9)Guangdong Second
People's Hospital, Guangzhou, China.

Bladder cancer (BC) is distinguished by high rate of recurrence after surgery,
but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we performed the
whole-exome sequencing of 37 BC individuals including 20 primary and 17 recurrent
samples in which the primary and recurrent samples were not from the same
patient. We uncovered that MLL, EP400, PRDM2, ANK3 and CHD5 exclusively altered
in recurrent BCs. Specifically, the recurrent BCs and bladder cancer cells with
MLL mutation displayed increased histone H3 tri-methyl K4 (H3K4me3) modification 
in tissue and cell levels and showed enhanced expression of GATA4 and ETS1
downstream. What's more, MLL mutated bladder cancer cells obtained with
CRISPR/Cas9 showed increased ability of drug-resistance to epirubicin (a
chemotherapy drug for bladder cancer) than wild type cells. Additionally, the BC 
patients with high expression of GATA4 and ETS1 significantly displayed shorter
lifespan than patients with low expression. Our study provided an overview of the
genetic basis of recrudescent bladder cancer and discovered that genetic
alterations of MLL were involved in BC relapse. The increased modification of
H3K4me3 and expression of GATA4 and ETS1 would be the promising targets for the
diagnosis and therapy of relapsed bladder cancer.

PMID: 26625313  [PubMed - in process]


18. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2016 Jan 5;371(1685):20150040. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2015.0040.

Loss of neurogenesis in Hydra leads to compensatory regulation of neurogenic and 
neurotransmission genes in epithelial cells.

Wenger Y(1), Buzgariu W(1), Galliot B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution, Institute of Genetics and Genomics in
Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest
Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. (2)Department of Genetics and Evolution,
Institute of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences,
University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
brigitte.galliot@unige.ch.

Hydra continuously differentiates a sophisticated nervous system made of
mechanosensory cells (nematocytes) and sensory-motor and ganglionic neurons from 
interstitial stem cells. However, this dynamic adult neurogenesis is dispensable 
for morphogenesis. Indeed animals depleted of their interstitial stem cells and
interstitial progenitors lose their active behaviours but maintain their
developmental fitness, and regenerate and bud when force-fed. To characterize the
impact of the loss of neurogenesis in Hydra, we first performed transcriptomic
profiling at five positions along the body axis. We found neurogenic genes
predominantly expressed along the central body column, which contains stem cells 
and progenitors, and neurotransmission genes predominantly expressed at the
extremities, where the nervous system is dense. Next, we performed
transcriptomics on animals depleted of their interstitial cells by hydroxyurea,
colchicine or heat-shock treatment. By crossing these results with
cell-type-specific transcriptomics, we identified epithelial genes up-regulated
upon loss of neurogenesis: transcription factors (Dlx, Dlx1, DMBX1/Manacle, Ets1,
Gli3, KLF11, LMX1A, ZNF436, Shox1), epitheliopeptides (Arminins, PW peptide),
neurosignalling components (CAMK1D, DDCl2, Inx1), ligand-ion channel receptors
(CHRNA1, NaC7), G-Protein Coupled Receptors and FMRFRL. Hence epitheliomuscular
cells seemingly enhance their sensing ability when neurogenesis is compromised.
This unsuspected plasticity might reflect the extended multifunctionality of
epithelial-like cells in early eumetazoan evolution.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4685579
PMID: 26598723  [PubMed - in process]


19. Endocrinology. 2016 Feb;157(2):470-81. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1786. Epub 2015 Nov
20.

Gene-by-Diet Interactions Affect Serum 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D Levels in Male BXD
Recombinant Inbred Mice.

Fleet JC(1), Replogle RA(1), Reyes-Fernandez P(1), Wang L(1), Zhang M(1),
Clinkenbeard EL(1), White KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Nutrition Science (J.C.F., R.A.R., P.R.-F.) and Statistics
(L.W., M.Z.), Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-2059; and
Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics (E.L.C., K.E.W.), Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25[OH]2D) regulates calcium (Ca), phosphate, and bone 
metabolism. Serum 1,25(OH)2D levels are reduced by low vitamin D status and high 
fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) levels and increased by low Ca intake and
high PTH levels. Natural genetic variation controls serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D
(25[OH]D) levels, but it is unclear how it controls serum 1,25(OH)2D or the
response of serum 1,25(OH)2D levels to dietary Ca restriction (RCR). Male mice
from 11 inbred lines and from 51 BXD recombinant inbred lines were fed diets with
either 0.5% (basal) or 0.25% Ca from 4 to 12 weeks of age (n = 8 per line per
diet). Significant variation among the lines was found in basal serum 1,25(OH)2D 
and in the RCR as well as basal serum 25(OH)D and FGF23 levels. 1,25(OH)2D was
not correlated to 25(OH)D but was negatively correlated to FGF23 (r = -0.5).
Narrow sense heritability of 1,25(OH)2D was 0.67 on the 0.5% Ca diet, 0.66 on the
0.25% Ca diet, and 0.59 for the RCR, indicating a strong genetic control of serum
1,25(OH)2D. Genetic mapping revealed many loci controlling 1,25(OH)2D (seven
loci) and the RCR (three loci) as well as 25(OH)D (four loci) and FGF23 (two
loci); a locus on chromosome 18 controlled both 1,25(OH)2D and FGF23. Candidate
genes underlying loci include the following: Ets1 (1,25[OH]2D), Elac1 (FGF23 and 
1,25[OH]2D), Tbc1d15 (RCR), Plekha8 and Lyplal1 (25[OH]D), and Trim35 (FGF23).
This report is the first to reveal that serum 1,25(OH)2D levels are controlled by
multiple genetic factors and that some of these genetic loci interact with the
dietary environment.

PMCID: PMC4733130 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26587785  [PubMed - in process]


20. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Oct;35(10):1422-7.

[Effect of simulated microgravity on erythroid differentiation of K562 cells and 
the mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu B(1), Zheng L, Hu XM, Gao Y, Yue CY, Hong JQ, Song J, Ping BH.

Author information: 
(1)Huiqiao Department, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China . E-mail: wb821814671@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of simulated microgravity on erythroid
differentiation of K562 cells and explore the possible mechanism.
METHODS: The fourth generation rotating cell culture system was used to generate 
the simulated microgravity environment. Benzidine staining was used to evaluate
the cell inhibition rate, and real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to
detect GATA-1, GATA-2, Ets-1, F-actin, ß-Tubulin and vimentin mRNA expressions.
The changes of cytoskeleton were observed by fluorescence microscopy, and Western
blotting was employed to assay F-actin, ß-tubulin and vimentin protein expression
levels.
RESULTS: Benzidine staining showed that simulated microgravity inhibited
erythroid differentiation of K562 cells. K562 cells treated with Hemin presented 
with increased mRNA expression of GATA-1 and reduced GATA-2 and Ets-1 mRNA
expressions. Simulated microgravity treatment of the cells resulted in
down-regulated GATA-1, F-actin, ß-tubulin and vimentin mRNA expressions and
up-regulated mRNA expressions of GATA-2 and Ets-1, and reduced F-actin, ß-tubulin
and vimentin protein expressions. Exposure to simulated microgravity caused
decreased fluorescence intensities of cytoskeletal filament F-actin, ß-tubulin
and vimentin in the cells.
CONCLUSION: Simulated microgravity inhibits erythroid differentiation of K562
cells possibly by causing cytoskeleton damages to result in down-regulation of
GATA-1 and up-regulation of GATA-2 and Ets-1 expressions.

PMID: 26547335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Tumour Biol. 2015 Nov 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Integrin ß6 acts as an unfavorable prognostic indicator and promotes cellular
malignant behaviors via ERK-ETS1 pathway in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC).

Li Z(1,)(2), Lin P(1,)(2), Gao C(1), Peng C(1), Liu S(3), Gao H(1), Wang B(1),
Wang J(1), Niu J(1), Niu W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, QiLu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
250012, Shandong, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and
Function Research, Chinese Ministry of Education and Public Health, Jinan,
250012, Shandong, China. (3)Department of Thyroid & Breast Surgery, Affiliated
Hospital of Binzhou Medical College, Binzhou, 256603, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, QiLu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
250012, Shandong, China. drniuweibo@163.com.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains one of the most deadly cancers
and is expected to become the second leading cause of cancer death by 2030.
Despite extensive efforts to improve surgical treatment, limited progress has
been made. Increasing evidence indicates that integrin ß6 plays a crucial role in
carcinoma invasion and metastasis. However, the expression and role of ß6 in PDAC
remain largely unknown. In the present study, we investigated the expression of
ß6 in PDAC and its potential value as a prognostic factor and therapeutic target.
ß6 upregulation was identified as an independent unfavorable prognostic
indicator. Integrin ß6 markedly promoted the proliferation and invasion of
pancreatic carcinoma cells and induced ETS1 phosphorylation in an ERK-dependent
manner, leading to the upregulation of matrix metalloprotease-9, which is
essential for ß6-mediated invasiveness of pancreatic carcinoma cells.
Accordingly, small interfering RNA-mediated silencing of integrin ß6 markedly
suppressed xenograft tumor growth in vivo. Taken together, our results suggest
that integrin ß6 plays important roles in the progression of pancreatic carcinoma
and contributes to reduced survival times, and may serve as a novel therapeutic
target for the treatment of PDAC.

PMID: 26547582  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. J Med Genet. 2015 Dec;52(12):848-55. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103442. Epub
2015 Oct 16.

Genome-wide significant association with seven novel multiple sclerosis risk
loci.

Lill CM(1), Luessi F(2), Alcina A(3), Sokolova EA(4), Ugidos N(5), de la Hera
B(6), Guillot-Noël L(7), Malhotra S(8), Reinthaler E(9), Schjeide BM(10),
Mescheriakova JY(11), Mashychev A(12), Wohlers I(12), Akkad DA(13), Aktas O(14), 
Alloza I(15), Antigüedad A(16), Arroyo R(17), Astobiza I(5), Blaschke P(18),
Boyko AN(19), Buttmann M(20), Chan A(21), Dörner T(22), Epplen JT(23), Favorova
OO(24), Fedetz M(3), Fernández O(25), García-Martínez A(6), Gerdes LA(26), Graetz
C(2), Hartung HP(14), Hoffjan S(13), Izquierdo G(27), Korobko DS(28), Kroner
A(29), Kubisch C(30), Kümpfel T(26), Leyva L(25), Lohse P(31), Malkova NA(32),
Montalban X(8), Popova EV(19), Rieckmann P(33), Rozhdestvenskii AS(34), Schmied
C(9), Smagina IV(35), Tsareva EY(24), Winkelmann A(18), Zettl UK(18), Binder
H(36), Cournu-Rebeix I(7), Hintzen R(11), Zimprich A(9), Comabella M(8), Fontaine
B(37), Urcelay E(6), Vandenbroeck K(15), Filipenko M(4), Matesanz F(3), Zipp
F(2), Bertram L(38).

Author information: 
(1)Platform for Genome Analytics, Institutes of Neurogenetics & Integrative and
Experimental Genomics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany Department of
Neurology, Focus Program Translational Neuroscience, University Medical Center of
the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, Germany Department of Vertebrate 
Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, Focus Program Translational Neuroscience, University 
Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Instituto de Parasitología y
Biomedicina López Neyra (IPBLN), CSIC, Granada, Spain. (4)Laboratory of
Pharmacogenomics, Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine,
Siberian Division, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia Novosibirsk
State University, Novosibirsk, Russia. (5)Neurogenomiks Laboratory, University of
the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain Achucarro Basque Center for
Neuroscience, Zamudio, Spain. (6)Immunology Department, Hospital Clínico San
Carlos, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos
(IdISSC), Madrid, Spain. (7)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, 
Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, ICM F-75013, Paris, France. (8)Department of
Neurology-Neuroimmunology, Centre d'Esclerosi Múltiple de Catalunya, Cemcat,
Hospital Universitari Vall d´Hebron (HUVH), Barcelona, Spain. (9)Department of
Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (10)Department of
Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin,
Germany. (11)Department of Neurology, MS Centre ErasMS, Erasmus Medical Centre,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (12)Platform for Genome Analytics, Institutes of
Neurogenetics & Integrative and Experimental Genomics, University of Lübeck,
Lübeck, Germany. (13)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr University, Bochum,
Germany. (14)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany. (15)Neurogenomiks Laboratory, University of the Basque
Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain Achucarro Basque Center for Neuroscience,
Zamudio, Spain IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.
(16)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain.
(17)Multiple Sclerosis Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos,
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC),
Madrid, Spain. (18)Department of Neurology, University of Rostock, Rostock,
Germany. (19)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University (RNRMU), Moscow, Russia. (20)Department of Neurology,
University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. (21)Department of Neurology, St.
Josef-Hospital, Ruhr-University, Bochum, Germany. (22)Department of Medicine,
Rheumatology, and Clinical Immunology & DRFZ, Charité University Medicine,
Berlin, Germany. (23)Department of Neurology, MS Centre ErasMS, Erasmus Medical
Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands Faculty of Health, University Witten/Herdecke,
Witten, Germany. (24)Department of Molecular Biology and Medical Biotechnology,
Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University (RNRMU), Moscow, Russia.
(25)Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Neurociencias, Instituto de Biomedicina de
Málaga (IBIMA), Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Málaga, Spain.
(26)Institute of Clinical Neuroimmunology, Campus Grosshadern, Ludwig Maximilian 
University, Munich, Germany. (27)Unidad de Esclerosis Múltiple, Hospital
Universitario Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain. (28)Multiple Sclerosis Center,
Novosibirsk Regional State Clinical Hospital, Novosibirsk, Russia. (29)Department
of Neurology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA. (30)Institute of Human Genetics, University
Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (31)Department of Clinical
Chemistry, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany CeGaT GmbH, Tuebingen,
Germany. (32)Multiple Sclerosis Center, Novosibirsk Regional State Clinical
Hospital, Novosibirsk, Russia Department of Clinical Neurology and Algology,
Novosibirsk State Medical University, Novosibirsk, Russia. (33)Department of
Neurology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany Department of Neurology,
Sozialstiftung Bamberg Hospital, Bamberg, Germany. (34)Department of Neurology of
Postgraduate Education, Omsk State Medical Academy, Omsk, Russia. (35)Territorial
Clinical Hospital, Barnaul, Russia Department of Nervous Diseases, Altai State
Medical University, Barnaul, Russia. (36)Institute for Medical Biostatistics,
Epidemiology and Informatics (IMBEI), University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz,
Germany. (37)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Inserm U 1127, 
CNRS UMR 7225, ICM F-75013, Paris, France AP-HP, Départment of des Maladies du
Système Nerveux, Pitié-Salpêtrère Hospital, Paris, France. (38)Platform for
Genome Analytics, Institutes of Neurogenetics & Integrative and Experimental
Genomics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany Department of Vertebrate
Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany Department
of Medicine, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: A recent large-scale study in multiple sclerosis (MS) using the
ImmunoChip platform reported on 11 loci that showed suggestive genetic
association with MS. Additional data in sufficiently sized and independent data
sets are needed to assess whether these loci represent genuine MS risk factors.
METHODS: The lead SNPs of all 11 loci were genotyped in 10 796 MS cases and
10 793 controls from Germany, Spain, France, the Netherlands, Austria and Russia,
that were independent from the previously reported cohorts. Association analyses 
were performed using logistic regression based on an additive model. Summary
effect size estimates were calculated using fixed-effect meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Seven of the 11 tested SNPs showed significant association with MS
susceptibility in the 21 589 individuals analysed here. Meta-analysis across our 
and previously published MS case-control data (total sample size n=101 683)
revealed novel genome-wide significant association with MS susceptibility
(p<5×10(-8)) for all seven variants. This included SNPs in or near LOC100506457
(rs1534422, p=4.03×10(-12)), CD28 (rs6435203, p=1.35×10(-9)), LPP (rs4686953,
p=3.35×10(-8)), ETS1 (rs3809006, p=7.74×10(-9)), DLEU1 (rs806349,
p=8.14×10(-12)), LPIN3 (rs6072343, p=7.16×10(-12)) and IFNGR2 (rs9808753,
p=4.40×10(-10)). Cis expression quantitative locus effects were observed in
silico for rs6435203 on CD28 and for rs9808753 on several immunologically
relevant genes in the IFNGR2 locus.
CONCLUSIONS: This study adds seven loci to the list of genuine MS genetic risk
factors and further extends the list of established loci shared across autoimmune
diseases.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26475045  [PubMed - in process]


23. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37600-12. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6067.

Revealing potential molecular targets bridging colitis and colorectal cancer
based on multidimensional integration strategy.

Guan X(1), Yi Y(2), Huang Y(2), Hu Y(2), Li X(3), Wang X(1), Fan H(2), Wang G(1),
Wang D(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Cancer Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China. (2)College of Bioinformatics Science
and Technology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China. (3)Department of
Pathology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China. (4)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 
China.

Chronic inflammation may play a vital role in the pathogenesis of
inflammation-associated tumors. However, the underlying mechanisms bridging
ulcerative colitis (UC) and colorectal cancer (CRC) remain unclear. Here, we
integrated multidimensional interaction resources, including gene expression
profiling, protein-protein interactions (PPIs), transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulation data, and virus-host interactions, to tentatively
explore potential molecular targets that functionally link UC and CRC at a
systematic level. In this work, by deciphering the overlapping genes,
crosstalking genes and pivotal regulators of both UC- and CRC-associated
functional module pairs, we revealed a variety of genes (including FOS and DUSP1,
etc.), transcription factors (including SMAD3 and ETS1, etc.) and miRNAs
(including miR-155 and miR-196b, etc.) that may have the potential to complete
the connections between UC and CRC. Interestingly, further analyses of the
virus-host interaction network demonstrated that several virus proteins
(including EBNA-LP of EBV and protein E7 of HPV) frequently inter-connected to
UC- and CRC-associated module pairs with their validated targets significantly
enriched in both modules of the host. Together, our results suggested that
multidimensional integration strategy provides a novel approach to discover
potential molecular targets that bridge the connections between UC and CRC, which
could also be extensively applied to studies on other inflammation-related
cancers.

PMCID: PMC4741951
PMID: 26461477  [PubMed - in process]


24. Gene. 2016 Jan 15;576(1 Pt 2):229-36. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.005. Epub 2015 
Oct 9.

Transcriptional regulation of gilthead seabream bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 
2 gene by bone- and cartilage-related transcription factors.

Marques CL(1), Cancela ML(2), Laizé V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal; PhD 
Program in Biomedical Sciences, University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal; Department
of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine (DCBM), University of Algarve, Faro,
Portugal. (2)Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), University of Algarve, Faro,
Portugal; Department of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine (DCBM), University of
Algarve, Faro, Portugal. (3)Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), University of
Algarve, Faro, Portugal. Electronic address: vlaize@ualg.pt.

PMID: 26456102  [PubMed - in process]


25. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 12. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.366. [Epub ahead of print]

SPROUTY-2 represses the epithelial phenotype of colon carcinoma cells via
upregulation of ZEB1 mediated by ETS1 and miR-200/miR-150.

Barbáchano A(1), Fernández-Barral A(1), Pereira F(1), Segura MF(2), Ordóñez-Morán
P(1), Carrillo-de Santa Pau E(3), González-Sancho JM(1), Hanniford D(2), Martínez
N(4), Costales-Carrera A(1), Real FX(3,)(5), Pálmer HG(6), Rojas JM(4), Hernando 
E(2), Muñoz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto
Sols', Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain. (2)Department of Pathology, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, USA. (3)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain. (4)Unidad de Biología Celular, Unidad
Funcional de Investigación en Enfermedades Crónicas, Instituto de Salud Carlos
III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain. (5)Department of Experimental and Health
Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Stem cells and Cancer
Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain.

SPROUTY-2 (SPRY2) is a modulator of tyrosine kinase receptor signaling with
receptor- and cell type-dependent inhibitory or enhancing effects. Studies on the
action of SPRY2 in major cancers are conflicting and its role remains unclear.
Here we have dissected SPRY2 action in human colon cancer. Global transcriptomic 
analyses show that SPRY2 downregulates genes encoding tight junction proteins
such as claudin-7 and occludin and other cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix adhesion
molecules in human SW480-ADH colon carcinoma cells. Moreover, SPRY2 represses
LLGL2/HUGL2, PATJ1/INADL and ST14, main regulators of the polarized epithelial
phenotype, and ESRP1, an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) inhibitor. A 
key action of SPRY2 is the upregulation of the major EMT inducer ZEB1, as these
effects are reversed by ZEB1 knock-down by means of RNA interference.
Consistently, we found an inverse correlation between the expression level of
claudin-7 and those of SPRY2 and ZEB1 in human colon tumors. Mechanistically,
ZEB1 upregulation by SPRY2 results from the combined induction of ETS1
transcription factor and the repression of microRNAs (miR-200 family, miR-150)
that target ZEB1 RNA. Moreover, SPRY2 increased AKT activation by epidermal
growth factor, whereas AKT and also Src inhibition reduced the induction of ZEB1.
Altogether, these data suggest that AKT and Src are implicated in SPRY2 action.
Collectively, these results show a tumorigenic role of SPRY2 in colon cancer that
is based on the dysregulation of tight junction and epithelial polarity master
genes via upregulation of ZEB1. The dissection of the mechanism of action of
SPRY2 in colon cancer cells is important to understand the upregulation of this
gene in a subset of patients with this neoplasia that have poor
prognosis.Oncogene advance online publication, 12 October 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.366.

PMID: 26455323  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 24;10(9):e0139165. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139165.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of Biomarker and Co-Regulatory Motifs in Lung Adenocarcinoma Based
on Differential Interactions.

Zhao N(1), Liu Y(1), Chang Z(1), Li K(1), Zhang R(1), Zhou Y(1), Qiu F(1), Han
X(1), Xu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, 150081, China.

Changes in intermolecular interactions (differential interactions) may influence 
the progression of cancer. Specific genes and their regulatory networks may be
more closely associated with cancer when taking their transcriptional and
post-transcriptional levels and dynamic and static interactions into account
simultaneously. In this paper, a differential interaction analysis was performed 
to detect lung adenocarcinoma-related genes. Furthermore, a miRNA-TF
(transcription factor) synergistic regulation network was constructed to identify
three kinds of co-regulated motifs, namely, triplet, crosstalk and joint. Not
only were the known cancer-related miRNAs and TFs (let-7, miR-15a, miR-17, TP53, 
ETS1, and so on) were detected in the motifs, but also the miR-15, let-7 and
miR-17 families showed a tendency to regulate the triplet, crosstalk and joint
motifs, respectively. Moreover, several biological functions (i.e., cell cycle,
signaling pathways and hemopoiesis) associated with the three motifs were found
to be frequently targeted by the drugs for lung adenocarcinoma. Specifically, the
two 4-node motifs (crosstalk and joint) based on co-expression and interaction
had a closer relationship to lung adenocarcinoma, and so further research was
performed on them. A 10-gene biomarker (UBC, SRC, SP1, MYC, STAT3, JUN, NR3C1,
RB1, GRB2 and MAPK1) was selected from the joint motif, and a survival analysis
indicated its significant association with survival. Among the ten genes, JUN,
NR3C1 and GRB2 are our newly detected candidate lung adenocarcinoma-related
genes. The genes, regulators and regulatory motifs detected in this work will
provide potential drug targets and new strategies for individual therapy.

PMCID: PMC4581687
PMID: 26402252  [PubMed - in process]


27. Semin Cancer Biol. 2015 Dec;35:20-38. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2015.09.010. Epub 
2015 Sep 25.

The role of the transcription factor Ets1 in carcinoma.

Dittmer J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Gynecology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.
Electronic address: juergen.dittmer@medizin.uni-halle.de.

Ets1 belongs to the large family of the ETS domain family of transcription
factors and is involved in cancer progression. In most carcinomas, Ets1
expression is linked to poor survival. In breast cancer, Ets1 is primarily
expressed in the triple-negative subtype, which is associated with unfavorable
prognosis. Ets1 contributes to the acquisition of cancer cell invasiveness, to
EMT (epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition), to the development of drug resistance
and neo-angiogenesis. The aim of this review is to summarize the current
knowledge on the functions of Ets1 in carcinoma progression and on the mechanisms
that regulate Ets1 activity in cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26392377  [PubMed - in process]


28. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;17(10):1327-38. doi: 10.1038/ncb3240. Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Non-canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling and ETS1/2 cooperatively drive C250T mutant TERT
promoter activation.

Li Y(1), Zhou QL(1,)(2), Sun W(3), Chandrasekharan P(4), Cheng HS(1), Ying
Z(5,)(6), Lakshmanan M(1), Raju A(1), Tenen DG(2,)(7), Cheng SY(8), Chuang KH(4),
Li J(5,)(6), Prabhakar S(3), Li M(5,)(6), Tergaonkar V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), A*STAR (Agency for Science,
Technology and Research), Singapore 138673, Singapore. (2)Cancer Science
Institute of Singapore, 14 Medical Dr #12-01, Singapore 117599, Singapore.
(3)Computational and Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis 
St, Singapore 138672, Singapore. (4)Laboratory of Molecular Imaging, Singapore
Bioimaging Consortium, Agency for Science, Technology and Research Singapore, 11 
Biopolis Way, #02-02 Helios, Singapore 138667, Singapore. (5)Department of
Microbiology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, China. (6)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control (Sun
Yat-sen University), Chinese Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, 
China. (7)Harvard Medical School, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. (8)Department of Neurology, Northwestern Brain Tumor
Institute, Center for Genetic Medicine &The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Transcriptional reactivation of TERT, the catalytic subunit of telomerase, is
necessary for cancer progression in about 90% of human cancers. The recent
discovery of two prevalent somatic mutations-C250T and C228T-in the TERT promoter
in various cancers has provided insight into a plausible mechanism of TERT
reactivation. Although the two hotspot mutations create a similar binding motif
for E-twenty-six (ETS) transcription factors, we show that they are functionally 
distinct, in that the C250T unlike the C228T TERT promoter is driven by
non-canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling. We demonstrate that binding of ETS to the mutant 
TERT promoter is insufficient in driving its transcription but this process
requires non-canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling for stimulus responsiveness, sustained
telomerase activity and hence cancer progression. Our findings highlight a
previously unrecognized role of non-canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling in tumorigenesis
and elucidate a fundamental mechanism for TERT reactivation in cancers, which if 
targeted could have immense therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC4772727 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26389665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Nov;1849(11):1319-28. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.09.005. Epub 2015 Sep 11.

c-ETS transcription factors play an essential role in the licensing of human MCM4
origin of replication.

Sidhu K(1), Kumar V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. (2)Virology Group,
International Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali
Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. Electronic address: vijay@icgeb.res.in.

In metazoans, DNA replication is a highly regulated and ordered process that
occurs during the S phase of cell cycle. It begins with the licensing of origins 
of replication usually found in close proximity of actively transcribing genes
owing perhaps to a profound influence of transcription factors on the epigenetic 
signatures and architecture of chromatin. Here we show that ETS transcription
factors are novel regulators of MCM4 origin, whose binding sites are localized
between two divergently transcribing MCM4 and PRKDC genes. c-ETS1 and c-ETS2 were
recruited to the MCM4 origin respectively during the S and G1 phases of cell
cycle. c-ETS2 binding was facilitated by an active chromatin distinguished by
acetylated histone H3 orchestrated by histone acetyl transferase GCN5 and
followed by HBO1 mediated histone H4 acetylation. Interestingly, c-ETS2
overexpression led to increased BrdU incorporation in the S phase cells while its
down-regulation by RNA interference compromised the loading of pre-replicative
complex at the origin. Conversely, the recruitment of c-ETS1 at the origin
coincided with histone H3 methylation signature characteristic of closed
chromatin conformation. As expected, enforced expression of c-ETS1 severely
compromised DNA replication whereas its down-regulation enhanced DNA replication 
as evident from increased BrdU incorporation. Thus, c-ETS transcription factors
appear to be key regulators of MCM4 origin where c-ETS2 seems to promote DNA
replication whereas c-ETS1 functions as a negative regulator.

© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26365772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Am J Pathol. 2015 Sep;185(9):2412-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.05.017.

miR-506 Inhibits Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition and Angiogenesis in Gastric
Cancer.

Li Z(1), Liu Z(2), Dong S(1), Zhang J(2), Tan J(3), Wang Y(2), Ge C(2), Li R(2), 
Xue Y(2), Li M(4), Wang W(5), Xiang X(5), Yang J(2), Ding H(2), Geng T(2), Yao
K(6), Song X(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, People's 
Republic of China; Cancer Biotherapy Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital of
Kunming Medical University (Tumor Hospital of Yunnan Province), Kunming, People's
Republic of China. (2)Cancer Biotherapy Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital of 
Kunming Medical University (Tumor Hospital of Yunnan Province), Kunming, People's
Republic of China. (3)Department of General Surgery, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Kunming Medical University (Tumor Hospital of Yunnan Province),
Kunming, People's Republic of China. (4)Department Pathology, The Third
Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University (Tumor Hospital of Yunnan
Province), Kunming, People's Republic of China. (5)Department Thoracic Surgery,
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University (Tumor Hospital of
Yunnan Province), Kunming, People's Republic of China. (6)Cancer Research
Institute of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. 
Electronic address: ktyao@fimmu.com. (7)Cancer Research Institute of Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China; Cancer Biotherapy
Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University (Tumor
Hospital of Yunnan Province), Kunming, People's Republic of China. Electronic
address: songxin68@126.com.

Gastric cancer is one of the most common malignancies in developing countries. We
examined the possible role of miR-506 in gastric cancer, investigated its
associations with the clinical outcomes of gastric cancer patients, and explored 
its potential role in angiogenesis and the metastasis of gastric cancer cells. We
found that miR-506 expression was a useful marker for stratifying patients from
early to advanced clinical stages and for overall survival prediction. miR-506
overexpression inhibited the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of gastric
cancer cells; however, depletion of miR-506 promoted it. In addition, miR-506
suppressed gastric cancer angiogenesis and was associated with decreased matrix
metalloproteinase-9 expression. We also found that ETS1 was a miR-506 target, and
it was expressed in 71.10% of gastric cancer tissue samples. Moreover, ETS1
expression was associated with matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression (P < 0.001).
In conclusion, miR-506 was identified as an ETS1 targeting suppressor of
metastatic invasion and angiogenesis in gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26362716  [PubMed - in process]


31. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 15;195(8):3574-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500776. Epub 2015
Sep 9.

Requirement for Transcription Factor Ets1 in B Cell Tolerance to Self-Antigens.

Russell L(1), John S(2), Cullen J(3), Luo W(1), Shlomchik MJ(4), Garrett-Sinha
LA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
NY 14203; (2)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY 14203; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University, New Haven,
CT 06520; Department of Immunobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520; and.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520;
Department of Immunobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520; and.
(4)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261. (5)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York
at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203; Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261 leesinha@buffalo.edu.

The differentiation and survival of autoreactive B cells is normally limited by a
variety of self-tolerance mechanisms, including clonal deletion, anergy, and
clonal ignorance. The transcription factor c-ets-1 (encoded by the Ets1 gene) has
B cell-intrinsic roles in regulating formation of Ab-secreting cells by
controlling the activity of Blimp1 and Pax5 and may be required for B cell
tolerance to self-antigen. To test this, we crossed Ets1(-/-) mice to two
different transgenic models of B cell self-reactivity, the anti-hen egg lysozyme 
BCR transgenic strain and the AM14 rheumatoid factor transgenic strain. BCR
transgenic Ets1(-/-) mice were subsequently crossed to mice either carrying or
lacking relevant autoantigens. We found that B cells lacking c-ets-1 are
generally hyperresponsive in terms of Ab secretion and form large numbers of
Ab-secreting cells even in the absence of cognate Ags. When in the presence of
cognate Ag, different responses were noted depending on the physical
characteristics of the Ag. We found that clonal deletion of highly autoreactive B
cells in the bone marrow was intact in the absence of c-ets-1. However,
peripheral B cells lacking c-ets-1 failed to become tolerant in response to
stimuli that normally induce B cell anergy or B cell clonal ignorance.
Interestingly, high-affinity soluble self-antigen did cause B cells to adopt many
of the classical features of anergic B cells, although such cells still secreted 
Ab. Therefore, maintenance of appropriate c-ets-1 levels is essential to prevent 
loss of self-tolerance in the B cell compartment.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4568556 [Available on 2016-10-15]
PMID: 26355157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Nov 1;338(2):194-202. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.08.009. Epub
2015 Aug 21.

Global increase in O-linked N-acetylglucosamine modification promotes osteoblast 
differentiation.

Koyama T(1), Kamemura K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Nagahama Institute of Bio-Science and Technology,
1266 Tamura, Nagahama, Shiga 526-0829, Japan. (2)Department of Bioscience,
Nagahama Institute of Bio-Science and Technology, 1266 Tamura, Nagahama, Shiga
526-0829, Japan. Electronic address: k_kamemura@nagahama-i-bio.ac.jp.

The balance between bone formation and bone resorption is maintained by
osteoblasts and osteoclasts, and an imbalance in this bone metabolism leads to
osteoporosis. Here, we found that osteoblast differentiation in MC3T3-E1 cells is
promoted by the inactivation of O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosaminidase (O-GlcNAcase) 
and suppressed by the inactivation of O-GlcNAc transferase, as indicated by
extracellular matrix calcification. The expression of osteogenic genes such as
alp, ocn, and bsp during osteoblast differentiation was positively regulated in a
O-GlcNAc glycosylation-dependent manner. Because it was confirmed that Ets1 and
Runx2 are the two key transcription factors responsible for the expression of
these osteogenic genes, their transcriptional activity might therefore be
regulated by O-GlcNAc glycosylation. However, osteoclast differentiation of
RAW264 cells, as indicated by the expression and activity of tartrate-resistant
acid phosphatase, was unaffected by the inactivation of either O-GlcNAcase or
O-GlcNAc transferase. Our findings suggest that an approach to manipulate
O-GlcNAc glycosylation could be useful for developing the therapeutics for
osteoporosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26302267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 25;465(3):594-600. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.068. Epub 2015 Aug 18.

Fentanyl inhibits the invasion and migration of colorectal cancer cells via
inhibiting the negative regulation of Ets-1 on BANCR.

Li AX(1), Xin WQ(2), Ma CG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Huaihe Hospital, Henan University, Kaifeng
475000, China. Electronic address: axianglx@163.com. (2)Department of
Anesthesiology, Huaihe Hospital, Henan University, Kaifeng 475000, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown the potential anti-tumor effect of fentanyl
on colorectal cancer (CRC). However, its underling mechanism is still unclear.
Since studies indicates the abnormal expression of transcription factor Ets-1 and
BRAF-activated lncRNA (BANCR) in CRC progress, the relationship between Ets-1 and
BANCR was investigated here to illustrate the fentanyl-induced mechanism on CRC
in vitro.
METHODS: The expression levels of Ets-1 and BANCR were first detected in
fentanyl-treated CRC cells. The interaction between Ets-1 and BANCR promoter was 
verified with chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, as well as corresponding
acetylation of histones. The regulation of Ets-1 on BANCR expression was
confirmed through luciferase assays and RT-PCR analysis. And, cell clone
formation, cell migration and invasion were observed to evaluate the anti-tumor
effects of fentanyl. Ets-1 overexpression or co-overexpression with BANCR was
further performed by plasmids transfection to show the regulatory role of Ets-1
in fentanyl-induced mechanism.
RESULTS: Fentanyl induced BANCR upregulation and Ets-1 downregulation in CRC
cells. Further studies showed that Ets-1 negatively regulated BANCR expression
via the deacetylation of histones H3 within BANCR promoter. Moreover, fentanyl
induced less cell clone formation, as well as inhibited cell migration and
invasion in vitro, while Ets-1 overexpression inhibited fentanyl-induced effects 
that could be reversed by BANCR co-overexpression.
CONCLUSION: Fentanyl showed anti-tumor like effects on CRC cells, including less 
cell clone formation and inhibited cell migration and invasion. Furthermore, the 
regulatory role of Ets-1 on BANCR influenced fentanyl-induced mechanism,
indicating their potential application in the therapeutic treatment of CRC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26296467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Infect Immun. 2015 Nov;83(11):4256-65. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00498-15. Epub 2015 Aug
17.

Gingipains from the Periodontal Pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis Play a
Significant Role in Regulation of Angiopoietin 1 and Angiopoietin 2 in Human
Aortic Smooth Muscle Cells.

Zhang B(1), Khalaf H(2), Sirsjö A(2), Bengtsson T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, School of Health Sciences, Örebro University,
Örebro, Sweden boxi.zhang@oru.se. (2)Department of Clinical Medicine, School of
Health Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.

Angiopoietin 1 (Angpt1) and angiopoietin 2 (Angpt2) are the ligands of tyrosine
kinase (Tie) receptors, and they play important roles in vessel formation and the
development of inflammatory diseases, such as atherosclerosis. Porphyromonas
gingivalis is a Gram-negative periodontal bacterium that is thought to contribute
to the progression of cardiovascular disease. The aim of this study was to
investigate the role of P. gingivalis infection in the modulation of Angpt1 and
Angpt2 in human aortic smooth muscle cells (AoSMCs). We exposed AoSMCs to
wild-type (W50 and 381), gingipain mutant (E8 and K1A), and fimbrial mutant
(DPG-3 and KRX-178) P. gingivalis strains and to different concentrations of
tumor necrosis factor (TNF). The atherosclerosis risk factor TNF was used as a
positive control in this study. We found that P. gingivalis (wild type, K1A,
DPG3, and KRX178) and TNF upregulated the expression of Angpt2 and its
transcription factor ETS1, respectively, in AoSMCs. In contrast, Angpt1 was
inhibited by P. gingivalis and TNF. However, the RgpAB mutant E8 had no effect on
the expression of Angpt1, Angpt2, or ETS1 in AoSMCs. The results also showed that
ETS1 is critical for P. gingivalis induction of Angpt2. Exposure to Angpt2
protein enhanced the migration of AoSMCs but had no effect on proliferation. This
study demonstrates that gingipains are crucial to the ability of P. gingivalis to
markedly increase the expressed Angpt2/Angpt1 ratio in AoSMCs, which determines
the regulatory role of angiopoietins in angiogenesis and their involvement in the
development of atherosclerosis. These findings further support the association
between periodontitis and cardiovascular disease.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4598411 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26283334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Arch Toxicol. 2015 Sep;89(9):1599-618. doi: 10.1007/s00204-015-1573-y. Epub 2015 
Aug 14.

A transcriptome-based classifier to identify developmental toxicants by stem cell
testing: design, validation and optimization for histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Rempel E(1), Hoelting L, Waldmann T, Balmer NV, Schildknecht S, Grinberg M, Das
Gaspar JA, Shinde V, Stöber R, Marchan R, van Thriel C, Liebing J, Meisig J,
Blüthgen N, Sachinidis A, Rahnenführer J, Hengstler JG, Leist M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, TU Dortmund University, 44139, Dortmund, Germany.

Test systems to identify developmental toxicants are urgently needed. A
combination of human stem cell technology and transcriptome analysis was to
provide a proof of concept that toxicants with a related mode of action can be
identified and grouped for read-across. We chose a test system of developmental
toxicity, related to the generation of neuroectoderm from pluripotent stem cells 
(UKN1), and exposed cells for 6 days to the histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACi) valproic acid, trichostatin A, vorinostat, belinostat, panobinostat and
entinostat. To provide insight into their toxic action, we identified HDACi
consensus genes, assigned them to superordinate biological processes and mapped
them to a human transcription factor network constructed from hundreds of
transcriptome data sets. We also tested a heterogeneous group of 'mercurials'
(methylmercury, thimerosal, mercury(II)chloride, mercury(II)bromide,
4-chloromercuribenzoic acid, phenylmercuric acid). Microarray data were compared 
at the highest non-cytotoxic concentration for all 12 toxicants. A support vector
machine (SVM)-based classifier predicted all HDACi correctly. For validation, the
classifier was applied to legacy data sets of HDACi, and for each exposure
situation, the SVM predictions correlated with the developmental toxicity.
Finally, optimization of the classifier based on 100 probe sets showed that eight
genes (F2RL2, TFAP2B, EDNRA, FOXD3, SIX3, MT1E, ETS1 and LHX2) are sufficient to 
separate HDACi from mercurials. Our data demonstrate how human stem cells and
transcriptome analysis can be combined for mechanistic grouping and prediction of
toxicants. Extension of this concept to mechanisms beyond HDACi would allow
prediction of human developmental toxicity hazard of unknown compounds with the
UKN1 test system.

PMCID: PMC4551554
PMID: 26272509  [PubMed - in process]


36. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015 Sep 15;309(6):H1075-86. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00378.2015. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Blockade of Ets-1 attenuates epidermal growth factor-dependent collagen loss in
human carotid plaque smooth muscle cells.

Rao VH(1), Rai V(1), Stoupa S(1), Agrawal DK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical and Translational Science, Creighton University School of 
Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska. (2)Center for Clinical and Translational Science,
Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska dkagr@creighton.edu.

Although degradation of extracellular matrix by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 
is thought to be involved in symptomatic (S) carotid plaques in atherosclerosis, 
the mechanisms of MMP expression are poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that
collagen loss in vascular smooth vessel cells (VSMCs) isolated from S plaques was
induced by epidermal growth factor (EGF) through the activation of p38-MAPK and
JNK-MAPK pathways. Inhibitors of p38-MAPK and JNK-MAPK signaling pathways
downregulated the expression of MMP-1 and MMP-9. In addition, we examined whether
v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homologue 1 (Ets-1), an important
regulator of different genes, is involved in destabilizing S plaques in patients 
with carotid stenosis. We demonstrate that EGF induces Ets-1 expression and
decreases interstitial and basement membrane collagen in vascular smooth muscle
cells (VSMCs) from patients with carotid stenosis. Increased expression of MMP-1 
and -9 and decreased collagen mRNA transcripts were also found in
Ets-1-overexpressed VSMCs. Transfection with both dominant-negative form of Ets-1
and small interfering RNA blocked EGF-induced MMP-1 and -9 expressions and
increased the mRNA transcripts for collagen I (a1) and collagen III (a1) in S
compared with asymptomatic (AS) carotid plaques. Inhibitors of p38-MAPK
(SB202190) and JNK-MAPK (SP600125) signaling pathways decreased the expression of
Ets-1, MMP-1, and MMP-9 and increased collagen type I and III expression in
EGF-treated VSMCs. This study provides a mechanistic insight into the role of
Ets-1 in the plaque destabilization in patients with carotid stenosis involving
p38-MAPK and JNK signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4591361 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26254334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Immunol. 2015 Sep 1;195(5):1955-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500165. Epub 2015
Jul 24.

Genetic Interaction between Lyn, Ets1, and Btk in the Control of Antibody Levels.

Mayeux J(1), Skaug B(1), Luo W(2), Russell LM(2), John S(2), Saelee P(2), Abbasi 
H(1), Li QZ(3), Garrett-Sinha LA(4), Satterthwaite AB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390; (2)Department of Biochemistry, Center of Excellence in 
Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY 14203; and. (3)Department of Immunology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390. (4)Department of Biochemistry,
Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, State University of New
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203; and anne.satterthwaite@utsouthwestern.edu
leesinha@buffalo.edu. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390; Department of Immunology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390
anne.satterthwaite@utsouthwestern.edu leesinha@buffalo.edu.

Tight control of B cell differentiation into plasma cells (PCs) is critical for
proper immune responses and the prevention of autoimmunity. The Ets1
transcription factor acts in B cells to prevent PC differentiation. Ets1(-/-)
mice accumulate PCs and produce autoantibodies. Ets1 expression is downregulated 
upon B cell activation through the BCR and TLRs and is maintained by the
inhibitory signaling pathway mediated by Lyn, CD22 and SiglecG, and SHP-1. In the
absence of these inhibitory components, Ets1 levels are reduced in B cells in a
Btk-dependent manner. This leads to increased PCs, autoantibodies, and an
autoimmune phenotype similar to that of Ets1(-/-) mice. Defects in inhibitory
signaling molecules, including Lyn and Ets1, are associated with human lupus,
although the effects are more subtle than the complete deficiency that occurs in 
knockout mice. In this study, we explore the effect of partial disruption of the 
Lyn/Ets1 pathway on B cell tolerance and find that Lyn(+/-)Ets1(+/-) mice
demonstrate greater and earlier production of IgM, but not IgG, autoantibodies
compared with Lyn(+/-) or Ets1(+/-) mice. We also show that Btk-dependent
downregulation of Ets1 is important for normal PC homeostasis when inhibitory
signaling is intact. Ets1 deficiency restores the decrease in steady state PCs
and Ab levels observed in Btk(-/-) mice. Thus, depending on the balance of
activating and inhibitory signals to Ets1, there is a continuum of effects on
autoantibody production and PC maintenance. This ranges from full-blown
autoimmunity with complete loss of Ets1-maintaining signals to reduced PC and Ab 
levels with impaired Ets1 downregulation.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4546901 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26209625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur Heart J. 2015 Nov 7;36(42):2909-19. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv321. Epub 2015 
Jul 22.

The microRNA-221/-222 cluster balances the antiviral and inflammatory response in
viral myocarditis.

Corsten M(1), Heggermont W(2), Papageorgiou AP(3), Deckx S(1), Tijsma A(4),
Verhesen W(1), van Leeuwen R(1), Carai P(3), Thibaut HJ(4), Custers K(1), Summer 
G(1), Hazebroek M(1), Verheyen F(5), Neyts J(4), Schroen B(1), Heymans S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Heart Failure Research, Cardiovascular Research Institute
Maastricht, Maastricht University, P. Debyelaan 25, Maastricht AZ-6202, The
Netherlands. (2)Center for Heart Failure Research, Cardiovascular Research
Institute Maastricht, Maastricht University, P. Debyelaan 25, Maastricht AZ-6202,
The Netherlands Center for Molecular and Vascular Research, University of Leuven,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium Department of Internal Medicine, Service of Cardiology,
University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven B-3000, Belgium. (3)Center for Heart Failure 
Research, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht, Maastricht University, P.
Debyelaan 25, Maastricht AZ-6202, The Netherlands Center for Molecular and
Vascular Research, University of Leuven, Leuven B-3000, Belgium. (4)Rega
Institute for Medical Research, University of Leuven, Leuven B-3000, Belgium.
(5)Electron Microscopy Unit, Maastricht University, Maastricht AZ-6202, The
Netherlands. (6)Center for Heart Failure Research, Cardiovascular Research
Institute Maastricht, Maastricht University, P. Debyelaan 25, Maastricht AZ-6202,
The Netherlands Center for Molecular and Vascular Research, University of Leuven,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium s.heymans@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

AIMS: Viral myocarditis (VM) is an important cause of heart failure and sudden
cardiac death in young healthy adults; it is also an aetiological precursor of
dilated cardiomyopathy. We explored the role of the miR-221/-222 family that is
up-regulated in VM.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we show that microRNA-221 (miR-221) and miR-222 levels
are significantly elevated during acute VM caused by Coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3).
Both miRs are expressed by different cardiac cells and by infiltrating
inflammatory cells, but their up-regulation upon myocarditis is mostly exclusive 
for the cardiomyocyte. Systemic inhibition of miR-221/-222 in mice increased
cardiac viral load, prolonged the viraemic state, and strongly aggravated cardiac
injury and inflammation. Similarly, in vitro, overexpression of miR-221 and
miR-222 inhibited enteroviral replication, whereas knockdown of this miR-cluster 
augmented viral replication. We identified and confirmed a number of miR-221/-222
targets that co-orchestrate the increased viral replication and inflammation,
including ETS1/2, IRF2, BCL2L11, TOX, BMF, and CXCL12. In vitro inhibition of
IRF2, TOX, or CXCL12 in cardiomyocytes significantly dampened their inflammatory 
response to CVB3 infection, confirming the functionality of these targets in VM
and highlighting the importance of miR-221/-222 as regulators of the cardiac
response to VM.
CONCLUSIONS: The miR-221/-222 cluster orchestrates the antiviral and inflammatory
immune response to viral infection of the heart. Its inhibition increases viral
load, inflammation, and overall cardiac injury upon VM.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26206211  [PubMed - in process]


39. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 4;290(36):21925-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.644864. Epub 2015
Jul 20.

The Proto-oncogene Transcription Factor Ets1 Regulates Neural Crest Development
through Histone Deacetylase 1 to Mediate Output of Bone Morphogenetic Protein
Signaling.

Wang C(1), Kam RK(1), Shi W(2), Xia Y(3), Chen X(4), Cao Y(5), Sun J(6), Du Y(7),
Lu G(3), Chen Z(7), Chan WY(3), Chan SO(3), Deng Y(8), Zhao H(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biomedical Sciences and. (2)Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong, China. (3)From the School of Biomedical Sciences and 
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
518057, China. (4)Advanced Biomedical Computing Center, NCI, National Institutes 
of Health, Frederick, Maryland 21702. (5)Model Animal Research Center of Nanjing 
University and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Model Animals for Disease 
Study, 12 Xuefu Road, Pukou High-Tech Zone, Nanjing 210061, China.
(6)Translational Cancer Research and Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Lund University, Medicon Village, 22381 Lund, Sweden, and. (7)Shanghai 
Key Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics, Renji
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 845 Lingshan Road,
Shanghai 200135, China. (8)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Cell Microenvironment,
Department of Biology, South University of Science and Technology of China,
Shenzhen 518055, China. (9)From the School of Biomedical Sciences and Shenzhen
Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518057, China, 
zhaohui@cuhk.edu.hk.

The neural crest (NC) is a transient, migratory cell population that
differentiates into a large variety of tissues including craniofacial cartilage, 
melanocytes, and peripheral nervous system. NC is initially induced at the border
of neural plate and non-neural ectoderm by balanced regulation of multiple
signaling pathways among which an intermediate bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
signaling is essential for NC formation. ets1, a proto-oncogene playing important
roles in tumor invasion, has also been implicated in delamination of NC cells. In
this study, we investigated Ets1 function in NC formation using Xenopus.
Overexpression of ets1 repressed NC formation through down-regulation of BMP
signaling. Moreover, ets1 repressed the BMP-responsive gene id3 that is essential
for NC formation. Conversely, overexpression of id3 can partially rescue the
phenotype of NC inhibition induced by ectopic ets1. Mechanistically, we found
that Ets1 binds to id3 promoter as well as histone deacetylase 1, suggesting that
Ets1 recruits histone deacetylase 1 to the promoter of id3, thereby inducing
histone deacetylation of the id3 promoter. Thus, our studies indicate that Ets1
regulates NC formation through attenuating BMP signaling epigenetically.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4571947 [Available on 2016-09-04]
PMID: 26198637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 4;290(36):22101-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.671339. Epub 2015
Jul 19.

A Role for Autoinhibition in Preventing Dimerization of the Transcription Factor 
ETS1.

Samorodnitsky D(1), Szyjka C(1), Koudelka GB(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo,
New York 14260. (2)From the Department of Biological Sciences, University at
Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14260 koudelka@buffalo.edu.

ETS1 is the archetype of the ETS transcription factor (TF) family. ETS TFs share 
a DNA-binding domain, the ETS domain. All ETS TFs recognize a core GGA(A/T)
binding site, and thus ETS TFs are found to redundantly regulate the same genes. 
However, each ETS TF has unique targets as well. One prevailing hypotheses
explaining this duality is that protein-protein interactions, including
homodimerization, allow each ETS TF to display distinct behavior. The behavior of
ETS1 is further regulated by autoinhibition. Autoinhibition apparently modulates 
ETS1 DNA binding affinity, but the mechanism of this inhibition is not completely
understood. We sought to characterize the relationship between DNA binding and
ETS1 homodimer formation. We find that ETS1 interrogates DNA and forms dimers
even when the DNA does not contain an ETS recognition sequence. Mutational
studies also link nonspecific DNA backbone contacts with dimer formation, in
addition to providing a new role for the recognition helix of ETS1 in maintaining
the autoinhibited state. Finally, in showing that residues in the DNA recognition
helix affect autoinhibition, we define a new function of ETS1 autoinhibition:
maintenance of a monomeric state in the absence of DNA. The conservation of
relevant amino acid residues across all ETS TFs indicates that the mechanisms of 
nonspecific DNA interrogation and protein oligomer formation elucidated here may 
be common to all ETS proteins that autoinhibit.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4571961 [Available on 2016-09-04]
PMID: 26195629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 15;10(7):e0133074. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133074.
eCollection 2015.

MiR-324-5p Suppresses Hepatocellular Carcinoma Cell Invasion by Counteracting ECM
Degradation through Post-Transcriptionally Downregulating ETS1 and SP1.

Cao L(1), Xie B(2), Yang X(1), Liang H(1), Jiang X(1), Zhang D(1), Xue P(1), Chen
D(1), Shao Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of General Surgery,
the First Affiliated Hospital of Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the common malignancies, which is highly
metastatic and the third common cause of cancer deaths in the world. The invasion
and metastasis of cancer cells is a multistep and complex process which is mainly
initiated by extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation. Aberrant expression of
microRNA has been investigated in HCC and shown to play essential roles during
HCC progression. In the present study, we found that microRNA-324-5p (miR-324-5p)
was downregulated in both HCC cell lines and tissues. Ectopic miR-324-5p led to
the reduction of HCC cells invasive and metastatic capacity, whereas inhibition
of miR-324-5p promoted the invasion of HCC cells. Matrix metalloproteinase 2
(MMP2) and MMP9, the major regulators of ECM degradation, were found to be
downregulated by ectopic miR-324-5p, while upregulated by miR-324-5p inhibitor.
E26 transformation-specific 1 (ETS1) and Specificity protein 1 (SP1), both of
which could modulate MMP2 and MMP9 expression and activity, were presented as the
direct targets of and downregulated by miR-324-5p. Downregulation of ETS1 and SP1
mediated the inhibitory function of miR-324-5p on HCC migration and invasion. Our
study demonstrates that miR-324-5p suppresses hepatocellular carcinoma cell
invasion and might provide new clues to invasive HCC therapy.

PMCID: PMC4503725
PMID: 26177288  [PubMed - in process]


42. Anticancer Res. 2015 Aug;35(8):4397-401.

Transcriptional Regulation of the p16 Tumor Suppressor Gene.

Kotake Y(1), Naemura M(2), Murasaki C(2), Inoue Y(2), Okamoto H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Chemistry, Faculty of
Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, Kinki University, Fukuoka, Japan
ykotake@fuk.kindai.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biological and Environmental
Chemistry, Faculty of Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, Kinki
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

The p16 tumor suppressor gene encodes a specific inhibitor of cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK) 4 and 6 and is found altered in a wide range of human cancers. p16
plays a pivotal role in tumor suppressor networks through inducing cellular
senescence that acts as a barrier to cellular transformation by oncogenic
signals. p16 protein is relatively stable and its expression is primary regulated
by transcriptional control. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins associate with the p16 
locus in a long non-coding RNA, ANRIL-dependent manner, leading to repression of 
p16 transcription. YB1, a transcription factor, also represses the p16
transcription through direct association with its promoter region. Conversely,
the transcription factors Ets1/2 and histone H3K4 methyltransferase MLL1 directly
bind to the p16 locus and mediate p16 induction during replicative and premature 
senescence. In the present review, we discuss the molecular mechanisms by which
these factors regulate p16 transcription.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26168478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 21;112(29):E3855-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1510733112. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

EGFR inhibition evokes innate drug resistance in lung cancer cells by preventing 
Akt activity and thus inactivating Ets-1 function.

Phuchareon J(1), McCormick F(2), Eisele DW(1), Tetsu O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF), CA 94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158. (2)UCSF Helen Diller
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of California,
San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu. (3)Head and
Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), CA
94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu
osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(20):3211-2.

Nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide.
About 14% of NSCLCs harbor mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). 
Despite remarkable progress in treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), 
only 5% of patients achieve tumor reduction >90%. The limited primary responses
are attributed partly to drug resistance inherent in the tumor cells before
therapy begins. Recent reports showed that activation of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) is an important determinant of this innate drug resistance. In
contrast, we demonstrate that EGFR inhibition promotes innate drug resistance
despite blockade of RTK activity in NSCLC cells. EGFR TKIs decrease both the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Akt protein kinase pathways for a
short time, after which the Ras/MAPK pathway becomes reactivated. Akt inhibition 
selectively blocks the transcriptional activation of Ets-1, which inhibits its
target gene, dual specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6), a negative regulator
specific for ERK1/2. As a result, ERK1/2 is activated. Furthermore, elevated
c-Src stimulates Ras GTP-loading and activates Raf and MEK kinases. These
observations suggest that not only ERK1/2 but also Akt activity is essential to
maintain Ets-1 in an active state. Therefore, despite high levels of ERK1/2,
Ets-1 target genes including DUSP6 and cyclins D1, D3, and E2 remain suppressed
by Akt inhibition. Reduction of DUSP6 in combination with elevated c-Src renews
activation of the Ras/MAPK pathway, which enhances cell survival by accelerating 
Bim protein turnover. Thus, EGFR TKIs evoke innate drug resistance by preventing 
Akt activity and inactivating Ets-1 function in NSCLC cells.

PMCID: PMC4517222
PMID: 26150526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;226(3):155-66. doi: 10.1530/JOE-15-0225. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

FGF23 gene regulation by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D: opposing effects in adipocytes 
and osteocytes.

Kaneko I(1), Saini RK(2), Griffin KP(2), Whitfield GK(2), Haussler MR(2), Jurutka
PW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical SciencesUniversity of Arizona College of Medicine,
425 N. Fifth Street, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, USASchool of Mathematical and
Natural SciencesArizona State University, 4701 W. Thunderbird Road, Phoenix,
Arizona 85306, USA Department of Basic Medical SciencesUniversity of Arizona
College of Medicine, 425 N. Fifth Street, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, USASchool of
Mathematical and Natural SciencesArizona State University, 4701 W. Thunderbird
Road, Phoenix, Arizona 85306, USA. (2)Department of Basic Medical
SciencesUniversity of Arizona College of Medicine, 425 N. Fifth Street, Phoenix, 
Arizona 85004, USASchool of Mathematical and Natural SciencesArizona State
University, 4701 W. Thunderbird Road, Phoenix, Arizona 85306, USA. (3)Department 
of Basic Medical SciencesUniversity of Arizona College of Medicine, 425 N. Fifth 
Street, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, USASchool of Mathematical and Natural
SciencesArizona State University, 4701 W. Thunderbird Road, Phoenix, Arizona
85306, USA Department of Basic Medical SciencesUniversity of Arizona College of
Medicine, 425 N. Fifth Street, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, USASchool of Mathematical 
and Natural SciencesArizona State University, 4701 W. Thunderbird Road, Phoenix, 
Arizona 85306, USA pjurutka@asu.edu.

In a closed endocrine loop, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) induces the
expression of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) in bone, with the phosphaturic 
peptide in turn acting at kidney to feedback repress CYP27B1 and induce CYP24A1
to limit the levels of 1,25D. In 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes, 1,25D
represses FGF23 and leptin expression and induces C/EBPß, but does not affect
leptin receptor transcription. Conversely, in UMR-106 osteoblast-like cells,
FGF23 mRNA concentrations are upregulated by 1,25D, an effect that is blunted by 
lysophosphatidic acid, a cell-surface acting ligand. Progressive truncation of
the mouse FGF23 proximal promoter linked in luciferase reporter constructs
reveals a 1,25D-responsive region between -400 and -200<U+200A> bp. A 0.6<U+200A> kb fragment
of the mouse FGF23 promoter, linked in a reporter construct, responds to 1,25D
with a fourfold enhancement of transcription in transfected K562 cells. Mutation 
of either an ETS1 site at -346 <U+200A>bp, or an adjacent candidate vitamin D receptor
(VDR)/Nurr1-element, in the 0.6<U+200A> kb reporter construct reduces the
transcriptional activity elicited by 1,25D to a level that is not significantly
different from a minimal promoter. This composite ETS1-VDR/Nurr1 cis-element may 
function as a switch between induction (osteocytes) and repression (adipocytes)
of FGF23, depending on the cellular setting of transcription factors. Moreover,
experiments demonstrate that a 1<U+200A>kb mouse FGF23 promoter-reporter construct,
transfected into MC3T3-E1 osteoblast-like cells, responds to a high calcium
challenge with a statistically significant 1.7- to 2.0-fold enhancement of
transcription. Thus, the FGF23 proximal promoter harbors cis elements that drive 
responsiveness to 1,25D and calcium, agents that induce FGF23 to curtail the
pathologic consequences of their excess.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4560246 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26148725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Gene. 2015 Nov 1;572(1):57-62. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.06.079. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Transcription factors from Sox family regulate expression of zebrafish Gla-rich
protein 2 gene.

Fazenda C(1), Conceição N(2), Cancela ML(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal; PhD 
Program in Biomedical Sciences, University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal. (2)Centre 
of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal; Department of 
Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal.
Electronic address: nconcei@ualg.pt. (3)Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR),
University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal; Department of Biomedical Sciences and
Medicine, University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal. Electronic address:
lcancela@ualg.pt.

GRP is a vitamin K-dependent protein with orthologs in all vertebrate taxonomic
groups and two paralogs in teleosts. However, no data is available about GRP
transcriptional gene regulation. We report a functional promoter for zebrafish
grp2 gene regulated by Sox9b, Sox10, Ets1 and Mef2ca as determined by in vitro
assays. This was confirmed in vivo for Sox9b and Sox10. Due to the high
conservation between human GRP and grp2, its zebrafish ortholog, our results are 
relevant for the study of human GRP gene regulation and provide new insights
towards understanding GRP function.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26143119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 2;10(7):e0131568. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131568.
eCollection 2015.

An Ikaros Promoter Element with Dual Epigenetic and Transcriptional Activities.

Perotti EA(1), Georgopoulos K(1), Yoshida T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, United States of America.

Ikaros DNA binding factor plays critical roles in lymphocyte development. Changes
in Ikaros expression levels during lymphopoiesis are controlled by redundant but 
also unique regulatory elements of its locus that are critical for this
developmental process. We have recently shown that Ikaros binds its own locus in 
thymocytes in vivo. Here, we evaluated the role of an Ikaros binding site within 
its major lympho-myeloid promoter. We identified an Ikaros/Ets binding site
within a promoter sub-region that was highly conserved in mouse and human.
Deletion of this binding site increased the percentage of the reporter-expressing
mouse lines, indicating that its loss provided a more permissive chromatin
environment. However, once transcription was established, the lack of this site
decreased transcriptional activity. These findings implicate a dual role for
Ikaros/Ets1 binding on Ikzf1 expression that is exerted at least through its
promoter.

PMCID: PMC4489883
PMID: 26135129  [PubMed - in process]


47. Am J Pathol. 2015 Jul;185(7):1867-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.03.026.

Mice Haploinsufficient for Ets1 and Fli1 Display Middle Ear Abnormalities and
Model Aspects of Jacobsen Syndrome.

Carpinelli MR(1), Kruse EA(2), Arhatari BD(3), Debrincat MA(2), Ogier JM(1),
Bories JC(4), Kile BT(2), Burt RA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; HEARing 
Cooperative Research Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (2)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (3)Department of Physics, ARC Centre of
Excellence for Coherent X-Ray Science, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria,
Australia. (4)INSERM UMR 1126 Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Paris,
France. (5)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
HEARing Cooperative Research Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of Genetics, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: rachel.burt@mcri.edu.au.

E26 transformation-specific 1 (ETS1) and friend leukemia integration 1 (FLI1) are
members of the ETS family of transcription factors, of which there are 28 in
humans. Both genes are hemizygous in Jacobsen syndrome, an 11q contiguous gene
deletion disorder involving thrombocytopenia, facial dysmorphism, growth and
mental retardation, malformation of the heart and other organs, and hearing
impairment associated with recurrent ear infections. To determine whether any of 
these defects are because of hemizygosity for ETS1 and FLI1, we characterized the
phenotype of mice heterozygous for mutant alleles of Ets1 and Fli1. Fli1(+/-)
mice displayed mild thrombocytopenia, as did Ets1(+/-)Fli1(+/-) animals.
Fli1(+/-) and Ets1(+/-)Fli1(+/-) mice also displayed craniofacial abnormalities, 
including a small middle ear cavity, short nasal bone, and malformed interface
between the nasal bone process and cartilaginous nasal septum. They exhibited
hearing impairment, otitis media, fusions of ossicles to the middle ear wall, and
deformed stapes. Hearing impairment was more penetrant and stapes malformations
were more severe in Ets1(+/-)Fli1(+/-) mice than in Fli1(+/-) mice, indicating
partial functional redundancy of these transcription factors during auditory
development. Our findings indicate that the short nose, otitis media, and hearing
impairment in Jacobsen syndrome are likely because of hemizygosity for ETS1 and
FLI1.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26093983  [PubMed - in process]


48. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 5;412:131-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.06.003. Epub
2015 Jun 4.

Roles of miR-196a on gene regulation of neuroendocrine tumor cells.

Li SC(1), Shi H(1), Khan M(2), Caplin M(3), Meyer T(4), Öberg K(5), Giandomenico 
V(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Neuroendocrine Tumour Unit, Centre for Gastroenterology, Royal Free Hospital, 
London, UK; The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. (3)Neuroendocrine
Tumour Unit, Centre for Gastroenterology, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Department of Oncology, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London,
London, UK. (5)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory,Endocrine Oncology Clinic, Uppsala University
Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. (6)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory,Endocrine Oncology Clinic, Uppsala
University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address:
valeria.giandomenico@medsci.uu.se.

This study aims at investigating miR-196a roles using in vitro models. miR-196a
was detected in small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs) and lung NETs.
miR-196a target prediction analysis suggested HOXA9, HOXB7, LRP4 and RSPO2 genes 
for further investigation. The level of these four genes is detectable in SI-NET 
tissue specimens at different disease stages and serum samples of untreated and
somatostatin analogs treated patients with liver metastases. A miR-196a inhibitor
was used to silence its effects in NET cells. We show that the four target genes 
were significantly upregulated at transcriptional level in silenced NET cells.
HOXA9, HOXB7, LRP4 and RSPO2 encoded proteins are also upregulated at
translational level in miR-196a silenced NET cells. miR-196a downstream genes
BMP4, ETS1, CTNNB1, FZD5, LRP5 and LRP6 were significantly upregulated at
transcriptional level in miR-196a silenced CNDT2.5 and NCI-H727 cells. In
addition, miR-196a clearly does not play a role in NET cell growth control.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26052033  [PubMed - in process]


49. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 20;6(20):18012-26.

The reciprocal regulation loop of Notch2 pathway and miR-23b in controlling
gastric carcinogenesis.

Huang TT(1,)(2), Ping YH(1), Wang AM(2), Ke CC(2), Fang WL(3,)(4), Huang
KH(3,)(4), Lee HC(1), Chi CW(1,)(5), Yeh TS(2,)(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department and Institute of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, 
School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Institute
of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan. (4)Department of Surgery, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. (5)Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Genome Research Center, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, 
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Gastric carcinoma is one of the most common malignancies and the third highest
cause of global cancer-related death. Notch2 receptor intracellular domain
(N2IC), the activated form of Notch2 receptor, enhances gastric carcinogenesis.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) act as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors in tumorigenesis 
and cross-talk with Notch pathways. Herein, microRNA-23b (miR-23b) was identified
as a Notch2 receptor-related miRNA and its role in gastric carcinogenesis was
investigated. Levels of miR-23b in stomach adenocarcinoma samples were
down-regulated, whereas those of Notch2 receptor, v-ets erythroblastosis virus
E26 oncogene homolog 1 (Ets1), and E2F1 transcripts were up-regulated. Results
also showed that N2IC down-regulated miR-23b expression in gastric cancer cells
through up-regulating E2F1. The miR-23b inhibited gastric tumorigenesis including
growth, viability, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and abilities of colony
formation, migration, invasion, and tumorsphere formation. Mechanistically,
miR-23b suppressed tumor progression and pluripotency gene expression and
affected tumorsphere ultra-structure in gastric cancer cells via targeting Notch2
receptor or Ets1. Furthermore, miR-23b diminished the xenografted tumor growth
and lung metastasis of SC-M1 gastric cancer cells through Notch2 pathway. Our
results suggest that Notch2 pathway and miR-23b interplay in a reciprocal
regulation loop in gastric cancer cells and this axis plays an important role in 
gastric carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4627232
PMID: 26041881  [PubMed - in process]


50. Mol Cancer. 2015 Jun 4;14:112. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0389-y.

HGF and TGFß1 differently influenced Wwox regulatory function on Twist program
for mesenchymal-epithelial transition in bone metastatic versus parental breast
carcinoma cells.

Bendinelli P(1), Maroni P(2), Matteucci E(3), Desiderio MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per la Salute, Molecular Pathology
Laboratory, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy.
paola.bendinelli@unimi.it. (2)Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, IRCCS, Milano, Italy.
paola.maroni@grupposandonato.it. (3)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per la
Salute, Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano,
Italy. emanuela.matteucci@unimi.it. (4)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per la 
Salute, Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano,
Italy. a.desiderio@unimi.it.

BACKGROUND: Much effort has been devoted to determining how metastatic cells and 
microenvironment reciprocally interact. However, the role of biological stimuli
of microenvironment in controlling molecular events in bone metastasis from
breast carcinoma for mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) is largely unknown. 
The purpose of the present paper was to clarify (1) the influence of
hepatocyte-growth factor (HGF) and transforming growth factorß1 (TGFß1) on the
phenotype of bone-metastatic 1833 and parental MDA-MB231 cells; (2) the
hierarchic response of Twist and Snail controlled by Wwox co-factor, that might
be critical for the control of 1833-adhesive properties via E-cadherin.
METHODS: We studied under HGF and TGFß1 the gene profiles-responsible for
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), versus the revertant MET
phenotype-making the correspondence with 1833 morphology and the relation to
HGF-dependent control of TGFß1 signalling. In particular, the activation of Twist
program and the underlying molecular mechanisms were investigated, considering
the role of endogenous and exogenous Wwox with siRNAWWOX and the expression
vector transfection, to clarify whether Twist affected E-cadherin transactivation
through a network of transcription factors and regulators.
RESULTS: HGF and TGFß1 oppositely affected the expression of Wwox in 1833 cells. 
Under HGF, endogenous Wwox decreased concomitant with Twist access to nuclei and 
its phosphorylation via PI3K/Akt pathway. Twist activated by HGF did not
influence the gene profile through an E-box mechanism, but participated in the
interplay of PPAR<U+03B3>/Ets1/NF-kB-transcription factors, triggering E-cadherin
transactivation. Altogether, HGF conferred MET phenotype to 1833 cells, even if
this was transient since followed by TGFß1-signalling activation. TGFß1 induced
Snail in both the cell lines, with E-cadherin down-regulation only in 1833 cells 
because in MDA-MB231 cells E-cadherin was practically absent. Exogenous Wwox
activated metastatic HIF-1, with Twist as co-factor.
CONCLUSIONS: HGF and TGFß1 of bone-metastasis microenvironment acted
co-ordinately, influencing non redundant pathways regulated by Twist program or
Snail-transcription factor, with reversible MET switch. This process implicated
different roles for Wwox in the various steps of the metastatic process including
colonization, with microenvironmental/exogenous Wwox that activated HIF-1,
important for E-cadherin expression. Interfering with the Twist program by
targeting the pre-metastatic niche stimuli could be an effective anti-bone
metastasis therapy.

PMCID: PMC4453100
PMID: 26041563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Jun;94(22):e923. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000923.

Impact of V-ets Erythroblastosis Virus E26 Oncogene Homolog 1 Gene Polymorphisms 
Upon Susceptibility to Autoimmune Diseases: A Meta-Analysis.

Zhou Y(1), Liu M, Li J, Hashmi F, Mao Z, Zhang N, Zhou L, Lv W, Zheng J, Nie X,
Li C.

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biotechnology (YZ), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
China; Department of Physiology and Biophysics (ML, FH), Virginia Commonwealth
University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA; Nanfang Hospital (JL, WL, XN, CL),
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou; Department of Intensive Care Unit (ZM),
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing; First College of Clinical Medicine (NZ),
Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China; Department of 
Medicine (LZ), Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA; The Eye Hospital
(JZ), Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou; and School of Traditional Chinese
Medicine (XN, CL), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

V-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS1) is recognized as a
gene of risk to autoimmune diseases (ADs). Two single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in ETS1 (rs1128334 G>A and rs10893872 T>C) were considered associated with
ADs risk. However, the results remain conflicting.We performed a meta-analysis to
evaluate more precise estimations of any relationship. We searched PubMed,
OvidSP, and Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure databases (papers published
prior to September 12, 2014) and extracted data from eligible studies.
Meta-analysis was performed using the STATA 12.0 software. Random effect model or
fixed effect model were chosen according to the study heterogeneities.A total of 
11 studies including 7359 cases (9660 controls) for rs1128334 and 8 studies
including 5419 cases (7122 controls) for rs10893872 were involved in this
meta-analysis. Overall, our results showed that there were significant
associations for rs1128334 with AD risk in 5 genetic models, both in pooled
analysis and in systemic lupus erythematous (SLE) subgroup, and in 3 genetic
models of the uveitis subgroup. Although for rs10893872, the results showed that 
there were significant associations in allele model both in pooled analysis and
in SLE subgroup. As a conclusion, this meta-analysis demonstrated that these 2
SNPs (rs1128334 and rs10893872) in ETS1 were associated with ADs risk.

PMCID: PMC4616355
PMID: 26039128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS One. 2015 May 4;10(5):e0126385. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126385.
eCollection 2015.

The +37 kb Cebpa Enhancer Is Critical for Cebpa Myeloid Gene Expression and
Contains Functional Sites that Bind SCL, GATA2, C/EBPa, PU.1, and Additional Ets 
Factors.

Cooper S(1), Guo H(1), Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

The murine Cebpa gene contains an evolutionarily conserved 453 bp enhancer
located at +37 kb that, together with its promoter, directs expression to myeloid
progenitors and to long-term hematopoietic stem cells in transgenic mice. In
human acute myeloid leukemia cases, the enhancer lacks point mutations but binds 
the RUNX1-ETO oncoprotein. The enhancer contains the H3K4me1 and H3K27Ac histone 
modifications, denoting an active enhancer, at progressively increasing levels as
long-term hematopoietic stem cells transition to granulocyte-monocyte
progenitors. We previously identified four enhancer sites that bind RUNX1 and
demonstrated that their integrity is required for maximal enhancer activity in
32Dcl3 myeloid cells. The +37 kb Cebpa enhancer also contains C/EBP, Ets factor, 
Myb, GATA, and E-box consensus sites conserved in the human +42 kb CEBPA
enhancer. Mutation of the two C/EBP, seven Ets, one Myb, two GATA, or two E-box
sites reduces activity of an enhancer-promoter reporter in 32Dcl3 cells. In 293T 
gel shift assays, exogenous C/EBPa binds both C/EBP sites, c-Myb binds the Myb
site, PU.1 binds the second Ets site, PU.1, Fli-1, ERG, and Ets1 bind the sixth
Ets site, GATA2 binds both GATA sites, and SCL binds the second E-box. Endogenous
hematopoietic RUNX1, PU.1, Fli-1, ERG, C/EBPa, GATA2, and SCL were previously
shown to bind the enhancer, and we find that endogenous PU.1 binds the second Ets
site in 32Dcl3 cells. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we developed 32Dcl3 lines in which the
wild-type enhancer alleles are replaced with a variant mutant in the seven Ets
sites. These lines have 20-fold reduced Cebpa mRNA when cultured in IL-3 or
G-CSF, demonstrating a critical requirement for enhancer integrity for optimal
Cebpa expression. In addition, these results indicate that the +37 kb Cebpa
enhancer is the focus of multiple regulatory transcriptional pathways that impact
its expression during normal hematopoiesis and potentially during myeloid
transformation.

PMCID: PMC4418761
PMID: 25938608  [PubMed - in process]


53. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jul;45(7):1934-45. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445286. Epub 2015 Jun 
18.

TLR9-induced miR-155 and Ets-1 decrease expression of CD1d on B cells in SLE.

Liu F(1), Fan H(2), Ren D(1), Dong G(1), Hu E(1), Ji J(1), Hou Y(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Division of
Immunology, Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, P. R. China. (2)School
of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, P. R. China. (3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanjing,
P. R. China.

B cells present lipid antigens to CD1d-restricted invariant natural killer T
(iNKT) cells to maintain autoimmune tolerance, and this process is disrupted in
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Inflammation may inhibit CD1d expression to
exacerbate the pathology of lupus. However, how inflammation regulates CD1d
expression on B cells is unclear in SLE. In the present study, we showed that the
surface expression of CD1d on B cells from SLE mice was decreased and that
stimulation of inflammatory responses through TLR9 decreased the membrane and
total CD1d levels of CD1d on B cells. Moreover, inflammation-related microRNA-155
(miR-155) negatively correlated with the expression of CD1d in B cells. miR-155
directly targeted the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of CD1d upon TLR9
activation in both humans and mice. The inhibitory effects of miR-155 on CD1d
expression in B cells impaired their antigen-presenting capacity to iNKT cells.
In addition, Ets-1, a susceptibility gene of SLE, also directly regulated the
expression of the CD1d gene at the transcriptional level. These findings provide 
new insight into the mechanism underlying decreased CD1d expression on B cells in
SLE, suggesting that inhibition of inflammation may increase CD1d expression in B
cells to ameliorate SLE via modulating iNKT cells.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25929465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jun 12;461(4):618-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.04.075. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

MicroRNA-129-5p inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma cell metastasis and invasion
via targeting ETS1.

Ma N(1), Chen F(2), Shen SL(1), Chen W(1), Chen LZ(2), Su Q(3), Zhang LJ(2), Bi
J(2), Zeng WT(2), Li W(2), Huang XH(4), Wang Q(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pancreato-Billary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China. (2)General Surgical Laboratory, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(3)Animal Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, 510080, China. (4)General Surgical Laboratory, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China. Electronic address:
hxiaohui2006@126.com. (5)Department of Pancreato-Billary Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
Electronic address: wangqian_dr@126.com.

MiR-129-5p is deregulated in various human cancers and has been associated with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression. However, the underlying mechanisms of
miR-129-5p involvement in the development and progression of HCC and the effects 
of miR-129-5p deregulation on the clinical characteristics observed in HCC
patients remain poorly understood. We therefore investigated the correlation
between low miR-129-5p expression and vascular invasion, intrahepatic metastasis,
and poor patient survival. Ectopic restoration of miR-129-5p expression in HCC
cells suppressed cellular migration and invasion and the expression of v-ets
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS1), while inhibition of
endogenous miR-129-5p caused an increase in these parameters. We identified the
ETS1 gene as a novel direct target of miR-129-5p. SiRNA-mediated ETS1 knockdown
rescued the effects of anti-miR-129-5p inhibitor in HCC cell lines, while the
effects of miR-129-5p overexpression were partially phenocopied in the knockdown 
model. In addition, miR-129-5p levels inversely correlated with those of ETS1 in 
HCC cells and tissues. Taken together, our findings indicate an important role
for miR-129-5p in the molecular etiology of invasive HCC and suggest that
miR-129-5p could have potential therapeutic applications in HCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25912876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Biol. 2015 Nov 15;407(2):300-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.04.012. Epub 2015 
Apr 23.

The transcription factors Ets1 and Sox10 interact during murine melanocyte
development.

Saldana-Caboverde A(1), Perera EM(1), Watkins-Chow DE(2), Hansen NF(3),
Vemulapalli M(4), Mullikin JC(5); NISC Comparative Sequencing Program(4), Pavan
WJ(2), Kos L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami,
FL, USA. (2)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (3)Comparative Genomics
Analysis Unit, CGCGB, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD,
USA. (4)NIH Intramural Sequencing Center, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Rockville, MD, USA. (5)Comparative Genomics Analysis Unit, CGCGB,
National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA; NIH Intramural
Sequencing Center, National Human Genome Research Institute, Rockville, MD, USA. 
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami,
FL, USA; Biomolecular Sciences Institute, Florida International University,
Miami, FL. Electronic address: kosl@fiu.edu.

Melanocytes, the pigment-producing cells, arise from multipotent neural crest
(NC) cells during embryogenesis. Many genes required for melanocyte development
were identified using mouse pigmentation mutants. The variable spotting mouse
pigmentation mutant arose spontaneously at the Jackson Laboratory. We identified 
a G-to-A nucleotide transition in exon 3 of the Ets1 gene in variable spotting,
which results in a missense G102E mutation. Homozygous variable spotting mice
exhibit sporadic white spotting. Similarly, mice carrying a targeted deletion of 
Ets1 exhibit hypopigmentation; nevertheless, the function of Ets1 in melanocyte
development is unknown. The transcription factor Ets1 is widely expressed in
developing organs and tissues, including the NC. In the chick, Ets1 is required
for the expression of Sox10, a transcription factor critical for the development 
of various NC derivatives, including melanocytes. We show that Ets1 is required
early for murine NC cell and melanocyte precursor survival in vivo. Given the
importance of Ets1 for Sox10 expression in the chick, we investigated a potential
genetic interaction between these genes by comparing the hypopigmentation
phenotypes of single and double heterozygous mice. The incidence of
hypopigmentation in double heterozygotes was significantly greater than in single
heterozygotes. The area of hypopigmentation in double heterozygotes was
significantly larger than would be expected from the addition of the areas of
hypopigmentation of single heterozygotes, suggesting that Ets1 and Sox10 interact
synergistically in melanocyte development. Since Sox10 is also essential for
enteric ganglia development, we examined the distal colons of Ets1 null mutants
and found a significant decrease in enteric innervation, which was exacerbated by
Sox10 heterozygosity. At the molecular level, Ets1 was found to activate an
enhancer critical for Sox10 expression in NC-derived structures. Furthermore,
enhancer activation was significantly inhibited by the variable spotting
mutation. Together, these results suggest that Ets1 and Sox10 interact to promote
proper melanocyte and enteric ganglia development from the NC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4618791 [Available on 2016-11-15]
PMID: 25912689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jul;405(1-2):115-24. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2403-5. Epub 
2015 Apr 17.

MicroRNA-221/222 regulate ox-LDL-induced endothelial apoptosis via Ets-1/p21
inhibition.

Qin B(1), Cao Y, Yang H, Xiao B, Lu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, No. 600 Tianhe Road, Guangzhou, 510630, Guangdong, People's Republic 
of China.

Endothelial cells (ECs) apoptosis induced by oxidized low-density lipoprotein
(ox-LDL) is thought to play an essential role in atherosclerosis. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are a class of short non-coding RNAs, acting as posttranscriptional
regulators of protein-coding genes involved in vascular cell biology. MiRNA-221
and miRNA-222 (miR-221/222) are known to be involved in the regulation of
endothelial inflammation and angiogenesis. However, the function of miR-221/222
in ox-LDL-induced ECs apoptosis and atherosclerosis is still unknown. Here, we
showed that miR-221/222 expression was markedly down-regulated in ox-LDL-induced 
apoptotic human umbilical cord vein endothelial cells. MiR-221/222 inhibition
enhanced apoptosis in ECs, whereas over-expression of miR-221/222 could partly
alleviate apoptotic cell death mediated by ox-LDL through suppression of Ets-1
and its downstream target p21. These findings suggest that manipulation of the
miR-221/222-Ets-1-p21 pathway may offer a novel strategy for treatment of
endothelial apoptosis and atherosclerosis.

PMID: 25893733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cell Commun Signal. 2015 Feb 19;13:12. doi: 10.1186/s12964-015-0089-7.

Comparison of MAPK specificity across the ETS transcription factor family
identifies a high-affinity ERK interaction required for ERG function in prostate 
cells.

Selvaraj N(1), Kedage V(2), Hollenhorst PC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, 1001 E 3rd St,
Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA. nagaselv@indiana.edu. (2)Medical Sciences, Indiana
University School of Medicine, 1001 E 3rd St, Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA.
vkedage@indiana.edu. (3)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
1001 E 3rd St, Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA. pchollen@indiana.edu.

BACKGROUND: The RAS/MAPK signaling pathway can regulate gene expression by
phosphorylating and altering the function of some, but not all, ETS transcription
factors. ETS family transcription factors bind similar DNA sequences and can
compete for genomic binding sites. However, MAPK regulation varies across the ETS
family. Therefore, changing the ETS factor bound to a cis-regulatory element can 
alter MAPK regulation of gene expression. To understand RAS/MAPK regulated gene
expression programs, comprehensive knowledge of the ETS family members that are
MAPK targets and relative MAPK targeting efficiency across the family is needed.
RESULTS: An in vitro kinase assay was used to rank-order 27 human ETS family
transcription factors based on phosphorylation by ERK2, JNK1, and p38a. Many
novel MAPK targets and specificities were identified within the ETS family,
including the identification of the prostate cancer oncoprotein ERG as a specific
target of ERK2. ERK2 phosphorylation of ERG S215 required a DEF docking domain
and was necessary for ERG to activate transcription of cell migration genes and
promote prostate cell migration. The ability of ERK2 to bind ERG with higher
affinity than ETS1 provided a potential molecular explanation for why ERG
overexpression drives migration of prostate cells with low levels of RAS/ERK
signaling, while ETS1 has a similar function only when RAS/ERK signaling is high.
CONCLUSIONS: The rank ordering of ETS transcription factors as MAPK targets
provides an important resource for understanding ETS proteins as mediators of
MAPK signaling. This is emphasized by the difference in rank order of ERG and
ETS1, which allows these factors to have distinct roles based on the level of
RAS/ERK signaling present in the cell.

PMCID: PMC4338625
PMID: 25885538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMC Mol Biol. 2015 Mar 19;16:8. doi: 10.1186/s12867-015-0038-4.

An Rb1-dependent amplification loop between Ets1 and Zeb1 is evident in thymocyte
differentiation and invasive lung adenocarcinoma.

Dean KC(1), Huang L(2,)(3), Chen Y(4,)(5), Lu X(6), Liu Y(7,)(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville
Health Sciences Center, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Blvd., Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
kcdean2442@gmail.com. (2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Blvd.,
Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. lihuang@zju.edu.cn. (3)College of Agriculture and
Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, 310058, China.
lihuang@zju.edu.cn. (4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Blvd.,
Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. sandytur22@gmail.com. (5)The Second Affiliated
Hospital, Central South University Xiangya School of Medicine, Changsha, Hunan
Province, 410011, China. sandytur22@gmail.com. (6)Department of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, 301 E. Muhammad
Ali Blvd., Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. xiaoqin.lu@louisville.edu. (7)Department
of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville Health Sciences
Center, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Blvd., Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
y0liu016@louisville.edu. (8)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of
Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
y0liu016@louisville.edu. (9)Birth Defects Center, University of Louisville Health
Sciences Center, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. y0liu016@louisville.edu.

BACKGROUND: Ras pathway mutation leads to induction and Erk phosphorylation and
activation of the Ets1 transcription factor. Ets1 in turn induces cyclin E and
cyclin dependent kinase (cdk) 2 to drive cell cycle progression. Ets1 also
induces expression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) transcription
factor Zeb1, and thereby links Ras mutation to EMT, which is thought to drive
tumor invasion. Ras pathway mutations are detected by the Rb1 tumor suppression
pathway, and mutation or inactivation of the Rb1 pathway is required for EMT.
RESULTS: We examined linkage between Rb1, Ets1 and Zeb1. We found that an Rb1-E2F
complex binds the Ets1 promoter and constitutively limits Ets1 expression. But,
Rb1 repression of Zeb1 provides the major impact of Rb1 on Ets1 expression. We
link Rb1 repression of Zeb1 to induction of miR-200 family members, which in turn
target Ets1 mRNA. These findings suggest that Ets1 and Zeb1 comprise an
amplification loop that is dependent upon miR-200 and regulated by Rb1. Thus,
induction of Ets1 when the Rb1 pathway is lost may contribute to deregulated cell
cycle progression through Ets1 induction of cyclin E and cdk2. Consistent with
such an amplification loop, we correlate expression of Ets1 and Zeb1 in mouse and
human lung adenocarcinoma. In addition we demonstrate that Ets1 expression in
thymocytes is also dependent upon Zeb1.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results provide evidence of an Rb1-dependent
Ets1-Zeb1 amplification loop in thymocyte differentiation and tumor invasion.

PMCID: PMC4364651
PMID: 25880398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Front Immunol. 2015 Mar 30;6:140. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00140. eCollection
2015.

Regulated Expression of miR-155 is Required for iNKT Cell Development.

Burocchi A(1), Pittoni P(1), Tili E(2), Rigoni A(1), Costinean S(3), Croce CM(3),
Colombo MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular
Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS "Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori" , Milan , Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, Wexner
Medical Center and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University ,
Columbus, OH , USA ; Department of Anesthesiology, Wexner Medical Center, The
Ohio State University , Columbus, OH , USA. (3)Department of Molecular Virology, 
Immunology and Medical Genetics, Wexner Medical Center and Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University , Columbus, OH , USA.

Invariant natural killer<U+2009>T cells (iNKT cells) are CD1d-restricted, lipid
antigen-reactive T lymphocytes with immunoregulatory functions. iNKT cell
development in the thymus proceeds through subsequent stages, defined by the
expression of CD44 and NK1.1, and is dictated by a unique gene expression
program, including microRNAs. Here, we investigated whether miR-155, a microRNA
involved in differentiation of most hematopoietic cells, played any role in iNKT 
cell development. To this end, we assessed the expression of miR-155 along iNKT
cell maturation in the thymus, and studied the effects of miR-155 on iNKT cell
development using Lck-miR-155 transgenic mice, which over express miR-155 in<U+2009>T
cell lineage under the lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (Lck)
promoter. We show that miR-155 is expressed by newly selected immature wild-type 
iNKT cells and turned off along iNKT cells differentiation. In transgenic mice,
miR-155 over-expression resulted in a substantial block of iNKT cell maturation
at Stage 2, in the thymus toward an overall reduction of peripheral iNKT cells,
unlike mainstream T cells. Furthermore, the effects of miR-155 over-expression on
iNKT cell differentiation were cell autonomous. Finally, we identified Ets1 and
ITK transcripts as relevant targets of miR-155 in iNKT cell differentiation.
Altogether, these results demonstrate that a tight control of miR-155 expression 
is required for the development of iNKT cells.

PMCID: PMC4378312
PMID: 25870598  [PubMed]


60. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 May 7;96(5):731-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.03.002. Epub
2015 Apr 9.

Lupus Risk Variant Increases pSTAT1 Binding and Decreases ETS1 Expression.

Lu X(1), Zoller EE(2), Weirauch MT(3), Wu Z(4), Namjou B(2), Williams AH(5),
Ziegler JT(5), Comeau ME(5), Marion MC(5), Glenn SB(6), Adler A(6), Shen N(7),
Nath SK(6), Stevens AM(8), Freedman BI(9), Tsao BP(10), Jacob CO(11), Kamen
DL(12), Brown EE(13), Gilkeson GS(12), Alarcón GS(14), Reveille JD(15), Anaya
JM(16), James JA(17), Sivils KL(6), Criswell LA(18), Vilá LM(19),
Alarcón-Riquelme ME(20), Petri M(21), Scofield RH(22), Kimberly RP(14),
Ramsey-Goldman R(23), Joo YB(24), Choi J(24), Bae SC(24), Boackle SA(25), Graham 
DC(26), Vyse TJ(26), Guthridge JM(6), Gaffney PM(6), Langefeld CD(5), Kelly
JA(6), Greis KD(27), Kaufman KM(28), Harley JB(28), Kottyan LC(29).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Graduate Program, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
(2)Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (3)Center for Autoimmune Genomics and 
Etiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229,
USA; Divisions of Biomedical Informatics and Developmental Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (4)Division of
Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
45229, USA. (5)Center for Public Health Genomics and Department of Biostatistical
Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. (6)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research
Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(7)Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; Joint Molecular Rheumatology
Laboratory, Institute of Health Sciences and Shanghai Renji Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine in collaboration with Shanghai Institutes
for Biological Sciences and Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, PRC.
(8)Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, WA 98101, USA; Division of Rheumatology, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (9)Section on
Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Wake
Forest Baptist Medical Center, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. (10)Division of
Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. (11)Department of
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90089, USA. (12)Division of Rheumatology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. (13)Division of Molecular and Cellular
Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL 35294, USA; Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. (14)Department of Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. (15)Rheumatology and Clinical
Immunogenetics, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (16)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research, Universidad del Rosario,
110010 Bogota, Colombia. (17)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, 
Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA; Department of
Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104,
USA. (18)Rosalind Russell / Ephraim P. Engleman Rheumatology Research Center,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94117, USA. (19)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, School of
Medicine, University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR 00936,
USA. (20)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical
Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA; Center for Genomics and
Oncological Research, Pfizer-University of Granada-Junta de Andalucia, Granada
18016, Spain. (21)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (22)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology
Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, 
USA; Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA; Oklahoma City Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (23)Division of Rheumatology, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (24)Department of
Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul 133-792, 
Korea. (25)Division of Rheumatology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado, 
Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (26)Divisions of Genetics and Molecular Medicine and
Immunology, King's College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK. (27)Cancer
Biology, University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(28)Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; Cincinnati Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45220, USA. (29)Center for Autoimmune Genomics and
Etiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229,
USA; Cincinnati Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45220, USA.
Electronic address: leah.kottyan@cchmc.org.

Genetic variants at chromosomal region 11q23.3, near the gene ETS1, have been
associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), or lupus, in independent
cohorts of Asian ancestry. Several recent studies have implicated ETS1 as a
critical driver of immune cell function and differentiation, and mice deficient
in ETS1 develop an SLE-like autoimmunity. We performed a fine-mapping study of
14,551 subjects from multi-ancestral cohorts by starting with genotyped variants 
and imputing to all common variants spanning ETS1. By constructing genetic models
via frequentist and Bayesian association methods, we identified 16 variants that 
are statistically likely to be causal. We functionally assessed each of these
variants on the basis of their likelihood of affecting transcription factor
binding, miRNA binding, or chromatin state. Of the four variants that we
experimentally examined, only rs6590330 differentially binds lysate from B cells.
Using mass spectrometry, we found more binding of the transcription factor signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) to DNA near the risk allele
of rs6590330 than near the non-risk allele. Immunoblot analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation of pSTAT1 in B cells heterozygous for rs6590330 confirmed
that the risk allele increased binding to the active form of STAT1. Analysis with
expression quantitative trait loci indicated that the risk allele of rs6590330 is
associated with decreased ETS1 expression in Han Chinese, but not other ancestral
cohorts. We propose a model in which the risk allele of rs6590330 is associated
with decreased ETS1 expression and increases SLE risk by enhancing the binding of
pSTAT1.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4570281
PMID: 25865496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Gene Expr Patterns. 2015 Mar;17(2):87-97. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2015.03.003. Epub
2015 Mar 21.

Expession patterns of mesenchyme specification genes in two distantly related
echinoids, Glyptocidaris crenularis and Echinocardium cordatum.

Yamazaki A(1), Minokawa T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Marine Biology, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku
University, 9 Sakamoto, Asamushi, Aomori, Aomori 039-3501, Japan. (2)Research
Center for Marine Biology, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 9
Sakamoto, Asamushi, Aomori, Aomori 039-3501, Japan. Electronic address:
takuya@m.tohoku.ac.jp.

The molecular mechanism of the larval mesenchyme cell specification in echinoids 
has been well analyzed. However, most of the data have been provided by studies
of a single group of echinoids, the order Camarodonta. Little is known about this
mechanism in other echinoid orders. We examined the expression patterns of
mesenchyme specification genes, micro1, hesC, alx1, tbr, ets1, cyp1, and gcm, in 
the two non-Camarodonta echinoids, Glyptocidaris crenularis and Echinocardium
cordatum. We found that the expression patterns of some genes contained
characteristics that were unique to one of the species; others were shared by the
two species. Some of the shared characteristics of G.<U+2009>crenularis and E.<U+2009>cordatum 
are not found in the species belonging to Camarodonta, suggesting the derived
status of this order. The expression of ets1 in E.<U+2009>cordatum aboral ectoderm is
one of the molecular level modifications possibly related to an evolutionarily
novel larval structure, the posterior process. Our results suggest that a
considerable number of modifications in the mesenchyme specification mechanisms
have been introduced during the echinoid evolution.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25801498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Haematologica. 2015 Jul;100(7):e275-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.124305. Epub
2015 Mar 20.

Post-transplant molecularly defined Burkitt lymphomas are frequently MYC-negative
and characterized by the 11q-gain/loss pattern.

Ferreiro JF(1), Morscio J(2), Dierickx D(3), Marcelis L(2), Verhoef G(3),
Vandenberghe P(1), Tousseyn T(2), Wlodarska I(4).

Author information: 
(1)KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Center for Human Genetics, Belgium. (2)KU
Leuven, University of Leuven, Translational Cell and Tissue Research and KU
Leuven, University Hospitals Leuven, Department of Pathology, Belgium. (3)KU
Leuven, University Hospitals Leuven, Department of Hematology, Belgium. (4)KU
Leuven, University of Leuven, Center for Human Genetics, Belgium
iwona.wlodarska@uzleuven.be.

PMCID: PMC4486241
PMID: 25795716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Biol Markers. 2015 May 26;30(2):e226-33. doi: 10.5301/jbm.5000134.

Identification of biomarkers for the prognosis of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma with miRNA microarray data.

Wang S(1), Zhao Y, Li D, Zhu L, Shen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Shanghai - PR China.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to explore the mechanism of chemotherapy
resistance and to screen biomarkers of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
METHODS: MicroRNA (miRNA) expression profile data for GSE38781 were downloaded
from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. Differentially expressed miRNAs
between short-overall survival (OS) and long-OS patients were screened with the
limma package in R. The function and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of
the miRNA target genes were further investigated. Finally, multivariate
statistical analysis was performed to verify the significant miRNAs obtained in
our work.
RESULTS: In total, 66 miRNAs were identified to be differentially expressed. Gene
ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analysis showed that 163 miRNA target genes 
were mainly enriched in heart function, cancer development and angiogenesis. Ten 
nodes, including TGFBR1, TGFBR2, ACVR1 and SHC1, were found to be hub nodes in
the PPI network. Multivariate statistical analysis showed 8 of the most
significant miRNAs could completely distinguish the 2 groups of samples. Seven
target genes (i.e., RET, ETS1, RHOA, NUMB, TIAM, ITGA5 and YY1) of the 8
significant miRNAs were found to be associated with control of cell fate
decisions, T-cell lymphoma invasion and angiogenesis enhancement.
CONCLUSIONS: The heart function-related pathway, cell cycle, immune system and
angiogenesis may be dysregulated in patients with poorer prognosis. The
significant nodes (e.g., TGFBR1, TGFBR2, ACVR1 and SHC1) in the PPI network may
be potential biomarkers for predicting outcomes for patients with pancreatic
cancer. The significant miRNAs and gene targets may be potential biomarkers or
therapeutic targets for PDAC.

PMID: 25791160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;21(18):4184-93. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2112. 
Epub 2015 Mar 16.

SLFN11 Is a Transcriptional Target of EWS-FLI1 and a Determinant of Drug Response
in Ewing Sarcoma.

Tang SW(1), Bilke S(2), Cao L(2), Murai J(1), Sousa FG(3), Yamade M(1), Rajapakse
V(1), Varma S(1), Helman LJ(4), Khan J(2), Meltzer PS(2), Pommier Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Developmental Therapeutics Branch, NCI, 
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. (2)Genetics Branch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Developmental Therapeutics Branch, NCI, 
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. CETROGEN, PPGFARM, UFMS, Campo Grande, Brazil.
(4)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland. (5)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Developmental Therapeutics
Branch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. pommier@nih.gov.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;21(18):4033-4.

PURPOSE: SLFN11 was identified as a critical determinant of response to
DNA-targeted therapies by analyzing gene expression and drug sensitivity of
NCI-60 and CCLE datasets. However, how SLFN11 is regulated in cancer cells
remained unknown. Ewing sarcoma, which is characterized by the chimeric
transcription factor EWS-FLI1, has notably high SLFN11 expression, leading us to 
investigate whether EWS-FLI1 drives SLFN11 expression and the role of SLFN11 in
the drug response of Ewing sarcoma cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Binding sites of EWS-FLI1 on the SLFN11 promoter were
analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing and promoter-luciferase
reporter analyses. The relationship between SLFN11 and EWS-FLI1 were further
examined in EWS-FLI1-knockdown or -overexpressing cells and in clinical tumor
samples.
RESULTS: EWS-FLI1 binds near the transcription start site of SLFN11 promoter and 
acts as a positive regulator of SLFN11 expression in Ewing sarcoma cells.
EWS-FLI1-mediated SLFN11 expression is responsible for high sensitivity of Ewing 
sarcoma to camptothecin and combinations of PARP inhibitors with temozolomide.
Importantly, Ewing sarcoma patients with higher SLFN11 expression showed better
tumor-free survival rate. The correlated expression between SLFN11 and FLI1
extends to leukemia, pediatric, colon, breast, and prostate cancers. In addition,
expression of other ETS members correlates with SLFN11 in NCI-60 and CCLE
datasets, and molecular experiments demonstrate that ETS1 acts as a positive
regulator for SLFN11 expression in breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results imply the emerging relevance of SLFN11 as an ETS
transcription factor response gene and for therapeutic response to topoisomerase 
I inhibitors and temozolomide-PARP inhibitor combinations in ETS-activated
cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4573368 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 25779942  [PubMed - in process]


65. Biomed Pharmacother. 2015 Mar;70:64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.01.012. Epub
2015 Jan 12.

miR-377 functions as a tumor suppressor in human clear cell renal cell carcinoma 
by targeting ETS1.

Wang R(1), Ma Y(2), Yu D(2), Zhao J(3), Ma P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Daqing Oilfield General Hospital, Daqing,
Heilongjiang 163001, China. Electronic address: 15004598666@163.com.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Daqing Oilfield General Hospital, Daqing,
Heilongjiang 163001, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Daqing Oilfield
General Hospital, Daqing, Heilongjiang 163001, China.

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common form of neoplasm
occurring in the adult kidney. Although significant advances have been made in
treatment for ccRCC, a significant percent of patients have no benefit from
currently available treatment option. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been reported to
play central roles in regulating tumor progression, and are being explored as
potentially more effective therapies and diagnostic tools for various cancers.
The transcription factor E26 transformation specific-1 (ETS1) is believed to be
intimately involved in tumor progression, and is frequently upregulated in
tumors, including ccRCC. However, few studies have investigated the implications 
of ETS1 in ccRCC, and no studies have investigated the dysregulated mechanisms
responsible for aberrant ETS1 expression in ccRCC. We used databases, clinical
samples and target prediction algorithms to investigate aberrant miR-377
expression and potential targets in ccRCC. Our results indicate that miR-377 is
downregulated in ccRCC, and that miR-377 can regulate the expression of ETS1.
Further, using cell cycle analysis, MTT, luciferase and knockdown experiments, we
found evidence to suggest that ETS1 is central in the development of the
proliferative, metastatic and invasive phenotype of ccRCC cells. Furthermore,
miR-377 was found to directly downregulate the expression of ETS1 and reduce the 
ability of ccRCC cells to proliferate, migrate and invade. As miR-377 was found
to be differentially expressed in ccRCC, and in light of the apparent central
role of ETS1 in tumor development, our results indicate that miR-377 could be
useful for ccRCC diagnostics, prognostics and therapeutics.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25776481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 16;5:9170. doi: 10.1038/srep09170.

ANGPTL2 increases bone metastasis of breast cancer cells through enhancing CXCR4 
signaling.

Masuda T(1), Endo M(2), Yamamoto Y(3), Odagiri H(4), Kadomatsu T(2), Nakamura
T(1), Tanoue H(1), Ito H(1), Yugami M(1), Miyata K(2), Morinaga J(2), Horiguchi
H(2), Motokawa I(2), Terada K(2), Morioka MS(5), Manabe I(5), Iwase H(6), Mizuta 
H(7), Oike Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan [2]
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (2)Department of
Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular-Targeting Therapy for Breast Cancer, Kumamoto University Hospital,
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (4)1]
Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto
University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan [2] Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan [3] Institute of Resource
Development and Analysis, Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto
860-8556, Japan. (5)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(6)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (8)1]
Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto
University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan [2] Core Research for 
Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology Agency, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2015;5:9789.

Bone metastasis of breast cancer cells is a major concern, as it causes increased
morbidity and mortality in patients. Bone tissue-derived CXCL12 preferentially
recruits breast cancer cells expressing CXCR4 to bone metastatic sites. Thus,
understanding how CXCR4 expression is regulated in breast cancer cells could
suggest approaches to decrease bone metastasis of breast tumor cells. Here, we
show that tumor cell-derived angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) increases
responsiveness of breast cancer cells to CXCL12 by promoting up-regulation of
CXCR4 in those cells. In addition, we used a xenograft mouse model established by
intracardiac injection of tumor cells to show that ANGPTL2 knockdown in breast
cancer cells attenuates tumor cell responsiveness to CXCL12 by decreasing CXCR4
expression in those cells, thereby decreasing bone metastasis. Finally, we found 
that ANGPTL2 and CXCR4 expression levels within primary tumor tissues from breast
cancer patients are positively correlated. We conclude that tumor cell-derived
ANGPTL2 may increase bone metastasis by enhancing breast tumor cell
responsiveness to CXCL12 signaling through up-regulation of tumor cell CXCR4
expression. These findings may suggest novel therapeutic approaches to treat
metastatic breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4360633
PMID: 25773070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Mar 4;7(1):19. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0057-5. eCollection
2015.

Replicative senescence is associated with nuclear reorganization and with DNA
methylation at specific transcription factor binding sites.

Hänzelmann S(1), Beier F(2), Gusmao EG(1), Koch CM(3), Hummel S(2), Charapitsa
I(4), Joussen S(3), Benes V(5), Brümmendorf TH(2), Reid G(4), Costa IG(1), Wagner
W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research (IZKF), RWTH University Medical
School, Aachen, Germany ; Institute for Biomedical Technology - Cell Biology,
RWTH University Medical School, Aachen, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology,
Oncology, Hemostaseology and Stem Cell Transplantation, RWTH Aachen University
Medical School, Aachen, Germany. (3)Institute for Biomedical Technology - Cell
Biology, RWTH University Medical School, Aachen, Germany ; Helmholtz-Institute
for Biomedical Engineering, Stem Cell Biology and Cellular Engineering, RWTH
University Medical School, Aachen, Germany. (4)Institute for Molecular Biology,
Mainz, Germany. (5)Genomics Core Facility, European Molecular Biology Laboratory 
(EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Primary cells enter replicative senescence after a limited number of 
cell divisions. This process needs to be considered in cell culture experiments, 
and it is particularly important for regenerative medicine. Replicative
senescence is associated with reproducible changes in DNA methylation (DNAm) at
specific sites in the genome. The mechanism that drives senescence-associated
DNAm changes remains unknown - it may involve stochastic DNAm drift due to
imperfect maintenance of epigenetic marks or it is directly regulated at specific
sites in the genome.
RESULTS: In this study, we analyzed the reorganization of nuclear architecture
and DNAm changes during long-term culture of human fibroblasts and mesenchymal
stromal cells (MSCs). We demonstrate that telomeres shorten and shift towards the
nuclear center at later passages. In addition, DNAm profiles, either analyzed by 
MethylCap-seq or by 450k IlluminaBeadChip technology, revealed consistent
senescence-associated hypermethylation in regions associated with H3K27me3,
H3K4me3, and H3K4me1 histone marks, whereas hypomethylation was associated with
chromatin containing H3K9me3 and lamina-associated domains (LADs). DNA
hypermethylation was significantly enriched in the vicinity of genes that are
either up- or downregulated at later passages. Furthermore, specific
transcription factor binding motifs (e.g. EGR1, TFAP2A, and ETS1) were
significantly enriched in differentially methylated regions and in the promoters 
of differentially expressed genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Senescence-associated DNA hypermethylation occurs at specific sites 
in the genome and reflects functional changes in the course of replicative
senescence. These results indicate that tightly regulated epigenetic
modifications during long-term culture contribute to changes in nuclear
organization and gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4356053
PMID: 25763115  [PubMed]


68. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 17;290(16):10447-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.609230. Epub
2015 Mar 9.

Membrane and integrative nuclear fibroblastic growth factor receptor (FGFR)
regulation of FGF-23.

Han X(1), Xiao Z(1), Quarles LD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163. (2)From the Department of Medicine, University 
of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163 dquarles@uthsc.edu.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 14;290(33):20101.

Fibroblastic growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) signaling pathways are implicated
in the regulation of FGF-23 gene transcription, but the molecular pathways remain
poorly defined. We used low molecular weight (LMW, 18 kDa) FGF-2 and high
molecular weight (HMW) FGF-2 isoforms, which, respectively, activate cell surface
FGF receptors and intranuclear FGFR1, to determine the roles of membrane FGFRs
and integrative nuclear FGFR1 signaling (INFS) in the regulation of FGF-23 gene
transcription in osteoblasts. We found that LMW-FGF-2 induced NFAT and Ets1
binding to conserved cis-elements in the proximal FGF-23 promoter and stimulated 
FGF-23 promoter activity through PLC<U+03B3>/calcineurin/NFAT and MAPK pathways in
SaOS-2 and MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts. In contrast, HMW-FGF-2 stimulated FGF-23
promoter activity in osteoblasts through a cAMP-dependent binding of FGFR1 and
cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) to a conserved cAMP response element
(CRE) contiguous with the NFAT binding site in the FGF-23 promoter. Mutagenesis
of the NFAT and CRE binding sites, respectively, inhibited the effects of
LMW-FGF-2 and HMW-FGF-23 to stimulate FGF-23 promoter activity. FGF-2 activation 
of both membrane FGFRs and INFS-dependent FGFR1 pathways may provide a means to
integrate systemic and local regulation of FGF-23 transcription under diverse
physiological and pathological conditions.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4400353 [Available on 2016-04-17]
PMID: 25752607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochimie. 2015 May;112:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2015.02.013. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Transcriptional regulation of the apolipoprotein F (ApoF) gene by ETS and C/EBPa 
in hepatoma cells.

Shen XB(1), Huang L(1), Zhang SH(2), Wang DP(3), Wu YL(4), Chen WN(4), Xu SH(5), 
Lin X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China; Department of
Cardiology, Affiliated Nanping First Hospital, Fujian Medical University,
Nanping, China. (2)Department of Medical Laboratory, Affiliated Nanping First
Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Nanping, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China; Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Hongqi Hospital of MuDanJiang Medical College, Mudanjiang, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China. (5)Department
of Cardiology, Affiliated Nanping First Hospital, Fujian Medical University,
Nanping, China. Electronic address: 18905990816@163.com. (6)Key Laboratory of
Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China. Electronic address:
linxu@mail.fjmu.edu.cn.

Apolipoprotein F (ApoF) inhibits cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP)
activity and plays an important role in lipid metabolism. In the present study,
the full-length human ApoF promoter was cloned, and the molecular mechanism of
the regulation of ApoF was investigated. The ApoF promoter displayed higher
activities in hepatoma cell lines, and the -198 nt to +79 nt promoter region
contained the maximum promoter activity. In the promoter region of -198 nt
to -2 nt there were four putative binding sites for transcription factors
ETS-1/ETS-2 (named EBS-1 to EBS-4) and one for C/EBP. Mutation of EBS-2, EBS4 and
the C/EBP binding site abolished the promoter activity, and ETS-1/ETS-2 and
C/EBPa could interact with corresponding binding sites. In addition,
overexpression of ETS-1/2 or C/EBPa enhanced, while dominant-negative mutants of 
ETS-1/2 and knockdown of C/EBPa decreased, ApoF promoter activities. ETS-1 and
C/EBPa associated physically, and acted synergistically to activate ApoF
transcription. These results demonstrated combined activation of the ApoF
promoter by liver-enriched and ubiquitous transcription factors. Direct
interactions between C/EBPa and ETS-1 were important for high liver-specific
expression of ApoF.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMID: 25726912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Apr 1;106(1):67-75. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv043. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

Dual developmental role of transcriptional regulator Ets1 in Xenopus cardiac
neural crest vs. heart mesoderm.

Nie S(1), Bronner ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California
Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA mbronner@caltech.edu shuyi.nie@biology.gatech.edu.

AIMS: Ets1 is an important transcription factor that is expressed in both the
cardiac neural crest (NC) and heart mesoderm of vertebrate embryos. Moreover,
Ets1 deletion in humans results in congenital heart abnormalities. To clarify the
functional contributions of Ets1 in cardiac NC vs. heart mesoderm, we performed
tissue-targeted loss-of-function analysis to compare the relative roles of Ets1
in these two tissues during heart formation using Xenopus embryos as a model
system.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We confirmed by in situ hybridization analysis that Ets1 is 
expressed in NC and heart mesoderm during embryogenesis. Using a
translation-blocking antisense morpholino to knockdown Ets1 protein selectively
in the NC, we observed defects in NC delamination from the neural tube,
collective cell migration, as well as segregation of NC streams in the cranial
and cardiac regions. Many cardiac NC cells failed to reach their destination in
the heart, resulting in defective aortic arch artery formation. A different set
of defects was noted when Ets1 knockdown was targeted to heart mesoderm. The
formation of the primitive heart tube was dramatically delayed and the
endocardial tissue appeared depleted. As a result, the conformation of the heart 
was severely disrupted. In addition, the outflow tract septum was missing, and
trabeculae formation in the ventricle was abolished.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows that Ets1 is required in both the cardiac NC and
heart mesoderm, albeit for different aspects of heart formation. Our results
reinforce the suggestion that proper interaction between these tissues is
critical for normal heart development.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4447785
PMID: 25691536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1851-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1760. Epub 2015 Feb
4.

ETS1 induces human trophoblast differentiation.

Kessler CA(1), Stanek JW, Stringer KF, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Endocrinology (C.A.K., S.H.) and Pathology (J.W.S., K.F.S.),
Children's Hospital Medical Center, and Departments of Pediatrics (C.A.K., S.H.) 
and Pathology (J.W.S., K.F.S.), University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229.

A possible role for the transcription factor v-ets avian erythroblastosis virus
E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS1) in human trophoblast cell differentiation was
examined using a highly enriched fraction of human mononuclear cytotrophoblast
cells (CTBs) that differentiate spontaneously in vitro to a multinucleated
syncytiotrophoblast cell (STB) phenotype. ETS1 mRNA and protein levels were
abundant in freshly isolated CTBs and decreased as the cells differentiated.
Silencing of ETS1 expression in freshly prepared CTBs markedly attenuated
syncytialization, as demonstrated by desmoplakin staining, and blocked the
induction of syncytin, the transcription factor activator protein-2a, placental
lactogen, and other STB-specific genes. Conversely, overexpression of ETS1 in
primary trophoblast cells induced STB marker gene mRNAs and transactivated each
of the gene proximal promoters. Taken together, these findings strongly suggest a
critical role for ETS1 in the induction of human villus CTB differentiation. The 
effect of ETS1 on syncytialization likely results, at least in part, from
inhibition of syncytin expression, whereas the induction of STB marker genes
likely results in part from transactivation by activator protein-2a.

PMCID: PMC4398769 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25651508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 8;34(41):5216-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.447. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Ets1 identified as a novel molecular target of RNA aptamer selected against
metastatic cells for targeted delivery of nano-formulation.

Kaur J(1), Tikoo K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics and Diseases, Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, SAS
Nagar (formerly Mohali), Punjab, India.

Nanomedicine era is not far from its realization, but a major concern of targeted
delivery still stands tall in its way. Herein we demonstrate the mechanism
underlying the anticancer activity of an RNA aptamer (Apt) conjugated to
gefitinib-loaded poly (lactic co-glycolic acid) nanoparticles (GNPs). Apt was
selected through Cell-SELEX (systemic evolution of ligands by exponential
enrichment) process against gefitinib-resistant H1975 lung cancer cells. The
selected aptamer exhibited high specificity toward H1975 cells, both
qualitatively as well as quantitatively. Software analysis using the MATCH tool
predicted Ets1, a proto-oncoprotein, to be the target of the selected aptamer.
Interestingly, the localization of identified aptamer varied in descending order 
of Ets1 expression, wherein maximum localization was observed in H1975 cells than
in MDA-MB231, DU-145, H23, H460, A431, A549 and MCF-7 cells, and minimum in L132 
cells. Furthermore, Apt-GNP bio-conjugate showed augmented anticancer activity
specifically in Ets1-overexpressing cells. In addition, partial depletion of Ets1
in H1975 cells and overexpression of Ets1 in L132 cells reversed the targeting
efficacy of the aptamer. Notably, a single intratumoral injection of the Apt-GNP 
bio-conjugate abrogated the growth of tumor in H1975 xenograft nude mice.
Altogether, we present a pioneering platform, involving aptamers, which can be
clinically used as a diagnostic marker for metastasis as well as an effective
delivery system to escort the pharmaceutical cargo specifically to
Ets1-overexpressing highly progressive tumors.

PMCID: PMC4687462
PMID: 25639877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Mar;35(3):580-8. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.304405. Epub 2015 Jan 29.

Tyrosine kinase receptor B protects against coronary artery disease and promotes 
adult vasculature integrity by regulating Ets1-mediated VE-cadherin expression.

Jiang H(1), Huang S(1), Li X(1), Li X(1), Zhang Y(2), Chen ZY(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research,
Chinese Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Qilu Hospital
(H.J., X.L., Y.Z.), and Department of Neurobiology, Shandong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Mental Disorders, School of Medicine (S.H., X.L., Z.-Y.C), Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong, China. (2)From the Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular 
Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese Ministry of Education and Chinese
Ministry of Health, Qilu Hospital (H.J., X.L., Y.Z.), and Department of
Neurobiology, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mental Disorders, School of
Medicine (S.H., X.L., Z.-Y.C), Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
zheyuchen@sdu.edu.cn zhangyun@sdu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: Tyrosine kinase receptor B (TrkB) is a high-affinity receptor for
brain-derived neurotrophic factor. In addition to its nervous system functions,
TrkB is also expressed in the cardiovascular system. However, the association of 
TrkB and coronary artery disease (CAD) remains unknown. We investigated the role 
of TrkB in the development of CAD and its mechanism.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We performed a case-control study in 2 independent cohort
of Chinese subjects and found -69C>G polymorphisms of TrkB gene significantly
associated with CAD. TrkB -69C homozygotes, which corresponded to decreased TrkB 
expression by luciferase reporter assay, showed increased risk for CAD.
Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that TrkB was expressed in the aortic
endothelium in atherosclerotic lesions in humans and ApoE(-/-) mice. TrkB
knockdown in the aortic endothelium resulted in vascular leakage in ApoE(-/-)
mice. Mechanistic studies showed that TrkB regulated vascular endothelial
cadherin (VE-cadherin) expression through induction and activation of Ets1
transcriptional factor. Importantly, TrkB activation attenuated
proatherosclerotic factors induced-endothelial hyperpermeability in human
vascular endothelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that TrkB protects endothelial integrity during
atherogenesis by promoting Ets1-mediated VE-cadherin expression and plays a
previously unknown protective role in the development of CAD.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25633318  [PubMed - in process]


74. Mol Carcinog. 2016 Feb;55(2):131-47. doi: 10.1002/mc.22263. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

miR-204 is dysregulated in metastatic prostate cancer in vitro.

Todorova K(1), Metodiev MV(2), Metodieva G(2), Zasheva D(1), Mincheff M(3),
Hayrabedyan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology and Immunology of Reproduction at Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria. (2)School of Biological Sciences, Essex University,
Colchester, UK. (3)Cellular and Gene Therapy Ward, National Specialized
Hematology Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria.

During cancer progression, the genome instability incurred rearrangement could
possibly turn some of the tumor suppressor micro-RNAs into pro-oncogenic ones. We
aimed to investigate miR-204 in the context of prostate cancer progression using 
a cell line model of different levels of genome instability (LNCaP, PC3, VCaP and
NCI H660), as demonstrated by the availability of ERG fusion. We studied the
effect of miR-204 modulation on master transcription factors important for
lineage development, cell differentiation and prostate cancer bone marrow
metastasis. We followed c-MYB, ETS1 and RUNX2 transcript and protein expression
and the miR-204 affected global proteome. We further investigated if these
transcription factors exert an effect on miR-204 expression (qPCR, luciferase
reporter assay) by silencing them using esiRNA. We found dualistic miR-204
effects, either acting as a tumor suppressor on c-MYB, or as an oncomiR on ETS1. 
RUNX2 and ETS1 regulation by miR-204 was ERG fusion dependent, demonstrating
regulatory circuitry disruption in advanced metastatic models. miR-204 also
differentially affected mRNA splicing and protein stability. miR-204 levels were 
found dependent on cancer hypermethylation and supported by positive feedback
induced by all three transcription factors. In this regulatory circuitry among
miR-204, c-MYB, RUNX2 and ETS1, the c-MYB was found to induce all three other
members, but its expression was differentially affected by the methylation status
in lymph node vs. bone metastasis. We demonstrate that not only tumor suppressor 
micro-RNA loss, but also significant genome rearrangement-driven regulatory loop 
perturbations play a role in the advanced cancer progression, conferring better
pro-survival and metastatic potential. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25630658  [PubMed - in process]


75. Hypertension. 2015 Apr;65(4):813-20. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.04533. Epub
2015 Jan 26.

Transcription factor avian erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogen homolog-1 is a
novel mediator of renal injury in salt-sensitive hypertension.

Feng W(1), Chumley P(1), Prieto MC(1), Miyada K(1), Seth DM(1), Fatima H(1), Hua 
P(1), Rezonzew G(1), Sanders PW(1), Jaimes EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Nephrology (W.F., P.C., P.H., G.R., P.W.S.) and
Department of Pathology (H.F.), University of Alabama at Birmingham; Department
of Physiology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA (M.C.P., K.M., D.M.S.);
Nephrology Section, VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL (P.W.S., E.A.J.); and Renal
Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY (E.A.J.). (2)From
the Division of Nephrology (W.F., P.C., P.H., G.R., P.W.S.) and Department of
Pathology (H.F.), University of Alabama at Birmingham; Department of Physiology, 
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA (M.C.P., K.M., D.M.S.); Nephrology Section, VA
Medical Center, Birmingham, AL (P.W.S., E.A.J.); and Renal Service, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY (E.A.J.). jaimese@mskcc.org.

Transcription factor E26 transformation-specific sequence-1 (ETS-1) is a
transcription factor that regulates the expression of a variety of genes,
including growth factors, chemokines, and adhesion molecules. We recently
demonstrated that angiotensin II increases the glomerular expression of ETS-1 and
that blockade of ETS-1 ameliorates the profibrotic and proinflammatory effects of
angiotensin II. The Dahl salt-sensitive rat is a paradigm of salt-sensitive
hypertension associated with local activation of the renin-angiotensin system. In
these studies, we determined whether: (1) salt-sensitive hypertension is
associated with renal expression of ETS-1 and (2) ETS-1 participates in the
development of end-organ injury in salt-sensitive hypertension. Dahl
salt-sensitive rats were fed a normal-salt diet (0.5% NaCl diet) or a high-salt
diet (4% NaCl) for 4 weeks. Separate groups on high-salt diet received an ETS-1
dominant-negative peptide (10 mg/kg/d), an inactive ETS-1 mutant peptide (10
mg/kg/d), the angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker candesartan (10 mg/kg/d), or
the combination high-salt diet/dominant-negative peptide/angiotensin II type 1
receptor blocker for 4 weeks. High-salt diet rats had a significant increase in
the glomerular expression of the phosphorylated ETS-1 that was prevented by
angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker. ETS-1 blockade reduced proteinuria,
glomerular injury score, fibronectin expression, urinary transforming growth
factor-ß excretion, and macrophage infiltration. Angiotensin II type 1 receptor
blocker reduced proteinuria, glomerular injury score, and macrophage
infiltration, whereas concomitant ETS-1 blockade and angiotensin II type 1
receptor blocker had additive effects and reduced interstitial fibrosis. Our
studies demonstrated that salt-sensitive hypertension results in increased
glomerular expression of phosphorylated ETS-1 and suggested that ETS-1 plays an
important role in the pathogenesis of end-organ injury in salt-sensitive
hypertension.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25624342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Virol. 2015 Mar;89(6):3396-411. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03625-14. Epub 2015 Jan 14.

Sp1 sites in the noncoding control region of BK polyomavirus are key regulators
of bidirectional viral early and late gene expression.

Bethge T(1), Hachemi HA(1), Manzetti J(1), Gosert R(2), Schaffner W(3), Hirsch
HH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation & Clinical Virology, Department Biomedicine (Haus
Petersplatz), University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (2)Transplantation &
Clinical Virology, Department Biomedicine (Haus Petersplatz), University of
Basel, Basel, Switzerland Division Infection Diagnostics, Department Biomedicine 
(Haus Petersplatz), University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (3)Institute of
Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(4)Transplantation & Clinical Virology, Department Biomedicine (Haus
Petersplatz), University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland Division Infection
Diagnostics, Department Biomedicine (Haus Petersplatz), University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland Infectious Diseases & Hospital Epidemiology, University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland hans.hirsch@unibas.ch.

In kidney transplant patients with BK polyomavirus (BKPyV) nephropathy, viral
variants arise bearing rearranged noncoding control regions (rr-NCCRs) that
increase viral early gene expression, replicative fitness, and cytopathology.
rr-NCCRs result from various deletions and duplications of archetype NCCR
(ww-NCCR) sequences, which alter transcription factor binding sites (TFBS).
However, the role of specific TFBS is unclear. We inactivated 28 TFBS in the
archetype NCCR by selective point mutations and examined viral gene expression in
bidirectional reporter constructs. Compared to the archetype, group 1 mutations
increased viral early gene expression similar to rr-NCCR and resulted from
inactivating one Sp1 or one Ets1 TFBS near the late transcription start site
(TSS). Group 2 mutations conferred intermediate early gene activation and
affected NF1, YY1, and p53 sites between early and late TSS. Group 3 mutations
decreased early and late gene expression and included two other Sp1 sites near
the early TSS. Recombinant viruses bearing group 1 NCCRs showed increased
replication in human renal epithelial cells similar to clinical rr-NCCR variants.
Group 2 and 3 viruses showed intermediate or no replication, respectively. A
literature search revealed unnoticed group 1 mutations in BKPyV nephropathy,
hemorrhagic cystitis, and disseminated disease.IMPORTANCE: The NCCRs of
polyomaviruses mediate silent persistence of the viral genome as well as the
appropriately timed (re)activation of the viral life cycle. This study indicates 
that the basal BKPyV NCCR is critically controlled by a hierarchy of single TFBS 
in the archetype NCCR that direct, modulate, and execute the bidirectional early 
and late viral gene expression. The results provide new insights into how BKPyV
NCCR functions as a viral sensor of host cell signals and shed new light on how
transcription factors like Sp1 control bidirectional viral gene expression and
contribute to replication and pathology.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4337534
PMID: 25589646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Biol. 2015 Mar 15;399(2):218-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.032. Epub 2015 
Jan 7.

Diverse ETS transcription factors mediate FGF signaling in the Ciona anterior
neural plate.

Gainous TB(1), Wagner E(1), Levine M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, Division of Genetics, Genomics and
Development, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (2)Center for Integrative Genomics, Division of
Genetics, Genomics and Development, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Electronic address:
mlevine@berkeley.edu.

The ascidian Ciona intestinalis is a marine invertebrate belonging to the sister 
group of the vertebrates, the tunicates. Its compact genome and simple,
experimentally tractable embryos make Ciona well-suited for the study of
cell-fate specification in chordates. Tunicate larvae possess a characteristic
chordate body plan, and many developmental pathways are conserved between
tunicates and vertebrates. Previous studies have shown that FGF signals are
essential for neural induction and patterning at sequential steps of Ciona
embryogenesis. Here we show that two different ETS family transcription factors, 
Ets1/2 and Elk1/3/4, have partially redundant activities in the anterior neural
plate of gastrulating embryos. Whereas Ets1/2 promotes pigment cell formation in 
lateral lineages, both Ets1/2 and Elk1/3/4 are involved in the activation of
Myt1L in medial lineages and the restriction of Six3/6 expression to the
anterior-most regions of the neural tube. We also provide evidence that
photoreceptor cells arise from posterior regions of the presumptive sensory
vesicle, and do not depend on FGF signaling. Cells previously identified as
photoreceptor progenitors instead form ependymal cells and neurons of the larval 
brain. Our results extend recent findings on FGF-dependent patterning of
anterior-posterior compartments in the Ciona central nervous system.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25576927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Development. 2015 Feb 1;142(3):465-76. doi: 10.1242/dev.112946. Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Mediator Med23 deficiency enhances neural differentiation of murine embryonic
stem cells through modulating BMP signaling.

Zhu W(1), Yao X(1), Liang Y(1), Liang D(1), Song L(1), Jing N(1), Li J(1), Wang
G(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China gwang@sibcb.ac.cn.

Unraveling the mechanisms underlying early neural differentiation of embryonic
stem cells (ESCs) is crucial to developing cell-based therapies of
neurodegenerative diseases. Neural fate acquisition is proposed to be controlled 
by a 'default' mechanism, for which the molecular regulation is not well
understood. In this study, we investigated the functional roles of Mediator Med23
in pluripotency and lineage commitment of murine ESCs. Unexpectedly, we found
that, despite the largely unchanged pluripotency and self-renewal of ESCs, Med23 
depletion rendered the cells prone to neural differentiation in different
differentiation assays. Knockdown of two other Mediator subunits, Med1 and Med15,
did not alter the neural differentiation of ESCs. Med15 knockdown selectively
inhibited endoderm differentiation, suggesting the specificity of cell fate
control by distinctive Mediator subunits. Gene profiling revealed that Med23
depletion attenuated BMP signaling in ESCs. Mechanistically, MED23 modulated Bmp4
expression by controlling the activity of ETS1, which is involved in Bmp4
promoter-enhancer communication. Interestingly, med23 knockdown in zebrafish
embryos also enhanced neural development at early embryogenesis, which could be
reversed by co-injection of bmp4 mRNA. Taken together, our study reveals an
intrinsic, restrictive role of MED23 in early neural development, thus providing 
new molecular insights for neural fate determination.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25564654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 17;34(38):4964-74. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.420. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

PAX3 and ETS1 synergistically activate MET expression in melanoma cells.

Kubic JD(1), Little EC(1), Lui JW(1), Iizuka T(1), Lang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA.

Melanoma is a highly aggressive disease that is difficult to treat owing to rapid
tumor growth, apoptotic resistance and high metastatic potential. The MET
proto-oncogene (MET) tyrosine kinase receptor promotes many of these cellular
processes, but while MET is often overexpressed in melanoma, the mechanism
driving this overexpression is unknown. As the MET gene is rarely mutated or
amplified in melanoma, MET overexpression may be driven to increased activation
through promoter elements. In this report, we find that transcription factors
PAX3 and ETS1 directly interact to synergistically activate MET expression.
Inhibition of PAX3 and ETS1 expression in melanoma cells leads to a significant
reduction of MET receptor levels. The 300-bp 5' proximal MET promoter contains a 
PAX3 response element and two ETS1 consensus motifs. Although ETS1 can moderately
activate both of these sites without cofactors, robust MET promoter activation of
the first site is PAX dependent and requires the presence of PAX3, whereas the
second site is PAX independent. The induction of MET by ETS1 via this second site
is enhanced by hepatocyte growth factor-dependent ETS1 activation, thereby MET
indirectly promotes its own expression. We further find that expression of a
dominant-negative ETS1 reduces the ability of melanoma cells to grow both in
culture and in vivo. Thus, we discover a pathway where ETS1 advances melanoma
through the expression of MET via PAX-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4476961
PMID: 25531327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Development. 2015 Jan 1;142(1):207-17. doi: 10.1242/dev.113043.

Dose-dependent nuclear ß-catenin response segregates endomesoderm along the sea
star primary axis.

McCauley BS(1), Akyar E(1), Saad HR(1), Hinman VF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 5th Ave,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon 
University, 4400 5th Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA veronica@cmu.edu.

In many invertebrates, the nuclearization of ß-catenin at one pole of the embryo 
initiates endomesoderm specification. An intriguing possibility is that a
gradient of nuclear ß-catenin (nß-catenin), similar to that operating in
vertebrate neural tube patterning, functions to distinguish cell fates in
invertebrates. To test this hypothesis, we determined the function of nß-catenin 
during the early development of the sea star, which undergoes a basal
deuterostomal mode of embryogenesis. We show that low levels of nß-catenin
activity initiate bra, which is expressed in the future posterior endoderm-fated 
territory; intermediate levels are required for expression of foxa and gata4/5/6,
which are later restricted to the endoderm; and activation of ets1 and erg in the
mesoderm-fated territory requires the highest nß-catenin activity. Transcription 
factors acting downstream of high nß-catenin segregate the endoderm/mesoderm
boundary, which is further reinforced by Delta/Notch signaling. Significantly,
therefore, in sea stars, endomesoderm segregation arises through transcriptional 
responses to levels of nß-catenin activity. Here, we describe the first empirical
evidence of a dose-dependent response to a dynamic spatiotemporal nß-catenin
activity that patterns cell fates along the primary axis in an invertebrate.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4299145
PMID: 25516976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 15;5:5798. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6798.

STAT3 restrains RANK- and TLR4-mediated signalling by suppressing expression of
the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc13.

Zhang H(1), Hu H(1), Greeley N(2), Jin J(1), Matthews AJ(1), Ohashi E(1), Caetano
MS(3), Li HS(1), Wu X(1), Mandal PK(4), McMurray JS(5), Moghaddam SJ(6), Sun
SC(2), Watowich SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)1] Department of Immunology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] The University of 
Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (4)Department of Experimental Therapeutics,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(5)1] The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (6)1] The University 
of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2]
Department of Pulmonary Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The transcriptional regulator STAT3 curbs pro-inflammatory cytokine production
mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B signalling in innate immune cells, yet the mechanism by which
this occurs has been unclear. Here we identify STAT3 as a pivotal negative
regulator of Ubc13, an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme that facilitates TRAF6
K63-linked ubiquitination and NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Ubc13 accumulates intracellularly
in the absence of STAT3. Depletion of Ubc13 in Stat3-deficient macrophages
subdues excessive RANKL- or LPS-dependent gene expression, indicating that Ubc13 
overexpression mediates enhanced transcriptional responses in the absence of
STAT3. In RANKL-activated macrophages, STAT3 is stimulated by autocrine IL-6 and 
inhibits accrual of Ets-1, Set1 methyltransferase and trimethylation of histone
H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3) at the Ube2n (Ubc13) promoter. These results delineate a
mechanism by which STAT3 operates as a transcriptional repressor on Ube2n, thus
modulating NF-<U+03BA>B activity by regulation of Ubc13 abundance. Our data suggest that
this pathway plays important roles in bone homeostasis and restraint of
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4270087
PMID: 25503582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(21):3442-9. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.956507.

A novel crosstalk between BRCA1 and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 in breast
cancer.

Li D(1), Bi FF, Chen NN, Cao JM, Sun WP, Zhou YM, Li CY, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology ; Shengjing Hospital of China
Medical University ; Shenyang , China.

BRCA mutations are the main known hereditary factor for breast cancer. Notably,
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) expression status plays a critical role in
breast cancer progression and the clinical development of PARP1 inhibitors to
treat BRCA-mutated breast cancer has advanced rapidly. However, dynamic crosstalk
between BRCA1 and PARP1 remains largely unknown. Here, we showed that: (i) BRCA1 
inactivation events (mutation, promoter methylation, or knockdown) were
accompanied by increased PARP1 and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
levels, and a subsequent increase in NAD-dependent PARP1 activity in MDA-MB-231
and primary breast cancer cells; (ii) the overexpression of BRCA1 resulted in
decreased PARP1 and NAD levels, and a subsequent impairment in NAD-dependent
PARP1 activity in MDA-MB-231 and primary breast cancer cells; and (iii)
intracellular NAD levels were largely responsible for regulating PARP1 activity
in breast cancer cells, and NAD levels were positively correlated with PARP1
activity in human breast cancer specimens (R = 0.647, P < 0.001). Interestingly, 
the high efficiency of PARP1 triggered by BRCA1 inactivation may further inhibit 
BRCA1 transcription by NAD depletion. These results highlight a novel interaction
between BRCA1 and PARP1, which may be beneficial for the dynamic balance between 
BRCA1 and PARP1-related biologic processes, especially for maintaining stable DNA
repair ability. All of this may improve our understanding of the basic molecular 
mechanism underlying BRCA1- and PARP1-related breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4613991
PMID: 25485588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Feb;35(2):348-57. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.303927. Epub 2014 Nov 25.

Angiogenic microvascular endothelial cells release microparticles rich in tissue 
factor that promotes postischemic collateral vessel formation.

Arderiu G(1), Peña E(1), Badimon L(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cardiovascular Research Center (CSIC-ICCC), IIB-Sant Pau and Hospital
de Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain (G.A., E.P., L.B.); and Cardiovascular Research
Chair Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain (L.B.). (2)From the
Cardiovascular Research Center (CSIC-ICCC), IIB-Sant Pau and Hospital de Sant
Pau, Barcelona, Spain (G.A., E.P., L.B.); and Cardiovascular Research Chair
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain (L.B.).
lbadimon@csic-iccc.org.

OBJECTIVE: Therapeutic angiogenesis is a promising strategy for treating
ischemia. Our previous work showed that endogenous endothelial tissue factor (TF)
expression induces intracrine signaling and switches-on angiogenesis in
microvascular endothelial cells (mECs). We have hypothesized that activated mECs 
could exert a further paracrine regulation through the release of TF-rich
microvascular endothelial microparticles (mEMPs) and induce neovascularization of
ischemic tissues.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Here, we describe for the first time that activated mECs
are able to induce reparative neovascularization in ischemic zones by releasing
TF-rich microparticles. We show in vitro and in vivo that mEMPs released by both 
wild-type and TF-upregulated-mECs induce angiogenesis and collateral vessel
formation, whereas TF-poor mEMPs derived from TF-silenced mECs are not able to
trigger angiogenesis. Isolated TF-bearing mEMPs delivered to nonperfused adductor
muscles in a murine hindlimb ischemia model enhance collateral flow and capillary
formation evidenced by MRI. TF-bearing mEMPs increase angiogenesis operating via 
paracrine regulation of neighboring endothelial cells, signaling through the
ß1-integrin pathway Rac1-ERK1/2-ETS1 and triggering CCL2 (chemokine [C-C motif]
ligand 2) production to form new and competent mature neovessels.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that TF-rich mEMPs released by
microvascular endothelial cells can overcome the consequences of arterial
occlusion and tissue ischemia by promoting postischemic neovascularization and
tissue reperfusion.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25425620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Oncol Rep. 2015 Feb;33(2):559-65. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3613. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

Transcriptional silencing of ETS-1 abrogates epithelial-mesenchymal transition
resulting in reduced motility of pancreatic cancer cells.

Li C(1), Wang Z(2), Chen Y(1), Zhou M(1), Zhang H(1), Chen R(1), Shi F(1), Wang
C(1), Rui Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Zhongda Hospital, Medical School of Southeast
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009, P.R. China. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Nanjing Government Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009, P.R. China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Zhongda Hospital, Medical School of Southeast
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009, P.R. China.

v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS-1) plays crucial roles
in a spectrum of malignancies. ETS-1 has gained attention in cancer research for 
its importance in cell migration, invasion and proliferation. In the present
study, we focused on the effect of ETS-1 on epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), which is characterized by reduced E-cadherin expression and increased
N-cadherin expression. We found that ETS-1 mRNA expression was positively
correlated with N-cadherin and negatively correlated with E-cadherin mRNA
expression in five pancreatic cancer cell lines. To elucidate the functionality
of ETS-1 on EMT in pancreatic cancer cells, we constructed a green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-expressing plasmid carrying ETS-1 short hairpin RNA (shRNA), and
transfected Panc-1 cells with the plasmid. We detected reduced N-cadherin and
vascular endothelial growth factor yet higher E-cadherin expression in the
ETS-1-silenced cells compared with the control group. In addition, we observed
reduced cell migration and increased adhesion in these cells. Our data showed
that ETS-1 actively functioned as a regulator of EMT in Panc-1 cells, and provide
additional evidence supporting a fundamental role for ETS-1 in metastatic
pancreatic cancer cells. These results suggest that analysis of ETS-1 expression 
levels may provide an avenue for evaluating prognosis in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4306275
PMID: 25421630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 7;9(11):e112419. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112419.
eCollection 2014.

A novel approach of dynamic cross correlation analysis on molecular dynamics
simulations and its application to Ets1 dimer-DNA complex.

Kasahara K(1), Fukuda I(1), Nakamura H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

The dynamic cross correlation (DCC) analysis is a popular method for analyzing
the trajectories of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. However, it is difficult
to detect correlative motions that appear transiently in only a part of the
trajectory, such as atomic contacts between the side-chains of amino acids, which
may rapidly flip. In order to capture these multi-modal behaviors of atoms, which
often play essential roles, particularly at the interfaces of macromolecules, we 
have developed the "multi-modal DCC (mDCC)" analysis. The mDCC is an extension of
the DCC and it takes advantage of a Bayesian-based pattern recognition technique.
We performed MD simulations for molecular systems modeled from the (Ets1)2-DNA
complex and analyzed their results with the mDCC method. Ets1 is an essential
transcription factor for a variety of physiological processes, such as immunity
and cancer development. Although many structural and biochemical studies have so 
far been performed, its DNA binding properties are still not well characterized. 
In particular, it is not straightforward to understand the molecular mechanisms
how the cooperative binding of two Ets1 molecules facilitates their recognition
of Stromelysin-1 gene regulatory elements. A correlation network was constructed 
among the essential atomic contacts, and the two major pathways by which the two 
Ets1 molecules communicate were identified. One is a pathway via direct
protein-protein interactions and the other is that via the bound DNA intervening 
two recognition helices. These two pathways intersected at the particular
cytosine bases (C110/C11), interacting with the H1, H2, and H3 helices.
Furthermore, the mDCC analysis showed that both pathways included the transient
interactions at their intermolecular interfaces of Tyr396-C11 and Ala327-Asn380
in multi-modal motions of the amino acid side chains and the nucleotide backbone.
Thus, the current mDCC approach is a powerful tool to reveal these complicated
behaviors and scrutinize intermolecular communications in a molecular system.

PMCID: PMC4224484
PMID: 25380315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Hum Genet. 2015 Feb;134(2):147-58. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1503-8. Epub 2014 Nov 
6.

Loss-of-function mutation in the X-linked TBX22 promoter disrupts an ETS-1
binding site and leads to cleft palate.

Fu X(1), Cheng Y, Yuan J, Huang C, Cheng H, Zhou R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Center for Developmental Biology, College of Life
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, People's Republic of China.

The cleft palate only (CPO) is a common congenital defect with complex etiology
in humans. The molecular etiology of the CPO remains unknown. Here, we report a
loss-of-function mutation in X-linked TBX22 gene (T-box 22) in a six-generation
family of the CPO with obvious phenotypes of both cleft palate and hyper-nasal
speech. We identify a functional -73G>A mutation in the promoter of TBX22, which 
is located at the core-binding site of transcription factor ETS-1 (v-ets avian
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1). Phylogenetic analysis showed that
the sequence around the -73G>A mutation site is specific in primates. The
mutation was detected in all five affected male members cosegregating with the
affected phenotype and heterozygote occurred only in some unaffected females of
the family, suggesting an X-linked transmission of the mutation in the family.
The -73G>A variant is a novel single nucleotide mutation. Cell co-transfections
indicated that ETS-1 could activate the TBX22 promoter. Moreover, EMSA and ChIP
assays demonstrated that the allele A disrupts the binding site of ETS-1, thus
markedly decreases the activity of the TBX22 promoter, which is likely to lead to
the birth defect of the CPO without ankyloglossia. These results suggest that a
loss-of-function mutation in the X-linked TBX22 promoter may cause the cleft
palate through disruption of TBX22-ETS-1 pathway.

PMID: 25373698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Jul;56(7):1975-80. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.981670. Epub
2015 Jan 14.

The transcription factor ETS1 in lymphomas: friend or foe?

Testoni M(1), Chung EY, Priebe V, Bertoni F.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma and Genomics Research Program, IOR Institute of Oncology Research ,
Bellinzona , Switzerland.

ETS1 is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, which contains many 
cancer genes. ETS1 gene is mapped at 11q24.3, a chromosomal region that is often 
the site of genomic rearrangements in hematological cancers. ETS1 is expressed in
a variety of cells, including B and T lymphocytes. ETS1 is important in various
biological processes such as development, differentiation, proliferation,
apoptosis, migration and tissue remodeling. It acts as an oncogene controlling
invasive and angiogenic behavior of malignant cells in multiple human cancers. In
particular, ETS1 deregulation has been reported in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma,
in Burkitt lymphoma and in Hodgkin lymphoma. Here, we summarize the function of
ETS1 in normal cells, with a particular emphasis on lymphocytes, and its possible
role as an oncogene or tumor suppressor gene in the different mature B cell
lymphomas.

PMID: 25363344  [PubMed - in process]


88. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 29;5:5202. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6202.

Hypoxia-mediated downregulation of miRNA biogenesis promotes tumour progression.

Rupaimoole R(1), Wu SY(2), Pradeep S(2), Ivan C(3), Pecot CV(4), Gharpure KM(1), 
Nagaraja AS(1), Armaiz-Pena GN(2), McGuire M(2), Zand B(2), Dalton HJ(2), Filant 
J(2), Miller JB(2), Lu C(2), Sadaoui NC(1), Mangala LS(3), Taylor M(2), van den
Beucken T(5), Koch E(6), Rodriguez-Aguayo C(7), Huang L(8), Bar-Eli M(8), Wouters
BG(6), Radovich M(9), Ivan M(10), Calin GA(7), Zhang W(11), Lopez-Berestein G(7),
Sood AK(12).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)Department of Gynecologic 
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (3)1] Department of Gynecologic Oncology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNA, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, University of North
Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 101 Manning Drive, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina 27599, USA. (5)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. (6)1] Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Princess 
Margaret Cancer Centre and Campbell Family Institute for Cancer Research,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. (7)1] Center for RNA
Interference and Non-Coding RNA, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of
Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (8)Department of Cancer
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (9)Department of Surgery, Microbiology and 
Immunology, Indiana University, 980W Walnut Street, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, 
USA. (10)Department of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University,
980W Walnut Street, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. (11)Department of
Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (12)1] Department of Gynecologic Oncology, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNA, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA [3] Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Cancer-related deregulation of miRNA biogenesis has been suggested, but the
underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here we report a previously unrecognized
effect of hypoxia in the downregulation of Drosha and Dicer in cancer cells that 
leads to dysregulation of miRNA biogenesis and increased tumour progression. We
show that hypoxia-mediated downregulation of Drosha is dependent on ETS1/ELK1
transcription factors. Moreover, mature miRNA array and deep sequencing studies
reveal altered miRNA maturation in cells under hypoxic conditions. At a
functional level, this phenomenon results in increased cancer progression in
vitro and in vivo, and data from patient samples are suggestive of miRNA
biogenesis downregulation in hypoxic tumours. Rescue of Drosha by siRNAs
targeting ETS1/ELK1 in vivo results in significant tumour regression. These
findings provide a new link in the mechanistic understanding of global miRNA
downregulation in the tumour microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC4215647
PMID: 25351346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Clin Oral Investig. 2015 Jun;19(5):1121-8. doi: 10.1007/s00784-014-1338-7. Epub
2014 Oct 28.

Interactions of human MSC with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell line
PCI-13 reduce markers of epithelia-mesenchymal transition.

Böhrnsen F(1), Fricke M, Sander C, Leha A, Schliephake H, Kramer FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Georg August University Göttingen,
Robert-Koch-Str. 40, Göttingen, Germany, florian.boehrnsen@med.uni-goettingen.de.

OBJECTIVES: Cancer progression is influenced by tumor microenvironment and
communication of stromal cells and tumor cells. Interactions may enhance
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of tumor cells through signaling proteins
such as Wnt/beta-catenin and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), as well as loss of 
cellular integrity, which affects invasion, progression, and metastasis of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). In this study, we are testing the
hypothesis that interactions of human mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) with HNSCC
might influence the expression of markers of EMT and tumor progression by
co-culturing human MSC with the PCI-13 HNSCC line.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pooled MSCs were derived from the iliac bone marrow of
seven patients and co-cultured in transwell permeable membrane wells with tumor
cells of the established HNSCC cell line PCI-13 (UICC: T3, N1, M0). MSCs were
characterized through fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis.
Expression of Wnt3, E-cadherin, beta-catenin, MMP14, cathepsin b, and ETS1 was
assessed by quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We were able to show that co-culture of MSCs and PCI-13 leads to a
significantly reduced expression of Wnt3, MMP14, and beta-catenin compared to
controls, whereas the expression of cathepsin b and ETS1 was not significantly
different between co-cultures and controls.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the interaction between MSCs and PCI-13 may 
suppress EMT in cancer cells.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The influence of MSCs can suppress the onset of EMT in HNSCC,
affecting tumor progression and therapy.

PMID: 25346374  [PubMed - in process]


90. Biol Reprod. 2014 Dec;91(6):139. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.121186. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

Expression and regulation of regulator of G-protein signaling protein-2 (RGS2) in
equine and bovine follicles prior to ovulation: molecular characterization of
RGS2 transactivation in bovine granulosa cells.

Sayasith K(1), Sirois J(2), Lussier JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en reproduction animale and the Département de biomédecine
vétérinaire, Faculté de médecine vétérinaire, Université de Montréal,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada k.sayasith@umontreal.ca. (2)Centre de recherche
en reproduction animale and the Département de biomédecine vétérinaire, Faculté
de médecine vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada.

The luteinizing hormone preovulatory surge stimulates several signal pathways
essential for ovulation, and the regulator of G-protein signaling protein-2
(RGS2) is thought to be involved in this process. The objectives of this study
were to characterize the regulation of RGS2 transcripts in equine and bovine
follicles prior to ovulation and to determine its transcriptional control in
bovine granulosa cells. To assess the regulation of equine RGS2 prior to
ovulation, RT-PCR was performed using total RNA extracted from equine follicles
collected at various times after human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) injection.
Results showed that RGS2 mRNA levels were very low at 0 h but markedly increased 
12-39 h post-hCG (P < 0.05). In the bovine species, results revealed that RGS2
mRNA levels were low in small and dominant follicles and in ovulatory follicles
obtained at 0 h, but markedly increased in ovulatory follicles 6-24 h post-hCG (P
< 0.05). To study the molecular control of RGS2 expression, primary cultures of
bovine granulosa cells were used. Stimulation with forskolin induced an
up-regulation of RGS2 mRNA in vitro. Studies using 5'-deletion mutants identified
a minimal region containing full-length basal and forskolin-inducible RGS2
promoter activities. Site-directed mutagenesis indicated that these activities
were dependent on CRE and ETS1 cis-elements. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays confirmed the involvement of these elements and revealed their
interactions with CREB1 and ETS1 proteins. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
confirmed endogenous interactions of these proteins with the RGS2 promoter in
granulosa cells. Forskolin-inducible RGS2 promoter activity and mRNA expression
were markedly decreased by PKA and ERK1/2 inhibitors, and treatment with an
antagonist of PGR (RU486) and inhibitors of PTGS2 (NS398) and EGFR (PD153035)
blocked the forskolin-dependent RGS2 transcript expression, suggesting the
importance of RGS2 in ovulation. Collectively, this study reports for the first
time the gonadotropin-dependent up-regulation of RGS2 in equine and bovine
preovulatory follicles and presents some of the regulatory controls involved in
RGS2 gene expression in granulosa cells.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25339105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2014 Dec;46(6):e103-12. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezu359. Epub 
2014 Oct 13.

Lung mesenchymal cells function as an inductive microenvironment for human lung
cancer propagating cells.

Ampollini L(1), Madeddu D(2), Falco A(2), Frati C(2), Lorusso B(2), Graiani G(2),
Saccani F(2), Gervasi A(3), Rossetti P(2), Bonomini S(2), Gnetti L(3), Lagrasta
CA(2), Silini EM(2), Quaini E(4), Petronini P(2), Alfieri R(2), Rusca M(5),
Carbognani P(5), Quaini F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgical Science, University Hospital of
Parma, Parma, Italy luca.ampollini@unipr.it. (2)Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, University Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy. (3)Department of
Biomedical, Biotechnological and Translational Sciences, University Hospital of
Parma, Parma, Italy. (4)Cardiothoracic Department, Humanitas Institute, Milan,
Italy. (5)Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgical Science, University Hospital
of Parma, Parma, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of the present study was to characterize the biological
properties and in vivo tumourigenic potential of mesenchymal cells (MCs) obtained
from non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples.
METHODS: NSCLC samples (53 adenocarcinomas and 24 squamous-cell carcinomas)
surgically removed from 46 males and 31 females were processed to identify
mesenchymal cells from human lung cancer (hLc-MCs). hLc-MCs were separated from
neoplastic epithelial cells, expanded and extensively characterized in vitro.
Subsequently, female BALB/c nude mice were subcutaneously injected with either
10(6) or 2.5 × 10(6) Calu-3 (human adenocarcinoma cell line able to reproducibly 
induce xenografted tumours) alone or in combination with equal doses of hLc-MCs. 
Control animals were injected with the two doses of hLc-MCs only.
RESULTS: Primary cultures of hLc-MCs were obtained from >80% of NSCLC specimens. 
The typical MCs immunophenotype was documented by the expression of CD90, CD105, 
CD73, CD13 and CD44 at fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis. CD45, CD14, 
CD34 and epithelial antigens were negative while CD117 (c-kit) and CD133
(prominin) were partially expressed. Interestingly, nuclear transcription factors
octamer-binding transcription factor 3/4 and sex determining region Y-box 2
involved in stemness, thyroid transcription factor 1 in bronchoalveolar
commitment, and ETS1 in carcinogenesis, were expressed in hLc-MCs isolated from
NSCLC. Specific conditioned media and cocultures confirmed the supportive role of
hLc-MCs for cancer cells. In vivo experiments showed that at both doses Calu-3
xenografts doubled in size when hLc-MCs were coinjected. Cell tracking in
xenografted tumours, by immunofluorescence combined with fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis, documented hX-chromosome-labelled, Calu-3-derived
cytokeratin-positive adenocarcinoma structures surrounded by hLc-MCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Tumour-propagating cells require the inductive interaction of
resident mesenchymal cells to foster lung cancer development.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25312525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Exp Eye Res. 2014 Dec;129:13-7. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2014.10.011. Epub 2014 Oct
11.

Transcript profile of cellular senescence-related genes in Fuchs endothelial
corneal dystrophy.

Matthaei M(1), Zhu AY(2), Kallay L(2), Eberhart CG(2), Cursiefen C(3), Jun AS(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, USA; 
Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany; Department 
of Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. 
(2)The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, USA. 
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (4)The
Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, USA.
Electronic address: aljun@jhmi.edu.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is a genetically heterogeneous
disease. Hypothesizing that cellular senescence may be relevant in FECD
pathogenesis, genetically undifferentiated late-onset FECD endothelial samples
were analyzed to identify common changes of specific senescence-related
transcripts. Total RNA was extracted from 21 FECD endothelial samples retrieved
from patients undergoing lamellar keratoplasty due to clinically diagnosed
end-stage FECD and from 12 endothelial samples retrieved from normal autopsy
eyes. Taqman low density array (TLDA) cards were used to analyze differential
expression of 89 cellular senescence-related transcripts. Result validation was
performed using individual real-time PCR assays. TLDA-analysis demonstrated
differential expression of 31 transcripts (fold-change >1.5; p < 0.05). Thereof, 
27 showed significant up-regulation and 4 significant down-regulation. Markedly
elevated mRNA-levels of the constitutively active and reactive oxygen
species-generating enzyme NOX4 were found in all evaluable FECD samples. In
addition, increased expression of CDKN2A and its transcriptional activators ETS1 
and ARHGAP18 (SENEX) along with decreased expression of CDKN2A inhibitor ID1 were
detected in FECD samples. Consistent over-expression of NOX4 in FECD endothelial 
samples suggests a role as pathogenic factor and as a potential new treatment
target in FECD. Transcriptional up-regulation of the CDKN2A-pathway provides
further evidence for increased cellular senescence in FECD endothelium.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4259834
PMID: 25311168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 15;5(21):10621-35.

Inhibitory effects of transcription factor Ikaros on the expression of liver
cancer stem cell marker CD133 in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang L(1), Li H(1), Ge C(1), Li M(1), Zhao FY(1), Hou HL(1), Zhu MX(1), Tian
H(1), Zhang LX(1), Chen TY(2), Jiang GP(3), Xie HY(3), Cui Y(4), Yao M(1), Li
JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. (2)Qi Dong Liver Cancer Institute, Qi Dong, China. (3)Department
of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. (4)Cancer Institute of Guangxi, Nanning, China.

CD133 is a cellular surface glycoprotein that has been reported as a marker for
the enrichment of cancer stem cells (CSCs). However, the regulatory mechanism of 
CD133 remains unknown. CSCs have been proposed to contribute to radioresistance
and multi-drug resistance. The elucidation of key regulators of CD133 and CSCs is
critical for the development of CSC-targeted therapy. In this study, we showed
that Ikarosinhibited the expression of CD133 via direct binding to the CD133 P1
promoter and repressed the tumorigenic and self-renewal capacity of CD133(+)
cancer stem-like cells in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We found that Ikaros
interacted with CtBP as a transcription repressor complex, which inhibited CD133 
expression in HCC. We also demonstrated that Ikaros expression was up-regulated
by ETS1 which activity was regulated by MAPKs pathway. Furthermore, decreased
expression of Ikaroswas significantly associated with poor survival in HCC
patients. Overall, our study identifies that Ikaros plays a role as a
transcription repressor in HCC and is a new reactivated therapeutic target for
the treatment of HCC. Meanwhile, our findings provide evidence that Ikaros could 
be an attractive inhibitor of the target gene CD133, which reactivates anticancer
mechanisms in targeted CSC therapy.

PMCID: PMC4279398
PMID: 25301737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct 29;42(19):11928-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku929. Epub
2014 Oct 7.

ETS1 is a genome-wide effector of RAS/ERK signaling in epithelial cells.

Plotnik JP(1), Budka JA(2), Ferris MW(2), Hollenhorst PC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA.
(2)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana,
USA. (3)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington,
Indiana, USA pchollen@indiana.edu.

The RAS/ERK pathway is commonly activated in carcinomas and promotes oncogenesis 
by altering transcriptional programs. However, the array of cis-regulatory
elements and trans-acting factors that mediate these transcriptional changes is
still unclear. Our genome-wide analysis determined that a sequence consisting of 
neighboring ETS and AP-1 transcription factor binding sites is enriched near cell
migration genes activated by RAS/ERK signaling in epithelial cells. In vivo
screening of candidate ETS proteins revealed that ETS1 is specifically required
for migration of RAS/ERK activated cells. Furthermore, both migration and
transcriptional activation through ETS/AP-1 required ERK phosphorylation of ETS1.
Genome-wide mapping of multiple ETS proteins demonstrated that ETS1 binds
specifically to enhancer ETS/AP-1 sequences. ETS1 occupancy, and its role in cell
migration, was conserved in epithelial cells derived from multiple tissues,
consistent with a chromatin organization common to epithelial cell lines.
Genome-wide expression analysis showed that ETS1 was required for activation of
RAS-regulated cell migration genes, but also identified a surprising role for
ETS1 in the repression of genes such as DUSP4, DUSP6 and SPRY4 that provide
negative feedback to the RAS/ERK pathway. Consistently, ETS1 was required for
robust RAS/ERK pathway activation. Therefore, ETS1 has dual roles in mediating
epithelial-specific RAS/ERK transcriptional functions.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4231772
PMID: 25294825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Oct;70(Pt 10):1380-4. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X14018470. Epub 2014 Sep 25.

Crystallization of the Ets1-Runx1-CBFß-DNA complex formed on the TCRa gene
enhancer.

Shiina M(1), Hamada K(1), Inoue-Bungo T(2), Shimamura M(2), Baba S(2), Sato K(1),
Ogata K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0004, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 3-9
Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0004, Japan.

Gene transcription is regulated in part through the assembly of multiple
transcription factors (TFs) on gene enhancers. To enable examination of the
mechanism underlying the formation of these complexes and their response to a
phosphorylation signal, two kinds of higher-order TF-DNA assemblies were
crystallized composed of an unmodified or phosphorylated Ets1 fragment, a
Runx1(L94K) fragment and a CBFß fragment on the T-cell receptor (TCR) a gene
enhancer. Within these complexes, the Ets1 and Runx1 fragments contain
intrinsically disordered regulatory regions as well as their DNA-binding domains.
Crystals of the complex containing unmodified Ets1 belonged to space group
P212121, with unit-cell parameters a = 78.7, b = 102.1, c = 195.0 Å, and
diffracted X-rays to a resolution of 2.35 Å, and those containing phosphorylated 
Ets1 belonged to the same space group, with unit-cell parameters a = 78.6, b =
101.7, c = 194.7 Å, and diffracted X-rays to a similar resolution. To facilitate 
crystallization, a Runx1 residue involved in a hydrophobic patch that was
predicted to be engaged in crystal packing based on the previously reported
structures of Runx1-containing crystals was mutated.

PMID: 25286944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Biosyst. 2014 Dec;10(12):3249-54. doi: 10.1039/c4mb00329b. Epub 2014 Oct 7.

Gene module based regulator inference identifying miR-139 as a tumor suppressor
in colorectal cancer.

Gu J(1), Chen Y, Huang H, Yin L, Xie Z, Zhang MQ.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, TNLIST Bioinformatics Division & Center 
for Synthetic and Systems Biology, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China. jgu@tsinghua.edu.cn michaelzhang@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Colorectal cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancer types worldwide.
Identification of the key regulators of the altered biological networks is
crucial for understanding the complex molecular mechanisms of colorectal cancer. 
We proposed a gene module based approach to infer key miRNAs regulating the major
gene network alterations in cancer tissues. By integrating gene differential
expression and co-expression information with a protein-protein interaction
network, the differential gene expression modules, which captured the major gene 
network changes, were identified for colorectal cancer. Then, several key miRNAs,
which extensively regulate the gene modules, were inferred by analyzing their
target gene enrichment in the modules. Among the inferred candidates, three
miRNAs, miR-101, miR-124 and miR-139, are frequently down-regulated in colorectal
cancers. The following computational and experimental analyses demonstrate that
miR-139 can inhibit cell proliferation and cell cycle G1/S transition. A known
oncogene ETS1, a key transcription factor in the gene module, was experimentally 
verified as a novel target of miR-139. miR-139 was found to be significantly
down-regulated in early pathological cancer stages and its expression remained at
very low levels in advanced stages. These results indicate that miR-139, inferred
by the gene module based approach, should be a key tumor suppressor in early
cancer development.

PMID: 25286864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Oct 2;95(4):462-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.09.004.

Genome-wide association study identifies five susceptibility loci for follicular 
lymphoma outside the HLA region.

Skibola CF, Berndt SI, Vijai J, Conde L, Wang Z, Yeager M, de Bakker PI, Birmann 
BM, Vajdic CM, Foo JN, Bracci PM, Vermeulen RC, Slager SL, de Sanjose S, Wang SS,
Linet MS, Salles G, Lan Q, Severi G, Hjalgrim H, Lightfoot T, Melbye M, Gu J,
Ghesquières H, Link BK, Morton LM, Holly EA, Smith A, Tinker LF, Teras LR,
Kricker A, Becker N, Purdue MP, Spinelli JJ, Zhang Y, Giles GG, Vineis P,
Monnereau A, Bertrand KA, Albanes D, Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A, Gabbas A, Chung CC,
Burdett L, Hutchinson A, Lawrence C, Montalvan R, Liang L, Huang J, Ma B, Liu J, 
Adami HO, Glimelius B, Ye Y, Nowakowski GS, Dogan A, Thompson CA, Habermann TM,
Novak AJ, Liebow M, Witzig TE, Weiner GJ, Schenk M, Hartge P, De Roos AJ, Cozen
W, Zhi D, Akers NK, Riby J, Smith MT, Lacher M, Villano DJ, Maria A, Roman E,
Kane E, Jackson RD, North KE, Diver WR, Turner J, Armstrong BK, Benavente Y,
Boffetta P, Brennan P, Foretova L, Maynadie M, Staines A, McKay J, Brooks-Wilson 
AR, Zheng T, Holford TR, Chamosa S, Kaaks R, Kelly RS, Ohlsson B, Travis RC,
Weiderpass E, Clavel J, Giovannucci E, Kraft P, Virtamo J, Mazza P, Cocco P,
Ennas MG, Chiu BC, Fraumeni JF Jr, Nieters A, Offit K, Wu X, Cerhan JR, Smedby
KE, Chanock SJ, Rothman N.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of follicular lymphoma (FL) have
previously identified human leukocyte antigen (HLA) gene variants. To identify
additional FL susceptibility loci, we conducted a large-scale two-stage GWAS in
4,523 case subjects and 13,344 control subjects of European ancestry. Five
non-HLA loci were associated with FL risk: 11q23.3 (rs4938573, p = 5.79 ×
10(-20)) near CXCR5; 11q24.3 (rs4937362, p = 6.76 × 10(-11)) near ETS1; 3q28
(rs6444305, p = 1.10 × 10(-10)) in LPP; 18q21.33 (rs17749561, p = 8.28 × 10(-10))
near BCL2; and 8q24.21 (rs13254990, p = 1.06 × 10(-8)) near PVT1. In an analysis 
of the HLA region, we identified four linked HLA-DRß1 multiallelic amino acids at
positions 11, 13, 28, and 30 that were associated with FL risk (pomnibus = 4.20 ×
10(-67) to 2.67 × 10(-70)). Additional independent signals included rs17203612 in
HLA class II (odds ratio [OR(per-allele)] = 1.44; p = 4.59 × 10(-16)) and
rs3130437 in HLA class I (OR(per-allele) = 1.23; p = 8.23 × 10(-9)). Our findings
further expand the number of loci associated with FL and provide evidence that
multiple common variants outside the HLA region make a significant contribution
to FL risk.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4185120
PMID: 25279986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Blood. 2014 Nov 6;124(19):2948-52. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-556332. Epub 2014
Sep 29.

OVOL2 is a critical regulator of ER71/ETV2 in generating FLK1+, hematopoietic,
and endothelial cells from embryonic stem cells.

Kim JY(1), Lee RH(2), Kim TM(3), Kim DW(2), Jeon YJ(2), Huh SH(4), Oh SY(5), Kyba
M(6), Kataoka H(7), Choi K(8), Ornitz DM(4), Chae JI(2), Park C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Cardiovascular Biology, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA; Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois, Chicago, IL; (2)Department of Oral Pharmacology, School
of Dentistry, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Republic of Korea;
(3)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois,
Chicago, IL; (4)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO; (5)Department of Pediatrics, Center for
Cardiovascular Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA;
(6)Department of Medicine, Medical School, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
MN; (7)Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, 
Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan; and. (8)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO.

In this study, we report that OVOL2, a C2H2 zinc finger protein, is a novel
binding protein of ER71, which is a critical transcription factor for blood and
vessel development. OVOL2 directly interacted with ER71, but not with ETS1 or
ETS2, in the nucleus. ER71-mediated activation of the Flk1 promoter was further
enhanced by OVOL2, although OVOL2 alone failed to activate it. Consistently,
coexpression of ER71 and OVOL2 in differentiating embryonic stem cells led to a
significant augmentation of FLK1(+), endothelial, and hematopoietic cells. Such
cooperative effects were impaired by the short hairpin RNA-mediated inhibition of
Ovol2. Collectively, we show that ER71 directly interacts with OVOL2 and that
such interaction is critical for FLK1(+) cell generation and their
differentiation into downstream cell lineages.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4224193
PMID: 25267199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Jan 15;330(2):398-411. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.09.020. Epub 
2014 Oct 1.

Pregnane and Xenobiotic Receptor gene expression in liver cells is modulated by
Ets-1 in synchrony with transcription factors Pax5, LEF-1 and c-Jun.

Kumari S(1), Saradhi M(1), Rana M(1), Chatterjee S(1), Aumercier M(2),
Mukhopadhyay G(1), Tyagi RK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 
110067, India. (2)IRI, CNRS USR 3078, Université de Lille-Nord de France, Parc
CNRS de la Haute Borne, 50 Avenue de Halley, BP 70478, 59658 Villeneuve d'Ascq
Cedex, France. (3)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi 110067, India. Electronic address: rktyagi@yahoo.com.

Nuclear receptor PXR is predominantly expressed in liver and intestine.
Expression of PXR is observed to be dysregulated in various metabolic disorders
indicating its involvement in disease development. However, information available
on mechanisms of PXR self-regulation is fragmentary. The present investigation
identifies some of the regulatory elements responsible for its tight regulation
and low cellular expression. Here, we report that the PXR-promoter is a target
for some key transcription factors like PU.1/Ets-1, Pax5, LEF-1 and c-Jun.
Interestingly, we observed that PXR-promoter responsiveness to Pax5, LEF-1 and
c-Jun, is considerably enhanced by Ets transcription factors (PU.1 and Ets-1).
Co-transfection of cells with Ets-1, LEF-1 and c-Jun increased PXR-promoter
activity by 5-fold and also induced expression of endogenous human PXR.
Site-directed mutagenesis and transfection studies revealed that two Ets binding 
sites and two of the three LEF binding sites in the PXR-promoter are functional
and have a positive effect on PXR transcription. Results suggest that expression 
of Ets family members, in conjunction with Pax5, LEF-1 and c-Jun, lead to
coordinated up-regulation of PXR gene transcription. Insights obtained on the
regulation of PXR gene have relevance in offering important cues towards normal
functioning as well as development of several metabolic disorders via PXR
signaling.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25265064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. BMC Genomics. 2014 Sep 18;15:802. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-802.

miRNome traits analysis on endothelial lineage cells discloses biomarker
potential circulating microRNAs which affect progenitor activities.

Chang TY, Huang TS, Wang HW, Chang SJ, Lo HH, Chiu YL, Wang YL, Hsiao CD, Tsai
CH, Chan CH, You RI, Wu CH, Tsai TN, Cheng SM, Cheng CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tri-Service General
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
chengcc@mail.ndmctsgh.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) play a fundamental role in not
only blood vessel development but also post-natal vascular repair. Currently EPCs
are defined as early and late EPCs based on their biological properties and their
time of appearance during in vitro culture. Both EPC types assist angiogenesis
and have been linked to ischemia-related disorders, including coronary artery
disease (CAD).
RESULTS: We found late EPCs are more mobile than early EPCs and matured
endothelial cells (ECs). To pinpoint the mechanism, microRNA profiles of early
EPCs late EPCs, and ECs were deciphered by small RNA sequencing. Obtained
signatures made up of both novel and known microRNAs, in which anti-angiogenic
microRNAs such as miR-221 and miR-222 are more abundant in matured ECs than in
late EPCs. Overexpression of miR-221 and miR-222 resulted in the reduction of
genes involved in hypoxia response, metabolism, TGF-beta signalling, and cell
motion. Not only hamper late EPC activities in vitro, both microRNAs (especially 
miR-222) also hindered in vivo vasculogenesis in a zebrafish model. Reporter
assays showed that miR-222, but not miR-221, targets the angiogenic factor ETS1. 
In contrast, PIK3R1 is the target of miR-221, but not miR-222 in late EPCs.
Clinically, both miR-221-PIK3R1 and miR-222-ETS1 pairs are deregulated in late
EPCs of CAD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results illustrate EPCs and ECs exploit unique miRNA modalities 
to regulate angiogenic features, and explain why late EPC levels and activities
are reduced in CAD patients. These data will further help to develop new plasma
biomarkers and therapeutic approaches for ischemia-related diseases or tumor
angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4176563
PMID: 25236949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014 Dec;97(3):375-85. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.09.016. Epub
2014 Sep 16.

Analysis of microRNA expression signatures in malignant pleural mesothelioma,
pleural inflammation, and atypical mesothelial hyperplasia reveals common
predictive tumorigenesis-related targets.

Ramírez-Salazar EG(1), Salinas-Silva LC(2), Vázquez-Manríquez ME(3),
Gayosso-Gómez LV(2), Negrete-Garcia MC(2), Ramírez-Rodriguez SL(2), Chávez R(1), 
Zenteno E(1), Santillán P(4), Kelly-García J(5), Ortiz-Quintero B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Research Unit, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosio 
Villegas", Mexico City, Mexico. (3)Department of Pathology, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosio Villegas", Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades
Respiratorias "Ismael Cosio Villegas", Mexico City, Mexico. (5)Oncology Service, 
Centro Médico Siglo XXI, Mexico City, Mexico. (6)Research Unit, Instituto
Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosio Villegas", Mexico City,
Mexico. Electronic address: boq@iner.gob.mx.

Pleural chronic inflammation (PP) and mesothelial hyperplasia (HP) may be
critical to the development of malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM). Nonetheless,
studies searching for mechanistic links involving microRNA (miRNA) regulation
among these interrelated processes have not been reported. Using PCR-Array, we
identified the miRNAs expressed in pleural tissues diagnosed with MPM (n=5), PP
(n=4) and HP (n=5), as well as in non-cancerous/non-inflammatory tissue as the
normal control (n=5). We performed bioinformatics and network analysis of
differentially expressed miRNAs to identify tumorigenesis-related miRNAs and
their biological networks. The targets of four down-regulated miRNAs in MPM
(mir-181a-5p, miR-101-3p, miR-145-5p and miR-212-3p), one in PP (mir-101-3p) and 
one in HP (mir-494) were significantly enriched in "pathways in cancer".
Interactome networks revealed that >50% of down-regulated miRNAs in MPM targeted 
the signaling-activation molecule MAPK1, the transcription factor ETS1 and the
mesenchymal transition-associated molecule FZDA, which have been associated with 
oncogenic function. Comparative analysis revealed that FZD4 was an overlapping
gene target of down-regulated miRNAs that were associated with "pathways in
cancer" in MPM, PP and HP. Moreover, MAPK1, ETS1 and Cox-2, a pro-inflammatory
enzyme associated with over-expression in cancers, were among the 25 overlapping 
target genes in MPM and PP. This network analysis revealed a potential
combinatory effect of deregulated miRNAs in MPM pathogenesis and indicated
potential molecular links between pleural inflammation and hyperplasia with
tumorigenesis mechanisms in pleura.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25236577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 15;5(19):9183-98.

Binding of a Smad4/Ets-1 complex to a novel intragenic regulatory element in
exon12 of FPGS underlies decreased gene expression and antifolate resistance in
leukemia.

Raz S(1), Stark M(1), Assaraf YG(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Fred Wyszkowski Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Biology,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

Polyglutamylation of antifolates catalyzed by folylpoly-<U+03B3>-glutamate synthetase
(FPGS) is essential for their intracellular retention and cytotoxic activity.
Hence, loss of FPGS expression and/or function results in lack of antifolate
polyglutamylation and drug resistance. Members of the TGF-ß/Smad signaling
pathway are negative regulators of hematopoiesis and deregulation of this pathway
is considered a major contributor to leukemogenesis. Here we show that FPGS gene 
expression is inversely correlated with the binding of a Smad4/Ets-1 complex to
exon12 of FPGS in both acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells and acute myeloid
leukemia blast specimens. We demonstrate that antifolate resistant leukemia cells
harbor a heterozygous point mutation in exon12 of FPGS which disrupts FPGS
activity by abolishing ATP binding, and alters the binding pattern of
transcription factors to the genomic region of exon12. This in turn results in
the near complete silencing of the wild type allele leading to a 97% loss of FPGS
activity. We show that exon12 is a novel intragenic transcriptional regulator,
endowed with the ability to drive transcription in vitro, and is occupied by
transcription factors and chromatin remodeling agents (e.g. Smad4/Ets-1, HP-1 and
Brg1) in vivo. These findings bear important implications for the rational
overcoming of antifolate resistance in leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4253427
PMID: 25229333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 15;193(8):3959-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401099. Epub 2014
Sep 15.

Regulation of the Th1 genomic locus from Ifng through Tmevpg1 by T-bet.

Collier SP(1), Henderson MA(2), Tossberg JT(2), Aune TM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232; and. (2)Department of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232. (3)Department of
Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232; and Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232 tom.aune@vanderbilt.edu.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), critical regulators of protein-coding genes, are
likely to be coexpressed with neighboring protein-coding genes in the genome. How
the genome integrates signals to achieve coexpression of lncRNA genes and
neighboring protein-coding genes is not well understood. The lncRNA Tmevpg1
(NeST, Ifng-AS1) is critical for Th1-lineage-specific expression of Ifng and is
coexpressed with Ifng. In this study, we show that T-bet guides epigenetic
remodeling of Tmevpg1 proximal and distal enhancers, leading to recruitment of
stimulus-inducible transcription factors, NF-<U+03BA>B and Ets-1, to the locus.
Activities of Tmevpg1-specific enhancers and Tmevpg1 transcription are dependent 
upon NF-<U+03BA>B. Thus, we propose that T-bet stimulates epigenetic remodeling of
Tmevpg1-specific enhancers and Ifng-specific enhancers to achieve
Th1-lineage-specific expression of Ifng.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4185266
PMID: 25225667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Nov;18(11):2311-20. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12399. Epub 2014 Sep
11.

HMGB1 mediates hyperglycaemia-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis via ERK/Ets-1
signalling pathway.

Wang WK(1), Lu QH, Zhang JN, Wang B, Liu XJ, An FS, Qin WD, Chen XY, Dong WQ,
Zhang C, Zhang Y, Zhang MX.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Public Health, Qilu Hospital of
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.

Apoptosis is a key event involved in diabetic cardiomyopathy. The expression of
high mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1) is up-regulated in diabetic mice.
However, the molecular mechanism of high glucose (HG)-induced cardiomyocyte
apoptosis remains obscure. We aimed to determine the role of HMGB1 in HG-induced 
apoptosis of cardiomyocytes. Treating neonatal primary cardiomyocytes with HG
increased cell apoptosis, which was accompanied by elevated levels of HMGB1.
Inhibition of HMGB1 by short-hairpin RNA significantly decreased HG-induced cell 
apoptosis by reducing caspase-3 activation and ratio of Bcl2-associated X protein
to B-cell lymphoma/leukemia-2 (bax/bcl-2). Furthermore, HG activated E26
transformation-specific sequence-1 (Ets-1), and HMGB1 inhibition attenuated
HG-induced activation of Ets-1 via extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2) signalling. In addition, inhibition of Ets-1 significantly decreased
HG-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis. Similar results were observed in
streptozotocin-treated diabetic mice. Inhibition of HMGB1 by short-hairpin RNA
markedly decreased myocardial cell apoptosis and activation of ERK and Ets-1 in
diabetic mice. In conclusion, inhibition of HMGB1 may protect against
hyperglycaemia-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis by down-regulating ERK-dependent
activation of Ets-1.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4224563
PMID: 25210949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Circ Res. 2014 Oct 24;115(10):884-96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304458. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Increased frequency of de novo copy number variants in congenital heart disease
by integrative analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism array and exome
sequence data.

Glessner JT(1), Bick AG(1), Ito K(1), Homsy JG(1), Rodriguez-Murillo L(1), Fromer
M(1), Mazaika E(1), Vardarajan B(1), Italia M(1), Leipzig J(1), DePalma SR(1),
Golhar R(1), Sanders SJ(1), Yamrom B(1), Ronemus M(1), Iossifov I(1), Willsey
AJ(1), State MW(1), Kaltman JR(1), White PS(1), Shen Y(1), Warburton D(1),
Brueckner M(1), Seidman C(1), Goldmuntz E(1), Gelb BD(1), Lifton R(1), Seidman
J(1), Hakonarson H(2), Chung WK(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Applied Genomics (J.T.G., R.G., H.H.), Center for
Biomedical Informatics (M.I., J.L., P.S.W.), and Division of Cardiology (E.G.),
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia (J.T.G., H.H.); Department
of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (A.G.B., K.I., J.G.H., E.M.,
S.R.D., C.S., J.S.); Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA (J.G.H.); Department of Pediatrics, Mindich Child Health and
Development Institute (L.R.-M., B.D.G.), Department of Genetics and Genomic
Sciences (L.R.-M., M.F., B.D.G.), Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale
Biology (M.F.), and Psychiatric Genomics in the Department of Psychiatry (M.F.), 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Department of Systems
Biology (B.V., Y.S.), Department of Genetics and Development (in Medicine)
(D.W.), and Department of Pediatrics and Medicine (W.K.C.), Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY; Department of Genetics (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S.,
R.L.), Department of Pediatrics (M.B.), and Department of Medicine (R.L.), Yale
University, New Haven, CT; Department of Psychiatry, University of California,
San Francisco (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S.); Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY (B.Y., 
M.R., I.I.); and Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute (NHLBI), NIH, Bethesda, MD (J.R.K.). (2)From the Center for
Applied Genomics (J.T.G., R.G., H.H.), Center for Biomedical Informatics (M.I.,
J.L., P.S.W.), and Division of Cardiology (E.G.), Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, PA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine, Philadelphia (J.T.G., H.H.); Department of Genetics, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA (A.G.B., K.I., J.G.H., E.M., S.R.D., C.S., J.S.);
Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
(J.G.H.); Department of Pediatrics, Mindich Child Health and Development
Institute (L.R.-M., B.D.G.), Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences
(L.R.-M., M.F., B.D.G.), Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology
(M.F.), and Psychiatric Genomics in the Department of Psychiatry (M.F.), Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Department of Systems Biology
(B.V., Y.S.), Department of Genetics and Development (in Medicine) (D.W.), and
Department of Pediatrics and Medicine (W.K.C.), Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY; Department of Genetics (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S., R.L.),
Department of Pediatrics (M.B.), and Department of Medicine (R.L.), Yale
University, New Haven, CT; Department of Psychiatry, University of California,
San Francisco (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S.); Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY (B.Y., 
M.R., I.I.); and Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute (NHLBI), NIH, Bethesda, MD (J.R.K.). hakonarson@email.chop.edu
Wkc15@Cumc.Columbia.Edu.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2014 Oct 24;115(10):821-3.

RATIONALE: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is among the most common birth defects.
Most cases are of unknown pathogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the contribution of de novo copy number variants (CNVs)
in the pathogenesis of sporadic CHD.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied 538 CHD trios using genome-wide dense single
nucleotide polymorphism arrays and whole exome sequencing. Results were
experimentally validated using digital droplet polymerase chain reaction. We
compared validated CNVs in CHD cases with CNVs in 1301 healthy control trios. The
2 complementary high-resolution technologies identified 63 validated de novo CNVs
in 51 CHD cases. A significant increase in CNV burden was observed when comparing
CHD trios with healthy trios, using either single nucleotide polymorphism array
(P=7×10(-5); odds ratio, 4.6) or whole exome sequencing data (P=6×10(-4); odds
ratio, 3.5) and remained after removing 16% of de novo CNV loci previously
reported as pathogenic (P=0.02; odds ratio, 2.7). We observed recurrent de novo
CNVs on 15q11.2 encompassing CYFIP1, NIPA1, and NIPA2 and single de novo CNVs
encompassing DUSP1, JUN, JUP, MED15, MED9, PTPRE SREBF1, TOP2A, and ZEB2, genes
that interact with established CHD proteins NKX2-5 and GATA4. Integrating de novo
variants in whole exome sequencing and CNV data suggests that ETS1 is the
pathogenic gene altered by 11q24.2-q25 deletions in Jacobsen syndrome and that
CTBP2 is the pathogenic gene in 10q subtelomeric deletions.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate a significantly increased frequency of rare de novo
CNVs in CHD patients compared with healthy controls and suggest several novel
genetic loci for CHD.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4209190
PMID: 25205790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 1;193(7):3470-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301663. Epub 2014
Aug 29.

GATA-3 dose-dependent checkpoints in early T cell commitment.

Scripture-Adams DD(1), Damle SS(1), Li L(1), Elihu KJ(1), Qin S(1), Arias AM(1), 
Butler RR 3rd(1), Champhekar A(1), Zhang JA(1), Rothenberg EV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125. (2)Division of Biology and Biological
Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
evroth@its.caltech.edu.

GATA-3 expression is crucial for T cell development and peaks during commitment
to the T cell lineage, midway through the CD4(-)CD8(-) (double-negative [DN])
stages 1-3. We used RNA interference and conditional deletion to reduce GATA-3
protein acutely at specific points during T cell differentiation in vitro. Even
moderate GATA-3 reduction killed DN1 cells, delayed progression to the DN2 stage,
skewed DN2 gene regulation, and blocked appearance of the DN3 phenotype. Although
a Bcl-2 transgene rescued DN1 survival and improved DN2 cell generation, it did
not restore DN3 differentiation. Gene expression analyses (quantitative PCR, RNA 
sequencing) showed that GATA-3-deficient DN2 cells quickly upregulated genes,
including Spi1 (PU.1) and Bcl11a, and downregulated genes, including Cpa3, Ets1, 
Zfpm1, Bcl11b, Il9r, and Il17rb with gene-specific kinetics and dose
dependencies. These targets could mediate two distinct roles played by GATA-3 in 
lineage commitment, as revealed by removing wild-type or GATA-3-deficient early T
lineage cells from environmental Notch signals. GATA-3 worked as a potent
repressor of B cell potential even at low expression levels, so that only full
deletion of GATA-3 enabled pro-T cells to reveal B cell potential. The ability of
GATA-3 to block B cell development did not require T lineage commitment factor
Bcl11b. In prethymic multipotent precursors, however, titration of GATA-3
activity using tamoxifen-inducible GATA-3 showed that GATA-3 inhibits B and
myeloid developmental alternatives at different threshold doses. Furthermore,
differential impacts of a GATA-3 obligate repressor construct imply that B and
myeloid development are inhibited through distinct transcriptional mechanisms.
Thus, the pattern of GATA-3 expression sequentially produces B lineage exclusion,
T lineage progression, and myeloid-lineage exclusion for commitment.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4170028
PMID: 25172496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Pharmacol. 2014 Nov;86(5):536-47. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.092759. Epub 2014 Aug 
26.

A methylation-based regulatory network for microRNA 320a in chemoresistant breast
cancer.

He DX(1), Gu XT(1), Jiang L(1), Jin J(1), Ma X(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Cereal Fermentation Technology (D.X.H.),
and Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutics (X.T.G., L.J., J.J., X.M.), Jiangnan University, Wuxi, People's
Republic of China. (2)National Engineering Laboratory for Cereal Fermentation
Technology (D.X.H.), and Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology,
School of Medicine and Pharmaceutics (X.T.G., L.J., J.J., X.M.), Jiangnan
University, Wuxi, People's Republic of China maxin@jiangnan.edu.cn.

We previously demonstrated that the overexpression of transient receptor
potential channel C5 (TRPC5) and nuclear factor of activated T-cells isoform c3
(NFATC3) are essential for cancer chemoresistance, but how TRPC5 and NFATC3 are
regulated was still unclear. In this study, microRNA 320a (miR-320a) was found to
be down-regulated in chemoresistant cancer cells. MiR-320a directly targeted
TRPC5 and NFATC3, and down-regulation of miR-320a triggered TRPC5 and NFATC3
overexpression. In chemoresistant cells, down-regulation of miR-320a was
associated with regulation by methylation, which implicated promoter methylation 
of the miR-320a coding sequence. Furthermore, the transcription factor v-ets
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS-1), which inhibited miR-320a
expression, was activated in chemoresistant cancer cells; such activation was
associated with hypomethylation of the ETS-1 promoter. Lastly, the
down-regulation of miR-320a and high expression of TRPC5, NFATC3, and ETS-1 were 
verified in clinically chemoresistant samples. Low expression of MiR-320a was
also found to be a significant unfavorable predictor for clinic outcome. In
conclusion, miR-320a is a mediator of chemoresistance by targeting TRPC5 and
NFATC3. Expression of miR-320a is regulated by methylation of its promoter and
that of ETS-1.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25159093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer Lett. 2014 Nov 28;354(2):245-53. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.08.021. Epub
2014 Aug 20.

Interleukin-8 promotes cell migration through integrin avß6 upregulation in
colorectal cancer.

Sun Q(1), Sun F(2), Wang B(1), Liu S(3), Niu W(4), Liu E(4), Peng C(4), Wang
J(4), Gao H(1), Liang B(1), Niu Z(1), Zou X(1), Niu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University,
Jinan 250012, Shandong, China; Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and
Function Research, Chinese Ministry of Education and Public Health, Qilu Hospital
of Shandong University, Jinan 250012, Shandong, China. (2)Department of
Hepatology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan 250012, Shandong, China. 
(3)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou
Medical College, Binzhou 256603, Shandong, China. (4)Department of Hepatobiliary 
Surgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan 250012, Shandong, China.
(5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University,
Jinan 250012, Shandong, China. Electronic address: jun_niujun@outlook.com.

Colorectal cancer (CRC), which is notorious for high morbidity and mortality
around the world, shows a predilection for metastasis to liver. Interleukin-8
(IL-8), a chemokine with a defining CXC amino acid motif, has been reported to
promote CRC cell migration and is associated with poor prognosis of CRC. However,
the underlying molecular mechanism of IL-8-mediated migration remains obscure. In
this study, we first demonstrated the cross talk between IL-8 and integrin avß6. 
We analyzed 139 human CRC samples, and found that the immunohistochemical
expression of avß6 was significantly correlated with expression of IL-8.
Furthermore, IL-8 increased the migration through integrin avß6 in human CRC
cells, and both CXCR1 and CXCR2 were primarily involved during the process. IL-8 
upregulated avß6 expression in a dose-dependent manner through activation of ERK 
and Ets-1 signaling pathway. Taken together, our results indicated that IL-8
enhances the migration of CRC cells by increasing avß6 integrin expression
through the ERK/Ets-1 pathway. Targeting integrin avß6 in IL-8 expressing tumors 
might be a potential therapeutic strategy for CRC patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25150782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Br J Haematol. 2014 Nov;167(4):514-23. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13079. Epub 2014 Aug 22.

The oncogenic JUNB/CD30 axis contributes to cell cycle deregulation in ALK+
anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Atsaves V(1), Lekakis L, Drakos E, Leventaki V, Ghaderi M, Baltatzis GE,
Chioureas D, Jones D, Feretzaki M, Liakou C, Panayiotidis P, Gorgoulis V,
Patsouris E, Medeiros LJ, Claret FX, Rassidakis GZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA; First Department of Pathology, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)+ anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL)
frequently carries the t(2;5)(p23;q35) resulting in expression of NPM1(NPM)-ALK
oncogenic kinase. The latter is capable of activating ERK kinase, which
upregulates JUNB expression through ETS1. JUNB, in turn, interacts with the
TNFRSF8 (CD30) gene promoter and induces CD30 (TNFRSF8) overexpression. However, 
the role of CD30 overexpression in ALK+ ALCL oncogenesis remains unknown. Here we
show that the JUNB gene is frequently amplified in ALK+ ALCL, suggesting gene
amplification as an additional underlying mechanism for JUNB overexpression.
Silencing of JUNB resulted in reduced cell growth and colony formation associated
with decreased activator protein-1 activity and G1/S and G2/M cell cycle arrest. 
These effects were linked to decreased CD30 levels, downregulation of CCNA2
(Cyclin A), CCND2 (Cyclin D2) and CCND3 (Cyclin D3) and upregulation of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors CDKN2A (p14) and CDKN1A (p21), but not CDKN1B 
(p27). Similar cell cycle changes were observed following the knock-down of
TNFRSF8 gene or blockade of its function using anti-CD30 antibodies, which were
associated with upregulation of CDKN2A and CDKN1A, but not CDKN1B. These findings
indicate that JUNB may partly operate through CD30 signalling. Silencing of JUNB 
also sensitized NPM1-ALCL+ cells to standard chemotherapeutic agents. Our
findings uncover the oncogenic role of the JUNB/CD30 axis and its potential as
therapeutic target in ALK+ ALCL.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25145835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Aug 21;10(8):e1003771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003771. 
eCollection 2014.

Tracing the evolution of lineage-specific transcription factor binding sites in a
birth-death framework.

Yokoyama KD(1), Zhang Y(2), Ma J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, United States of America. (2)Department of Bioengineering,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, United States of
America. (3)Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, United States of America; Department of
Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois,
United States of America.

Changes in cis-regulatory element composition that result in novel patterns of
gene expression are thought to be a major contributor to the evolution of
lineage-specific traits. Although transcription factor binding events show
substantial variation across species, most computational approaches to study
regulatory elements focus primarily upon highly conserved sites, and rely heavily
upon multiple sequence alignments. However, sequence conservation based
approaches have limited ability to detect lineage-specific elements that could
contribute to species-specific traits. In this paper, we describe a novel
framework that utilizes a birth-death model to trace the evolution of
lineage-specific binding sites without relying on detailed base-by-base
cross-species alignments. Our model was applied to analyze the evolution of
binding sites based on the ChIP-seq data for six transcription factors (GATA1,
SOX2, CTCF, MYC, MAX, ETS1) along the lineage toward human after human-mouse
common ancestor. We estimate that a substantial fraction of binding sites
(~58-79% for each factor) in humans have origins since the divergence with mouse.
Over 15% of all binding sites are unique to hominids. Such elements are often
enriched near genes associated with specific pathways, and harbor more common
SNPs than older binding sites in the human genome. These results support the
ability of our method to identify lineage-specific regulatory elements and help
understand their roles in shaping variation in gene regulation across species.

PMCID: PMC4140645
PMID: 25144359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cancer Lett. 2014 Nov 28;354(2):427-37. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.08.017. Epub
2014 Aug 15.

ß6 integrin induces the expression of metalloproteinase-3 and metalloproteinase-9
in colon cancer cells via ERK-ETS1 pathway.

Gao H(1), Peng C(1), Liang B(1), Shahbaz M(1), Liu S(2), Wang B(1), Sun Q(1), Niu
Z(1), Niu W(3), Liu E(3), Wang J(3), Lin P(3), Wang J(4), Niu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan
250012, Shandong, China; Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function
Research, Chinese Ministry of Education and Public Health, Jinan 250012,
Shandong, China. (2)Department of Thyroid & Breast Surgery, Affiliated Hospital
of Binzhou Medical College, Binzhou 256603, Shandong, China. (3)Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250012,
Shandong, China. (4)Department of Surgical Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009,
Zhejiang, China. (5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong 
University, Jinan 250012, Shandong, China. Electronic address:
niujunsdu@outlook.com.

We previously reported that ß6 integrin played an important role in the
progression of colon cancer. In this study, we demonstrated that ß6 integrin
induced the expression of MMP-3/MMP-9 and the invasion of colon cancer cells.
Moreover, that function was abolished by the inhibition of ERK/MAPK pathways or
knockdown of ETS1, an important transcription factor of MMP genes. Here, we
showed that ß6 induced phosphorylation of ETS1 via the ERK/MAPK pathways, through
which the MMP-3/MMP-9 promoters were stimulated, thereby leading to the
up-regulation of MMP-3/MMP-9, and subsequent the invasion of colon cancer cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25135220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Nov;10(5):2421-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2491. Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Differential co-expression analysis of rheumatoid arthritis with microarray data.

Wang K(1), Zhao L(2), Liu X(1), Hao Z(2), Zhou Y(1), Yang C(1), Li H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Orthopedics, The Harbin Fifth Hospital, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the underlying molecular
mechanisms of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) using microarray expression profiles from
osteoarthritis and RA patients, to improve diagnosis and treatment strategies for
the condition. The gene expression profile of GSE27390 was downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus, including 19 samples from patients with RA (n=9) or
osteoarthritis (n=10). Firstly, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
obtained with the thresholds of |logFC|>1.0 and P<0.05, using the t-test method
in LIMMA package. Then, differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) and
differentially co-expressed links (DCLs) were screened with q<0.25 by the
differential coexpression analysis and differential regulation analysis of gene
expression microarray data package. Secondly, pathway enrichment analysis for
DCGs was performed by the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery and the DCLs associated with RA were selected by comparing the obtained
DCLs with known transcription factor (TF)-targets in the TRANSFAC database.
Finally, the obtained TFs were mapped to the known TF-targets to construct the
network using cytoscape software. A total of 1755 DEGs, 457 DCGs and 101988 DCLs 
were achieved and there were 20 TFs in the obtained six TF-target relations
(STAT3-TNF, PBX1-PLAU, SOCS3-STAT3, GATA1-ETS2, ETS1-ICAM4 and CEBPE-GATA1) and
457 DCGs. A number of TF-target relations in the constructed network were not
within DCLs when the TF and target gene were DCGs. The identified TFs may have an
important role in the pathogenesis of RA and have the potential to be used as
biomarkers for the development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for
RA.

PMID: 25118911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cancer Cell. 2014 Aug 11;26(2):222-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.06.026.

Phosphorylation of ETS1 by Src family kinases prevents its recognition by the
COP1 tumor suppressor.

Lu G(1), Zhang Q(1), Huang Y(2), Song J(3), Tomaino R(4), Ehrenberger T(5), Lim
E(6), Liu W(7), Bronson RT(8), Bowden M(2), Brock J(3), Krop IE(1), Dillon DA(3),
Gygi SP(4), Mills GB(7), Richardson AL(9), Signoretti S(10), Yaffe MB(5), Kaelin 
WG Jr(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02215, USA. (2)Center for Molecular Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)Department of Cell
Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Department of Biology,
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (6)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(7)Department of Systems Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)Rodent Histopathology Core, Dana Farber/Harvard Cancer
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (9)Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA; Department of Cancer Cell Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. (10)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (11)Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Electronic address:
william_kaelin@dfci.harvard.edu.

Oncoproteins and tumor suppressors antagonistically converge on critical nodes
governing neoplastic growth, invasion, and metastasis. We discovered that
phosphorylation of the ETS1 and ETS2 transcriptional oncoproteins at specific
serine or threonine residues creates binding sites for the COP1 tumor suppressor 
protein, which is an ubiquitin ligase component, leading to their destruction. In
the case of ETS1, however, phosphorylation of a neighboring tyrosine residue by
Src family kinases disrupts COP1 binding, thereby stabilizing ETS1. Src-dependent
accumulation of ETS1 in breast cancer cells promotes anchorage-independent growth
in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. These findings expand the list of potential
COP1 substrates to include proteins whose COP1-binding sites are subject to
regulatory phosphorylation and provide insights into transformation by Src family
kinases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4169234
PMID: 25117710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Nutr Biochem. 2014 Nov;25(11):1177-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2014.06.004. Epub
2014 Jul 17.

Genistein attenuates choroidal neovascularization.

Kinoshita S(1), Noda K(2), Tagawa Y(1), Inafuku S(1), Dong Y(1), Fukuhara J(1),
Dong Z(1), Ando R(1), Kanda A(1), Ishida S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Ocular Cell Biology and Visual Science; Department of
Ophthalmology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Ocular Cell Biology and Visual Science; Department of
Ophthalmology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
Electronic address: nodako@med.hokudai.ac.jp.

Genistein is a dietary-derived flavonoid abundantly present in soybeans and known
to possess various biological effects including anti-inflammation and
anti-angiogenic activity. To investigate the effects of genistein on intraocular 
neovascularization, we used an animal model of laser-induced choroidal
neovascularization (CNV). Male C57BL/6J mice were treated in accordance with the 
ARVO Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research. CNV was 
induced by laser photocoagulation. The animals were fed a mixture diet containing
0.5% genistein or a control diet ad libitum for 7 days before laser
photocoagulation and the treatment was continued until the end of the study.
Seven days after laser injury, the size of CNV lesions was quantified. Retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE)-choroid complex was also harvested 1 or 3 days after
laser injury and the level of monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1,
intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1, and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9
were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Expression levels of Ets-1
and F4/80 were examined by real-time PCR. A significant decrease in CNV size was 
observed in animals treated with genistein (15441.9±1511.8 µm(2)) compared to
control mice (21074.0±1940.7µm(2), P<.05). Genistein significantly reduced the
protein level of MCP-1, ICAM-1, and MMP-9 in the RPE-choroid complex (P<.05). In 
addition, genistein suppressed the expression levels of Ets-1 and F4/80 (P<.05). 
The current data indicate the anti-angiogenic property of genistein during CNV
formation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25113565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Immunol. 2014 Sep 15;193(6):2661-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302779. Epub 2014
Aug 6.

The Fli-1 transcription factor regulates the expression of CCL5/RANTES.

Lennard Richard ML(1), Sato S(1), Suzuki E(1), Williams S(2), Nowling TK(3),
Zhang XK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; and. (2)Medical Research
Service, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC 29403. 
(3)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; and Medical Research Service,
Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC 29403.
(4)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; and Medical Research Service,
Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC 29403
zhangjo@musc.edu.

The friend leukemia insertion site 1 (Fli-1) transcription factor, an Ets family 
member, is implicated in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus in
human patients and murine models of lupus. Lupus-prone mice with reduced Fli-1
expression have significantly less nephritis, prolonged survival, and decreased
infiltrating inflammatory cells into the kidney. Inflammatory chemokines,
including CCL5, are critical for attracting inflammatory cells. In this study,
decreased CCL5 mRNA expression was observed in kidneys of lupus-prone NZM2410
mice with reduced Fli-1 expression. CCL5 protein expression was significantly
decreased in endothelial cells transfected with Fli-1-specific small interfering 
RNA compared with controls. Fli-1 binds to endogenous Ets binding sites in the
distal region of the CCL5 promoter. Transient transfection assays demonstrate
that Fli-1 drives transcription from the CCL5 promoter in a dose-dependent
manner. Both Ets1, another Ets family member, and Fli-1 drive transcription from 
the CCL5 promoter, although Fli-1 transactivation was significantly stronger.
Ets1 acts as a dominant-negative transcription factor for Fli-1, indicating that 
they may have at least one DNA binding site in common. Systematic deletion of DNA
binding sites demonstrates the importance of the sites located within a 225-bp
region of the promoter. Mutation of the Fli-1 DNA binding domain significantly
reduces transactivation of the CCL5 promoter by Fli-1. We identified a novel
regulator of transcription for CCL5. These results suggest that Fli-1 is a novel 
and critical regulator of proinflammatory chemokines and affects the pathogenesis
of disease through the regulation of factors that recruit inflammatory cells to
sites of inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4157095
PMID: 25098295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 1;9(8):e103686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103686. eCollection
2014.

Redundant role of protein kinase C delta and epsilon during mouse embryonic
development.

Carracedo S(1), Sacher F(2), Brandes G(3), Braun U(4), Leitges M(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (2)Max
Planck Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Zellbiologie im Zentrum Anatomie Gebäude I4, Raum, Germany. (4)The
Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Max Planck
Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Hannover, Germany.

Protein Kinase C delta and epsilon are mediators of important cellular events,
such as cell proliferation, migration or apoptosis. The formation of blood
vessels, i.e., vasculo- and angiogenesis, is a process where these isoforms have 
also been shown to participate. However, mice deficient in either Protein Kinase 
C delta or epsilon are viable and therefore their individual contribution to the 
formation of the vasculature appeared so far dispensable. In this study, we show 
that double null mutation of Protein Kinase C delta and epsilon causes embryonic 
lethality at approximately E9.5. At this stage, whole mount staining of the
endothelial marker CD31 in double null embryos revealed defective blood vessel
formation. Moreover, culture of double deficient mouse allantois showed impaired 
endothelial cell organization, and analyses of double deficient embryo sections
showed dilated vessels, decreased endothelial-specific adherent junctions, and
decreased contact of endothelial cells with mural cells. Protein kinase C delta
and epsilon also appeared essential for vascular smooth muscle cell
differentiation, since a-smooth muscle actin, a classical marker for vascular
smooth muscle cells, was almost undetectable in double deficient embryonic aorta 
at E9.5. Subsequent qPCR analyses showed decreased VE-cadherin, Vegfr2, Cd31,
Cdh2, Ets1, and Fli-1, among other angiogenesis related transcripts in double
deficient embryos. Taken together, these data suggest for the first time an in
vivo redundant role between members of the novel Protein Kinase C subfamily that 
allows for mutual compensation during mouse embryonic development, with
vasculogenesis/angiogenesis as an obvious common function of these two Protein
Kinase Cs. Protein Kinase C delta and epsilon might therefore be useful targets
for inhibiting vasculo- and/or angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4118884
PMID: 25084151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Mol Biol. 2015 Apr 24;427(8):1655-69. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.07.020. Epub 2014
Jul 30.

A novel allosteric mechanism on protein-DNA interactions underlying the
phosphorylation-dependent regulation of Ets1 target gene expressions.

Shiina M(1), Hamada K(1), Inoue-Bungo T(2), Shimamura M(2), Uchiyama A(2), Baba
S(2), Sato K(2), Yamamoto M(3), Ogata K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan; RIKEN SPring-8
Center, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan. (2)Department of 
Biochemistry, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, 
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan. (3)RIKEN SPring-8 Center, 1-1-1 Kouto,
Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan; SPring-8/JASRI, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho,
Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5198, Japan. (4)Department of Biochemistry, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama
236-0004, Japan; RIKEN SPring-8 Center, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo
679-5148, Japan. Electronic address: ogata@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp.

Cooperative assemblies of transcription factors (TFs) on target gene enhancers
coordinate cell proliferation, fate specification, and differentiation through
precise and complicated transcriptional mechanisms. Chemical modifications, such 
as phosphorylation, of TFs induced by cell signaling further modulate the dynamic
cooperativity of TFs. In this study, we found that various Ets1-containing TF-DNA
complexes respond differently to calcium-induced phosphorylation of Ets1, which
is known to inhibit Ets1-DNA binding. Crystallographic analysis of a complex
comprising Ets1, Runx1, and CBFß at the TCRa enhancer revealed that Ets1 acquires
robust binding stability in the Runx1 and DNA-complexed state, via allosteric
mechanisms. This allows phosphorylated Ets1 to be retained at the TCRa enhancer
with Runx1, in contrast to other Ets1 target gene enhancers including mb-1 and
stromelysin-1. This study provides a structure-based model for
cell-signaling-dependent regulation of target genes, mediated via chemical
modification of TFs.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25083921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 29;111(30):11019-24. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1401891111. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

Synergy of aromatic residues and phosphoserines within the intrinsically
disordered DNA-binding inhibitory elements of the Ets-1 transcription factor.

Desjardins G(1), Meeker CA(2), Bhachech N(2), Currie SL(2), Okon M(1), Graves
BJ(3), McIntosh LP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Chemistry, and
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
V6T 1Z3; (2)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of
Medicine, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
84112; and. (3)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of
Medicine, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
84112; andHoward Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815
barbara.graves@hci.utah.edu mcintosh@chem.ubc.ca. (4)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Department of Chemistry, and Michael Smith Laboratories,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z3;
barbara.graves@hci.utah.edu mcintosh@chem.ubc.ca.

The E26 transformation-specific (Ets-1) transcription factor is autoinhibited by 
a conformationally disordered serine-rich region (SRR) that transiently interacts
with its DNA-binding ETS domain. In response to calcium signaling, autoinhibition
is reinforced by calmodulin-dependent kinase II phosphorylation of serines within
the SRR. Using mutagenesis and quantitative DNA-binding measurements, we
demonstrate that phosphorylation-enhanced autoinhibition requires the presence of
phenylalanine or tyrosine (<U+03D5>) residues adjacent to the SRR phosphoacceptor
serines. The introduction of additional phosphorylated Ser-<U+03D5>-Asp, but not
Ser-Ala-Asp, repeats within the SRR dramatically reinforces autoinhibition. NMR
spectroscopic studies of phosphorylated and mutated SRR variants, both within
their native context and as separate trans-acting peptides, confirmed that the
aromatic residues and phosphoserines contribute to the formation of a dynamic
complex with the ETS domain. Complementary NMR studies also identified the
SRR-interacting surface of the ETS domain, which encompasses its positively
charged DNA-recognition interface and an adjacent region of neutral polar and
nonpolar residues. Collectively, these studies highlight the role of aromatic
residues and their synergy with phosphoserines in an intrinsically disordered
regulatory sequence that integrates cellular signaling and gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4121781
PMID: 25024220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cytokine. 2014 Sep;69(1):6-13. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.05.004. Epub 2014 May 27.

Association of CXCR1 and 2 expressions with gastric cancer metastasis in ex vivo 
and tumor cell invasion in vitro.

Li Z(1), Wang Y(1), Dong S(1), Ge C(1), Xiao Y(2), Li R(1), Ma X(2), Xue Y(1),
Zhang Q(1), Lv J(1), Tan Q(1), Zhu Z(1), Song X(3), Tan J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biotherapy Center, Tumor Hospital of Yunnan Province Affiliated to
Kunming Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan, China. (2)Department of Osteology,
Tumor Hospital of Yunnan Province Affiliated to Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, Yunnan, China. (3)Cancer Biotherapy Center, Tumor Hospital of Yunnan
Province Affiliated to Kunming Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
Electronic address: songxin68@126.com. (4)Department of General Surgery, Tumor
Hospital of Yunnan Province Affiliated to Kunming Medical University, Kunming,
Yunnan, China. Electronic address: kmtjing@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: CXCR1 and CXCR2, cell surface receptors of interleukin-8, regulate
cell migration and alteration of their expression has been associated with poor
prognosis of various cancers. The aim of this study was to detect their
expression in gastric cancer to identify associations with another cell adhesion 
molecule, matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9), and with clinicopathological data ex
vivo, and then explore their potential role in gastric cancer cells in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 172 cases of gastric cancer tissue specimens
were collected for immunohistochemical analysis of CXCR1, CXCR2, and MMP9
expression. Expression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 proteins was knocked in or down using
their cDNA and shRNA, respectively, in gastric cancer cell lines to assess the
changed cell phenotypes and gene expression.
RESULTS: CXCR1, CXCR2, and MMP9 were expressed in 61.0%, 77.9%, and 75.6% of
gastric cancer tissues, respectively. Moreover, CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression was
associated with tumor differentiations, advanced clinical stages, lymph node, and
distant metastasis of gastric cancer. Similarly, MMP9 expression was associated
with CXCR1 and CXCR2. Expression of these three proteins was interrelated. In
vitro study showed that levels of CXCR1 and CXCR2 proteins were associated with
the capacity of gastric cancer cell migration, while knockdown of their
expression inhibited gastric cancer cell migration and invasion abilities in
vitro. In contrast, overexpression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 proteins promoted tumor
cell migration and invasion. At the gene levels, knockdown of CXCR1 or CXCR2
expression suppressed expression of Ets-1, SRC-1, and JNK proteins and
phosphorylated c-Jun and Erk1/2. Conversely, upregulation of CXCR1 or CXCR2
promoted expression of Ets-1, SRC-1, JNK, and c-Jun proteins and phosphorylated
JNK, c-Jun and Erk1/2.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that CXCR1 and CXCR2 play an important role
in gastric cancer progression. Further study will be performed to investigate
whether target of their expression can be used as a novel strategy in clinical
control of gastric cancer metastasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25022956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Structure. 2014 Aug 5;22(8):1196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2014.06.002. Epub 2014
Jul 10.

Phosphorylation of an intrinsically disordered segment in Ets1 shifts
conformational sampling toward binding-competent substates.

Bui JM(1), Gsponer J(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Qualcomm Institute, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive,
La Jolla, CA 92093-4040, USA. Electronic address: jennbui@eng.ucsd.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, 2185 East Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada. Electronic address:
gsponer@chibi.ubc.ca.

Functions of many proteins are affected by posttranslational modifications of
intrinsically disordered (ID) regions, yet little is known about the underlying
molecular mechanisms. By combining molecular dynamics simulations and protein
docking, we demonstrate that the addition of phosphates to an ID segment adjacent
to the PNT domain of Ets1 directs conformational sampling toward substates that
are most compatible with high-affinity binding of the TAZ1 domain of its
coactivator CBP. The phosphate charges disrupt salt bridges and thereby open a
hydrophobic cleft and expose hydrophobic residues at the ID N terminus. The
structure of the PNT-TAZ1 complex that we determined shows that PNT binds to TAZ1
via these hydrophobic regions in a similar manner to how it interacts with other 
partners. Our calculations reveal a dual effect of phosphorylation in that it
changes the dynamics of PNT so that it becomes more compatible for TAZ1 binding
and increases complementarity with this binding partner.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25017730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Epigenetics. 2014 Jan;9(1):129-41. doi: 10.4161/epi.26842. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Epigenetic regulation of miR-21 in colorectal cancer: ITGB4 as a novel miR-21
target and a three-gene network (miR-21-ITG<U+0392>4-PDCD4) as predictor of metastatic
tumor potential.

Ferraro A(1), Kontos CK(1), Boni T(1), Bantounas I(1), Siakouli D(1), Kosmidou
V(1), Vlassi M(1), Spyridakis Y(2), Tsipras I(2), Zografos G(2), Pintzas A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Mediated Gene Expression; Institute of Biology, Medicinal
Chemistry and Biotechnology; National Hellenic Research Foundation; Athens,
Greece. (2)3rd Department of Surgery; General Hospital of Athens G. Gennimatas;
Athens, Greece.

Previous studies have uncovered several transcription factors that determine
biological alterations in tumor cells to execute the invasion-metastasis cascade,
including the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We sought to investigate
the role of miR-21 in colorectal cancer regulation. For this purpose, miR-21
expression was quantified in a panel of colorectal cancer cell lines and clinical
specimens. High expression was found in cell lines with EMT properties and in the
vast majority of human tumor specimens. We demonstrate in a cell-specific manner 
the occupancy of MIR-21 gene promoter by AP-1 and ETS1 transcription factors and,
for the first time, the pattern of histone posttranslational modifications
necessary for miR-21 overexpression. We also show that Integrin-ß4 (ITGß4),
exclusively expressed in polarized epithelial cells, is a novel miR-21 target
gene and plays a role in the regulation of EMT, since it is remarkably
de-repressed after transient miR-21 silencing and downregulated after miR-21
overexpression. miR-21-dependent change of ITGß4 expression significantly affects
cell migration properties of colon cancer cells. Finally, in a subgroup of tumor 
specimens, ROC curve analysis performed on quantitative PCR data sets for miR-21,
ITGß4, and PDCD4 shows that the combination of high miR-21 with low ITGß4 and
PDCD4 expression is able to predict presence of metastasis. In conclusion, miR-21
is a key player in oncogenic EMT, its overexpression is controlled by the
cooperation of genetic and epigenetic alterations, and its levels, along with
ITGß4 and PDCD4 expression, could be exploited as a prognostic tool for CRC
metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3928175
PMID: 24149370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. G3 (Bethesda). 2013 Dec 9;3(12):2239-55. doi: 10.1534/g3.113.008698.

Identification and characterization of FGF2-dependent mRNA: microRNA networks
during lens fiber cell differentiation.

Wolf L(1), Gao CS, Gueta K, Xie Q, Chevallier T, Podduturi NR, Sun J, Conte I,
Zelenka PS, Ashery-Padan R, Zavadil J, Cvekl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling regulate a wide
range of cellular functions, including cell specification, proliferation,
migration, differentiation, and survival. In lens, both these systems control
lens fiber cell differentiation; however, a possible link between these processes
remains to be examined. Herein, the functional requirement for miRNAs in
differentiating lens fiber cells was demonstrated via conditional inactivation of
Dicer1 in mouse (Mus musculus) lens. To dissect the miRNA-dependent pathways
during lens differentiation, we used a rat (Rattus norvegicus) lens epithelial
explant system, induced by FGF2 to differentiate, followed by mRNA and miRNA
expression profiling. Transcriptome and miRNome analysis identified extensive
FGF2-regulated cellular responses that were both independent and dependent on
miRNAs. We identified 131 FGF2-regulated miRNAs. Seventy-six of these miRNAs had 
at least two in silico predicted and inversely regulated target mRNAs. Genes
modulated by the greatest number of FGF-regulated miRNAs include DNA-binding
transcription factors Nfib, Nfat5/OREBP, c-Maf, Ets1, and N-Myc. Activated FGF
signaling influenced bone morphogenetic factor/transforming growth factor-ß,
Notch, and Wnt signaling cascades implicated earlier in lens differentiation.
Specific miRNA:mRNA interaction networks were predicted for c-Maf, N-Myc, and
Nfib (DNA-binding transcription factors); Cnot6, Cpsf6, Dicer1, and Tnrc6b (RNA
to miRNA processing); and Ash1l, Med1/PBP, and Kdm5b/Jarid1b/Plu1 (chromatin
remodeling). Three miRNAs, including miR-143, miR-155, and miR-301a,
down-regulated expression of c-Maf in the 3'-UTR luciferase reporter assays.
These present studies demonstrate for the first time global impact of activated
FGF signaling in lens cell culture system and predicted novel gene regulatory
networks connected by multiple miRNAs that regulate lens differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3852386
PMID: 24142921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013 Sep;17(18):2504-11.

Regulation different network analysis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
osteoarthritis (OA).

Yin F(1), Luo SL, Yuan F, Peng Z, Zhou W, Fang L, Cai JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University, Pudong
New district, Shanghai, China. dr_jfc@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease
characterized by chronic synovitis that progresses to destruction of cartilage
and bone.
AIM: The purpose of this study was to employ microarray analysis combined with
bioinformatics techniques to evaluate differential gene expression in BM-derived 
mononuclear cells obtained from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or
osteoarthritis (OA) to study the pathogenesis of this disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gene expression profiles in BM-derived mononuclear cells
from 9 RA and 10 OA patients were obtained from GEO.
RESULTS: The bone marrow (BM) mononuclear cells showed 2581 up-regulated and 649 
down-regulated genes in RA patients relative to the OA group: Our analysis
indicated that several differentially expressed genes might play crucial roles in
RA development, including SP1, RARA, ETS1, ETS2, FOS and ESR1.
CONCLUSIONS: Further analysis predicted these genes might be involved in RA
through cancer related pathways and immunity related pathways. Furthermore, these
genes may serve as novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of RA.

PMID: 24089231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cell Res. 2014 Feb;24(2):254-7. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.137. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

MicroRNA-155 broadly orchestrates inflammation-induced changes of microRNA
expression in breast cancer.

Hu S(1), Zhu W(2), Zhang LF(1), Pei M(3), Liu MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for RNA Research, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China [2] Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Molecular Andrology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. (3)Shanghai Qibao High
school, Shanghai 201101, China.

PMCID: PMC3915901
PMID: 24080728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 8;288(45):32126-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.495218. Epub 2013
Sep 24.

ETS-1-mediated transcriptional up-regulation of CD44 is required for
sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor subtype 3-stimulated chemotaxis.

Zhang W(1), Zhao J, Lee JF, Gartung A, Jawadi H, Lambiv WL, Honn KV, Lee MJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P)-regulated chemotaxis plays critical roles in
various physiological and pathophysiological conditions. S1P-regulated chemotaxis
is mediated by the S1P family of G-protein-coupled receptors. However, molecular 
details of the S1P-regulated chemotaxis are incompletely understood. Cultured
human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines abundantly express S1P receptor subtype 3
(S1P3), thus providing a tractable in vitro system to characterize molecular
mechanism(s) underlying the S1P3 receptor-regulated chemotactic response. S1P
treatment enhances CD44 expression and induces membrane localization of CD44
polypeptides via the S1P3/Rho kinase (ROCK) signaling pathway. Knockdown of CD44 
completely diminishes the S1P-stimulated chemotaxis. Promoter analysis suggests
that the CD44 promoter contains binding sites of the ETS-1 (v-ets
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1) transcriptional factor. ChIP assay
confirms that S1P treatment stimulates the binding of ETS-1 to the CD44 promoter 
region. Moreover, S1P induces the expression and nuclear translocation of ETS-1. 
Knockdown of S1P3 or inhibition of ROCK abrogates the S1P-induced ETS-1
expression. Furthermore, knockdown of ETS-1 inhibits the S1P-induced CD44
expression and cell migration. In addition, we showed that S1P3/ROCK signaling
up-regulates ETS-1 via the activity of JNK. Collectively, we characterized a
novel signaling axis, i.e., ROCK-JNK-ETS-1-CD44 pathway, which plays an essential
role in the S1P3-regulated chemotactic response.

PMCID: PMC3820853
PMID: 24064218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 13;8(9):e74930. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074930. eCollection
2013.

Fli1 represses transcription of the human a2(I) collagen gene by recruitment of
the HDAC1/p300 complex.

Asano Y(1), Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Fli1, a member of the Ets transcription factor family, is a key repressor of the 
human a2(I) collagen (COL1A2) gene. Although our previous studies have delineated
that TGF-ß induces displacement of Fli1 from the COL1A2 promoter through
sequential post-translational modifications, the detailed mechanism by which Fli1
functions as a potent transcriptional repressor of the COL1A2 gene has not been
fully investigated. To address this issue, we carried out a series of experiments
especially focusing on protein-protein interaction and epigenetic transcriptional
regulation. The combination of tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometry
identified HDAC1 as a Fli1 interacting protein. Under quiescent conditions, HDAC1
induced deacetylation of Fli1 resulting in an increase of Fli1 DNA binding
ability and p300 enhanced this process by promoting the formation of a
Fli1-HDAC1-p300 complex. TGF-ß-induced phosphorylation of Fli1 at threonine 312
led to disassembly of this protein complex. In quiescent dermal fibroblasts Fli1,
HDAC1, and p300 occupied the -404 to -237 region, including the Fli1 binding
site, of the COL1A2 promoter. TGF-ß induced Fli1 and HDAC1 dissociation from the 
COL1A2 promoter, while promoting Ets1 and p300 recruitment. Furthermore,
acetylation levels of histone H3 around the Fli1 binding site in the COL1A2
promoter inversely correlated with the DNA occupancy of Fli1 and HDAC1, while
positively correlating with that of Ets1 and p300. In the functional studies,
HDAC1 overexpression magnified the inhibitory effect of Fli1 on the COL1A2
promoter. Moreover, pharmacological blockade of HDAC1 by entinostat enhanced
collagen production in dermal fibroblasts. Collectively, these results indicate
that under quiescent conditions Fli1 recruits HDAC1/p300 to the COL1A2 promoter
and suppresses the expression of the COL1A2 gene by chromatin remodeling through 
histone deacetylation. TGF-ß-dependent phosphorylation of Fli1 at threonine 312
is a critical step regulating the remodeling of the Fli1 transcription repressor 
complex, leading to transcriptional activation of the COL1A2 gene.

PMCID: PMC3772867
PMID: 24058639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Gene Expr Patterns. 2013 Dec;13(8):464-72. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2013.09.002. Epub
2013 Sep 16.

Expression of skeletogenic genes during arm regeneration in the brittle star
Amphiura filiformis.

Czarkwiani A(1), Dylus DV, Oliveri P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, UCL, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT, UK.

The brittle star Amphiura filiformis, which regenerates its arms post autotomy,
is emerging as a useful model for studying the molecular underpinnings of
regeneration, aided by the recent availability of some molecular resources.
During regeneration a blastema initially is formed distally to the amputation
site, and then a rapid rebuild is obtained by adding metameric units, which will 
eventually differentiate and become fully functional. In this work we first
characterize the developmental process of the regenerating arms using two
differentiation markers for muscle and skeletal structures - Afi-trop-1 and
Afi-acoll. Both genes are not expressed in the blastema and newly added
undifferentiated metameric units. Their expression at different regenerating
stages shows an early segregation of muscle and skeletal cells during the
regenerating process, long before the metameric units become functional. We then 
studied the expression of a set of genes orthologous of the sea urchin
transcription factors involved in the development of skeletal and non-skeletal
mesoderm: Afi-ets1/2, Afi-alx1, Afi-tbr, Afi-foxB and Afi-gataC. We found that
Afi-ets1/2, Afi-alx1, Afi-foxB and Afi-gataC are all expressed at the blastemal
stage. As regeneration progresses those genes are expressed in a similar small
undifferentiated domain beneath the distal growth cap, while in more advanced
metameric units they become restricted to different skeletal domains. Afi-foxB
becomes expressed in non-skeletal structures. This suggests that they might play 
a combinatorial role only in the early cell specification process and that
subsequently they function independently in the differentiation of different
structures. Afi-tbr is not present in the adult arm tissue at any stage of
regeneration. In situ hybridization results have been confirmed with a new
strategy for quantitative PCR (QPCR), using a subdivision of the three stages of 
regeneration into proximal (differentiated) and distal (undifferentiated) arm
segments.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3838619
PMID: 24051028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Gene. 2013 Dec 1;531(2):444-50. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.082. Epub 2013 Sep
11.

Identification of novel target genes involved in Indian Fanconi anemia patients
using microarray.

Shyamsunder P(1), Ganesh KS, Vidyasekar P, Mohan S, Verma RS.

Author information: 
(1)Stem cell and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology,
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600 036, India.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disorder characterized by progressive bone
marrow failure and a predisposition to cancers. Mutations have been documented in
15 FA genes that participate in the FA-BRCA DNA repair pathway, a fundamental
pathway in the development of the disease and the presentation of its
characteristic symptoms. Certain symptoms such as oxygen sensitivity,
hematological abnormalities and impaired immunity suggest that FA proteins could 
participate in or independently control other pathways as well. In this study, we
identified 9 DNA repair genes that were down regulated in a genome wide analysis 
of 6 Indian Fanconi anemia patients. Functional clustering of a total of 233
dysregulated genes identified key biological processes that included regulation
of transcription, DNA repair, cell cycle and chromosomal organization. Microarray
data revealed the down regulation of ATXN3, ARID4A and ETS-1, which were
validated by RTPCR in a subsequent sample set of 9 Indian FA patients. Here we
report for the first time a gene expression profile of Fanconi anemia patients
from the Indian population and a pool of genes that might aid in the acquisition 
and progression of the FA phenotype.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 30;8(8):e72551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072551. eCollection
2013.

Analysis of gender differences in genetic risk: association of TNFAIP3
polymorphism with male childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus in the
Japanese population.

Kadota K(1), Mori M, Yanagimachi M, Miyamae T, Hara T, Kanetaka T, Nozawa T,
Kikuchi M, Hara R, Imagawa T, Kaneko T, Yokota S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic multisystem
autoimmune disorder influenced by genetic background and environmental factors.
Our aim here was to replicate findings of associations between 7 of the
implicated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in IRF5, BLK, STAT4, TNFAIP3,
SPP1, TNIP1 and ETS1 genes with susceptibility to childhood-onset SLE in the
Japanese population. In particular, we focused on gender differences in allelic
frequencies.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The 7 SNPs were genotyped using TaqMan assays in 
75 patients with childhood-onset SLE and in 190 healthy controls. The
relationship between the cumulative number of risk alleles and SLE manifestations
was explored in childhood-onset SLE. Logistic regression was used to test the
effect of each polymorphism on susceptibility to SLE, and Wilcoxon rank sum
testing was used for comparison of total risk alleles. Data on rs7574865 in the
STAT4 gene and rs9138 in SPP1 were replicated for associations with SLE when
comparing cases and controls (corrected P values ranging from 0.0043 to 0.027).
The rs2230926 allele of TNFAIP3 was associated with susceptibility to SLE in
males, but after Bonferroni correction there were no significant associations
with any of the other four SNPs in IRF5, BLK, TNIP1 and ETS1 genes. The
cumulative number of risk alleles was significantly increased in childhood-onset 
SLE relative to healthy controls (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0000041). Male SLE patients had a
slightly but significantly higher frequency of the TNFAIP3 (rs2230926G) risk
allele than female patients (odds ratio [OR]<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.05, 95% confidence interval
[95%CI]<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.46-11.2 P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Associations of polymorphisms in STAT4 and SPP1 with childhood-onset
SLE were confirmed in a Japanese population. Although these are preliminary
results for a limited number of cases, TNFAIP3 rs2230926G may be an important
predictor of disease onset in males. We also replicated findings that the
cumulative number of risk alleles was significantly increased in childhood-onset 
SLE.

PMCID: PMC3758304
PMID: 24023622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 24;110(39):15776-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304343110. Epub 2013 Sep 9.

Ets-1 facilitates nuclear entry of NFAT proteins and their recruitment to the
IL-2 promoter.

Tsao HW(1), Tai TS, Tseng W, Chang HH, Grenningloh R, Miaw SC, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Immunology, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei 10051, Taiwan.

E26 transformation-specific sequence 1 (Ets-1), the prototype of the ETS family
of transcription factors, is critical for the expression of IL-2 by murine Th
cells; however, its mechanism of action is still unclear. Here we show that Ets-1
is also essential for optimal production of IL-2 by primary human Th cells.
Although Ets-1 negatively regulates the expression of Blimp1, a known suppressor 
of IL-2 expression, ablation of B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1
(Blimp1) does not rescue the expression of IL-2 by Ets-1-deficient Th cells.
Instead, Ets-1 physically and functionally interacts with the nuclear factor of
activated T-cells (NFAT) and is required for the recruitment of NFAT to the IL-2 
promoter. In addition, Ets-1 is located in both the nucleus and cytoplasm of
resting Th cells. Nuclear Ets-1 quickly exits the nucleus in response to
calcium-dependent signals and competes with NFAT proteins for binding to protein 
components of noncoding RNA repressor of NFAT complex (NRON), which serves as a
cytoplasmic trap for phosphorylated NFAT proteins. This nuclear exit of Ets-1
precedes rapid nuclear entry of NFAT and Ets-1 deficiency results in impaired
nuclear entry, but not dephosphorylation, of NFAT proteins. Thus, Ets-1 promotes 
the expression of IL-2 by modulating the activity of NFAT.

PMCID: PMC3785780
PMID: 24019486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cell Signal. 2013 Dec;25(12):2652-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.08.029. Epub
2013 Sep 4.

LINE-1 ORF-1p functions as a novel HGF/ETS-1 signaling pathway co-activator and
promotes the growth of MDA-MB-231 cell.

Yang Q(1), Feng F, Zhang F, Wang C, Lu Y, Gao X, Zhu Y, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Clinical Medicine, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, PR China.

Long interspersed nucleotide element (LINE)-1 ORF-1p is encoded by the human
pro-oncogene LINE-1. It is involved in the development and progression of several
human carcinomas, such as hepatocellular carcinoma and lung and breast cancers.
The hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/ETS-1 signaling pathway is involved in
regulation of cancer cell proliferation, metastasis and invasion. The biological 
function of the interaction between LINE-1 ORF-1p and the HGF/ETS-1 signaling
pathway in regulation of human breast cancer proliferation remains largely
unknown. Here, we showed that LINE-1 ORF-1p enhanced ETS-1 transcriptional
activity and increased expression of downstream genes of ETS-1. Interaction
between ETS-1 and LINE-1 ORF-1p was identified by immunoprecipitation assays.
LINE-1 ORF-1p modulated ETS-1 activity through cytoplasm/nucleus translocation
and recruitment to the ETS-1 binding element in the MMP1 gene promoter. We also
showed that LINE-1 ORF-1p promoted proliferation and anchorage-independent growth
of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. By investigating a novel role of the LINE-1
ORF-1p in the HGF/ETS-1 signaling pathway and MDA-MB-231 cells, we demonstrated
that LINE-1 ORF-1p may be a novel ETS-1 coactivator and molecular target for
therapy of human triple negative breast cancer.

© 2013.

PMID: 24012497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell Microbiol. 2014 Jan;16(1):131-45. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12211. Epub 2013 Sep 19.

Porphyromonas gingivalis promotes invasion of oral squamous cell carcinoma
through induction of proMMP9 and its activation.

Inaba H(1), Sugita H, Kuboniwa M, Iwai S, Hamada M, Noda T, Morisaki I, Lamont
RJ, Amano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Frontier Biology, Center for Frontier Oral Science, Osaka
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Recent epidemiological studies have revealed a significant association between
periodontitis and oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Furthermore, matrix
metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) is implicated in the invasion and metastasis of tumour
cells. We examined the involvement of Porphyromonas gingivalis, a periodontal
pathogen, in OSCC invasion through induced expression of proMMP and its
activation. proMMP9 was continuously secreted from carcinoma SAS cells, while
P.<U+2009>gingivalis infection increased proenzyme expression and subsequently processed
it to active MMP9 in culture supernatant, which enhanced cellular invasion. In
contrast, Fusobacterium nucleatum, another periodontal organism, failed to
demonstrate such activities. The effects of P.<U+2009>gingivalis were observed with
highly invasive cells, but not with the low invasivetype. P.<U+2009>gingivalis also
stimulated proteinase-activated receptor 2 (PAR2) and enhanced proMMP9
expression, which promoted cellular invasion. P.<U+2009>gingivalis mutants deficient in 
gingipain proteases failed to activate MMP9. Infected SAS cells exhibited
activation of ERK1/2, p38, and NF-kB, and their inhibitors diminished both
proMMP9-overexpression and cellular invasion. Together, our results show that
P.<U+2009>gingivalis activates the ERK1/2-Ets1, p38/HSP27, and PAR2/NF-kB pathways to
induce proMMP9 expression, after which the proenzyme is activated by gingipains
to promote cellular invasion of OSCC cell lines. These findings suggest a novel
mechanism of progression and metastasis of OSCC associated with periodontitis.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3939075
PMID: 23991831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Regul Pept. 2013 Sep 10;186:108-15. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2013.08.006. Epub 2013 
Aug 25.

Gestational hypertension in atrial natriuretic peptide knockout mice and the
developmental origins of salt-sensitivity and cardiac hypertrophy.

Armstrong DW(1), Tse MY, O'Tierney-Ginn PF, Wong PG, Ventura NM, Janzen-Pang JJ, 
Matangi MF, Johri AM, Croy BA, Adams MA, Pang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, Kingston,
ON K7L 3N6, Canada; The Kingston Heart Clinic, 460 Princess Street, Kingston, ON 
K7L 1C2, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of gestational hypertension on the
developmental origins of blood pressure (BP), altered kidney gene expression,
salt-sensitivity and cardiac hypertrophy (CH) in adult offspring.
METHODS: Female mice lacking atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP-/-) were used as a
model of gestational hypertension. Heterozygous ANP+/- offspring was bred from
crossing either ANP+/+ females with ANP-/- males yielding ANP+/-(WT) offspring,
or from ANP-/- females with ANP+/+ males yielding ANP+/-(KO) offspring. Maternal 
BP during pregnancy was measured using radiotelemetry. At 14weeks of age,
offspring BP, gene and protein expression were measured in the kidney with
real-time quantitative PCR, receptor binding assay and ELISA.
RESULTS: ANP+/-(KO) offspring exhibited normal BP at 14weeks of age, but
displayed significant CH (P<0.001) as compared to ANP+/-(WT) offspring.
ANP+/-(KO) offspring exhibited significantly increased gene expression of
natriuretic peptide receptor A (NPR-A) (P<0.001) and radioligand binding studies 
demonstrated significantly reduced NPR-C binding (P=0.01) in the kidney.
Treatment with high salt diet increased BP (P<0.01) and caused LV hypertrophy
(P<0.001) and interstitial myocardial fibrosis only in ANP+/-(WT) and not
ANP+/-(KO) offspring, suggesting gestational hypertension programs the offspring 
to show resistance to salt-induced hypertension and LV remodeling. Our data
demonstrate that altered maternal environments can determine the salt-sensitive
phenotype of offspring.

© 2013.

PMID: 23981445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Oncogene. 2014 Jun 26;33(26):3432-40. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.307. Epub 2013 Aug
12.

COL11A1 promotes tumor progression and predicts poor clinical outcome in ovarian 
cancer.

Wu YH(1), Chang TH(2), Huang YF(3), Huang HD(4), Chou CY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan,
Taiwan, ROC. (2)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Informatics, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University and Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan,
ROC. (4)1] Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsin Chu, Taiwan, ROC [2] Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems
Biology, National Chiao Tung University, Hsin Chu, Taiwan, ROC.

Biomarkers that predict disease progression might assist the development of
better therapeutic strategies for aggressive cancers, such as ovarian cancer.
Here, we investigated the role of collagen type XI alpha 1 (COL11A1) in cell
invasiveness and tumor formation and the prognostic impact of COL11A1 expression 
in ovarian cancer. Microarray analysis suggested that COL11A1 is a disease
progression-associated gene that is linked to ovarian cancer recurrence and poor 
survival. Small interference RNA-mediated specific reduction in COL11A1 protein
levels suppressed the invasive ability and oncogenic potential of ovarian cancer 
cells and decreased tumor formation and lung colonization in mouse xenografts. A 
combination of experimental approaches, including real-time RT-PCR, casein
zymography and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, showed that COL11A1
knockdown attenuated MMP3 expression and suppressed binding of Ets-1 to its
putative MMP3 promoter-binding site, suggesting that the Ets-1-MMP3 axis is
upregulated by COL11A1. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta (TGF-ß1) treatment 
triggers the activation of smad2 signaling cascades, leading to activation of
COL11A1 and MMP3. Pharmacological inhibition of MMP3 abrogated the
TGF-ß1-triggered, COL11A1-dependent cell invasiveness. Furthermore, the
NF-YA-binding site on the COL11A1 promoter was identified as the major
determinant of TGF-ß1-dependent COL11A1 activation. Analysis of 88 ovarian cancer
patients indicated that high COL11A1 mRNA levels are associated with advanced
disease stage. The 5-year recurrence-free and overall survival rates were
significantly lower (P=0.006 and P=0.018, respectively) among patients with high 
expression levels of tissue COL11A1 mRNA compared with those with low expression.
We conclude that COL11A1 may promote tumor aggressiveness via the TGF-ß1-MMP3
axis and that COL11A1 expression can predict clinical outcome in ovarian cancer
patients.

PMID: 23934190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Am J Pathol. 2013 Oct;183(4):1243-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.06.029. Epub
2013 Aug 6.

Tumor necrosis factor inhibition modulates thrombospondin-1 expression in human
inflammatory joint disease through altered NR4A2 activity.

McMorrow JP(1), Crean D, Gogarty M, Smyth A, Connolly M, Cummins E, Veale D,
Fearon U, Tak PP, Fitzgerald O, Murphy EP.

Author information: 
(1)UCD Veterinary Sciences Centre, University College Dublin, Belfield, Ireland.

We examined thrombospondin-1 (THBS1, alias TSP-1) expression in human synovial
tissue (ST) during the resolution phase of chronic inflammation and elucidated
its transcriptional regulation by the orphan receptor 4A2 (NR4A2). In vivo,
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) serum and ST revealed altered expression levels and
tissue distribution of TSP-1. After anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy, a
reciprocal relationship between TSP-1 and NR4A2 expression levels was measured in
patients with clinical and ST responses to biological treatment. In vitro,
primary RA fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) expressed minimal TSP-1 mRNA
levels with high transcript levels of NR4A2, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and IL-8 measured. Hypoxic modulation of RA FLSs resulted in inverse
expression levels of TSP-1 compared with NR4A2, IL-8, and VEGF. Ectopic NR4A2
expression led to reduced TSP-1 mRNA and protein levels with concomitant
increases in proangiogenic mediators. NR4A2 transcriptional activity, independent
of DNA binding, repressed the hTSP-1 promoter leading to reduced mRNA and protein
release in immortalized K4IM FLSs. Bioinformatic and deletion studies identified 
a 5' region of the TSP-1 promoter repressed by NR4A2 and proangiogenic
transcription factors, including NF-<U+03BA>B and Ets1/2. Stable depletion of NR4A2
levels resulted in a shift in the TSP-1/VEGF expression ratio. Thus, modulation
of TSP-1 expression is achieved through anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy
effects on specific transcriptional networks, suggesting that enhanced TSP-1
expression may help restore tissue homeostasis during resolution of inflammation.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Blood. 2013 Sep 26;122(13):2233-41. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-475772. Epub 2013 
Aug 7.

Deregulation of ETS1 and FLI1 contributes to the pathogenesis of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma.

Bonetti P(1), Testoni M, Scandurra M, Ponzoni M, Piva R, Mensah AA, Rinaldi A,
Kwee I, Tibiletti MG, Iqbal J, Greiner TC, Chan WC, Gaidano G, Piris MA, Cavalli 
F, Zucca E, Inghirami G, Bertoni F.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma and Genomics Research Program, Institute of Oncology Research,
Bellinzona, Switzerland;

Erratum in
    Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):3056.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of human lymphoma. 
DLBCL is a heterogeneous disease characterized by different genetic lesions. We
herein report the functional characterization of a recurrent gain mapping on
chromosome 11q24.3, found in 23% of 166 DLBCL cases analyzed. The transcription
factors ETS1 and FLI1, located within the 11q24.3 region, had significantly
higher expression in clinical samples carrying the gain. Functional studies on
cell lines showed that ETS1 and FLI1 cooperate in sustaining DLBCL proliferation 
and viability and regulate genes involved in germinal center differentiation.
Taken together, these data identify the 11q24.3 gain as a recurrent lesion in
DLBCL leading to ETS1 and FLI1 deregulated expression, which can contribute to
the pathogenesis of this disease.

PMID: 23926301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Aug;30(4):477-80. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2013.04.021.

[Association of two SNPs in 3'UTR of ETS1 gene with systemic lupus erythematosus 
in a northern Chinese Han population].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo XF(1), Shan S, Dang J, Qiu RF, Zhao HL, Xin Q, Liu YC, Li JX, Liu QJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Experimental Teratology of the Ministry of Education and
Department of Medical Genetics, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, P. R. China. liuqiji@sdu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between 2 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of ETS1 gene and susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in a
northern Chinese Han population.
METHODS: Two SNPs within the ETS1 gene mapped to 11q23 were selected based on
HapMap data. Genotyping was conducted with Taqman method in 231 patients with SLE
and 474 healthy controls from Qilu Hospital, Shandong and analyzed with PLINK1.07
software. Haplotypes were analyzed with SHEsis software.
RESULTS: A statistically significant difference was detected in the distribution 
of rs1128334 and rs4937333 genotypes between the two groups (all P< 0.01). For
rs1128334, the frequency of the minor allele was 0.291 and 0.428 in controls and 
cases, respectively. For rs4937333, the minor allele frequency was 0.381 and
0.476 in controls and cases respectively. An A-C haplotype was found to be
strongly associated with increased risk for SLE, while another haplotype G-C may 
reduce this risk.
CONCLUSION: Our study has suggested that rs1128334 and rs4937333 are strongly
associated with the risk for SLE in northern Chinese Han population.

PMID: 23926020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Oncol Res. 2013;20(9):393-402. doi: 10.3727/096504013X13657689382770.

Hepatocyte growth factor-mediated gastrin-releasing peptide induces IL-8
expression through Ets-1 in gastric cancer cells.

Lee KH(1), Koh SA, Kim JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University,
Daegu, Korea.

Gastric cancer cells secrete a variety of proangiogenic molecules, including IL-8
and VEGF. However, factors regulating the expression of proangiogenic genes for
gastric cancer remain largely undefined. We investigated the role of HGF-induced 
activation of GRP and Ets-1 transcription factor in expression of the
proangiogenic factor IL-8. The genes associated with angiogenesis induced by HGF 
were screened using cDNA micro-array technology in two gastric cancer cell lines 
(NUGC-3 and MKN-28). First, GRP RNA and protein were confirmed to be upregulated.
Then, expression of GRP, Ets-1, and IL-8 were further estimated by Western blot
analysis. A role for Ets-1 in HGF-induced upregulation of IL-8 was determined by 
knockdown of Ets-1 with Ets-1 sh-RNA and a chromatin immune precipitation assay. 
The levels of GRP, Ets-1, and IL-8 were upregulated in cells treated with HGF in 
a dose-dependent manner. HGF-induced expression of Ets-1 and IL-8 was increased
more by GRP treatment and inhibited by pretreatment with an ERK 1/2 inhibitor
(PD098059). HGF-induced upregulation of IL-8 was repressed by Ets-1 knockdown.
HGF enhanced the binding activity of Ets-1 to the IL-8 promoter in control cells,
but not in the Ets-1 shRNA cells. We confirmed the functional role of HGF-induced
Ets-1 in activation of the IL-8 promoter by the reporter gene assay.
Downregulation of IL-8 also decreased in vitro cell invasion. In conclusion, HGF 
mediated the GRP induction of IL-8 expression through Ets-1, which thus might
serve as a promising target for gastric cancer therapy.

PMID: 23924923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 9;8(7):e68815. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068815. Print 2013.

Transcription factor Ets1 cooperates with estrogen receptor a to stimulate
estradiol-dependent growth in breast cancer cells and tumors.

Kalet BT(1), Anglin SR, Handschy A, O'Donoghue LE, Halsey C, Chubb L, Korch C,
Duval DL.

Author information: 
(1)Flint Animal Cancer Center, Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States of America.

The purpose of this study was to explore the role of transcription factor Ets1 in
estrogen receptor a (ERa)-positive breast cancer progression. We expressed human 
Ets1 or empty vector in four human ERa-positive breast cancer cell lines and
observed increased colony formation. Further examination of cellular responses in
stable Ets1-expressing MCF7 clones displayed increased proliferation, migration, 
and invasion. Ets1-expressing MCF7 tumors grown in the mammary fat pads of nude
mice exhibited increased rates of tumor growth (7.36±2.47 mm(3)/day) compared to 
control MCF7 tumors (2.52±1.70 mm(3)/day), but maintained their dependence on
estradiol for tumor growth. Proliferation marker Ki-67 staining was not different
between control and Ets1-expressing tumors, but Ets1-expressing tumors exhibited 
large necrotic centers and elevated apoptotic staining. Ets1 was shown to
cooperate with ERa and the p160 nuclear receptor coactivator (NCOA/SRC) family to
increase activation of a consensus estrogen response element luciferase reporter 
construct. Ets1-expressing MCF7 cells also exhibited elevated expression of the
ERa target genes, progesterone receptor and trefoil factor 1. Using GST-pulldown 
assays, Ets1 formed stable complexes containing both ERa and p160 nuclear
receptor coactivators. Taken together, these data suggest that the Ets1-dependent
estradiol sensitization of breast cancer cells and tumors may be partially due to
the ability of Ets1 to cooperate with ERa and nuclear receptor coactivators to
stimulate transcriptional activity of estrogen-dependent genes.

PMCID: PMC3706316
PMID: 23874775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. EMBO J. 2013 Aug 14;32(16):2217-30. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.159. Epub 2013 Jul
19.

DPY30 regulates pathways in cellular senescence through ID protein expression.

Simboeck E(1), Gutierrez A, Cozzuto L, Beringer M, Caizzi L, Keyes WM, Di Croce
L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) and UPF, Department of Gene Regulation,
Stem Cells and Cancer, Barcelona, Spain.

Cellular senescence is an intrinsic defense mechanism to various cellular
stresses: while still metabolically active, senescent cells stop dividing and
enter a proliferation arrest. Here, we identify DPY30, a member of all mammalian 
histone H3K4 histone methyltransferases (HMTases), as a key regulator of the
proliferation potential of human primary cells. Following depletion of DPY30,
cells show a severe proliferation defect and display a senescent phenotype,
including a flattened and enlarged morphology, elevated level of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS), increased SA-ß-galactosidase activity, and formation of
senescence-associated heterochromatin foci (SAHFs). While DPY30 depletion leads
to a reduced level of H3K4me3-marked active chromatin, we observed a concomitant 
activation of CDK inhibitors, including p16INK4a, independent of H3K4me3. ChIP
experiments show that key regulators of cell-cycle progression, including ID
proteins, are under direct control of DPY30. Because ID proteins are negative
regulators of the transcription factors ETS1/2, depletion of DPY30 leads to the
transcriptional activation of p16INK4a by ETS1/2 and thus to a senescent-like
phenotype. Ectoptic re-introduction of ID protein expression can partially rescue
the senescence-like phenotype induced by DPY30 depletion. Thus, our data indicate
that DPY30 controls proliferation by regulating ID proteins expression, which in 
turn lead to senescence bypass.

PMCID: PMC3746196
PMID: 23872946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Adv Cancer Res. 2013;119:1-61. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407190-2.00001-0.

Understanding the role of ETS-mediated gene regulation in complex biological
processes.

Findlay VJ(1), LaRue AC, Turner DP, Watson PM, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

Ets factors are members of one of the largest families of evolutionarily
conserved transcription factors, regulating critical functions in normal cell
homeostasis, which when perturbed contribute to tumor progression. The
well-documented alterations in ETS factor expression and function during cancer
progression result in pleiotropic effects manifested by the downstream effect on 
their target genes. Multiple ETS factors bind to the same regulatory sites
present on target genes, suggesting redundant or competitive functions. The anti-
and prometastatic signatures obtained by examining specific ETS regulatory
networks will significantly improve our ability to accurately predict tumor
progression and advance our understanding of gene regulation in cancer.
Coordination of multiple ETS gene functions also mediates interactions between
tumor and stromal cells and thus contributes to the cancer phenotype. As such,
these new insights may provide a novel view of the ETS gene family as well as a
focal point for studying the complex biological control involved in tumor
progression. One of the goals of molecular biology is to elucidate the mechanisms
that contribute to the development and progression of cancer. Such an
understanding of the molecular basis of cancer will provide new possibilities
for: (1) earlier detection, as well as better diagnosis and staging of disease;
(2) detection of minimal residual disease recurrences and evaluation of response 
to therapy; (3) prevention; and (4) novel treatment strategies. Increased
understanding of ETS-regulated biological pathways will directly impact these
areas.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23870508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Dermatol Sci. 2013 Nov;72(2):123-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.06.011. Epub 
2013 Jul 1.

Induction of chemokine receptor CXCR4 expression by transforming growth factor-ß1
in human basal cell carcinoma cells.

Chu CY(1), Sheen YS, Cha ST, Hu YF, Tan CT, Chiu HC, Chang CC, Chen MW, Kuo ML,
Jee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Laboratory of Molecular
and Cellular Toxicology, Institute of Toxicology, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Higher CXCR4 expression enhances basal cell carcinoma (BCC) invasion 
and angiogenesis. The underlying mechanism of increased CXCR4 expression in
invasive BCC is still not well understood.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanisms involved in the regulation of CXCR4
expression in invasive BCC.
METHODS: We used qRT-PCR, RT-PCR, Western blot, and flow cytometric analyses to
examine different CXCR4 levels among the clinical samples, co-cultured BCC cells 
and BCC cells treated with recombinant transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) and
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF). Immunohistochemical studies were used to 
demonstrate the correlation between TGF-ß1 and CXCR4 expressions. The signal
transduction pathway and transcriptional regulation were confirmed by treatments 
with chemical inhibitors, neutralizing antibodies, or short interfering RNAs, as 
well as luciferase reporter activity.
RESULTS: Invasive BCC has higher TGF-ß1 and CTGF levels compared to non-invasive 
BCC. Non-contact dermal fibroblasts co-culture with human BCC cells also
increases the expression of CXCR4 in BCC cells. Treatment with recombinant human 
TGF-ß1, but not CTGF, enhanced the CXCR4 levels in time- and dose-dependent
manners. The protein level and surface expression of CXCR4 in human BCC cells was
increased by TGF-ß1 treatment. TGF-ß1 was intensely expressed in the surrounding 
fibroblasts of invasive BCC and was positively correlated with the CXCR4
expression of BCC cells. The transcriptional regulation of CXCR4 by TGF-ß1 is
mediated by its binding to the TGF-ß receptor II and phosphorylation of the
extracellular signal-related kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2)-ETS-1 pathway.
CONCLUSION: TGF-ß1 induces upregulation of CXCR4 in human BCC cells by
phosphorylation of ERK1/2-ETS-1 pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23856244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Sep;11(9):1742-50. doi: 10.1111/jth.12355.

RUNX1, but not its familial platelet disorder mutants, synergistically activates 
PF4 gene expression in combination with ETS family proteins.

Okada Y(1), Watanabe M, Nakai T, Kamikawa Y, Shimizu M, Fukuhara Y, Yonekura M,
Matsuura E, Hoshika Y, Nagai R, Aird WC, Doi T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Familial platelet disorder (FPD) is a rare autosomal dominant disease
characterized by thrombocytopenia and abnormal platelet function. Causal
mutations have been identified in the gene encoding runt-related transcription
factor 1 (RUNX1) of FPD patients.
OBJECTIVES: To elucidate the role of RUNX1 in the regulation of expression of
platelet factor 4 (PF4) and to propose a plausible mechanism underlying
RUNX1-mediated induction of the FPD phenotype.
METHODS: We assessed whether RUNX1 and its mutants, in combination with E26
transformation-specific-1 (ETS-1), Core-binding factor subunit beta (CBFß), and
Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI-1), cooperatively regulate PF4
expression during megakaryocytic differentiation. In an embryonic stem cell
differentiation system, expression levels of endogenous and exogenous RUNX1 and
PF4 were determined by real-time RT-PCR. Promoter activation by the transcription
factors were evaluated by reporter gene assays with HepG2 cells. DNA binding
activity and protein interaction were analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay and immunoprecipitation assay with Cos-7 cells, respectively. Protein
localization was analyzed by immunocytochemistry and Western blotting with Cos-7 
cells.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that RUNX1 activates endogenous PF4 expression in
megakaryocytic differentiation. RUNX1, but not its mutants, in combination with
ETS-1 and CBFß, or FLI-1, synergistically activated the PF4 promoter. Each RUNX1 
mutant harbors various functional abnormalities, including loss of DNA-binding
activity, abnormal subcellular localization, and/or alterations of binding
affinities for ETS-1, CBFß, and FLI-1.
CONCLUSIONS: RUNX1, but not its mutants, strongly and synergistically activates
PF4 expression along with ETS family proteins. Furthermore, loss of the RUNX1
transcriptional activation function is induced by various functional
abnormalities.

© 2013 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMID: 23848403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Sci Transl Med. 2013 Jul 10;5(193):193ra90. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3005794.

Overexpression of vascular endothelial growth factor in the germinal matrix
induces neurovascular proteases and intraventricular hemorrhage.

Yang D(1), Baumann JM, Sun YY, Tang M, Dunn RS, Akeson AL, Kernie SG, Kallapur S,
Lindquist DM, Huang EJ, Potter SS, Liang HC, Kuan CY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Intracranial hemorrhage in preterm neonates may result in neonatal mortality and 
functional disabilities, but its pathogenic mechanisms are poorly defined and
better therapies are needed. We used a tetracycline-regulated transgenic system
to test whether the induction of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the
germinal matrix leads to intracranial hemorrhage. This genetic strategy initially
induced a dense network of loosely adjoined endothelial cells and pericytes near 
lateral ventricles, similar to the immature vascular rete in human fetal brains. 
Yet, this rich vascular network transformed into low-vasculature patches
correlated with hemorrhage and caspase-3 activation near birth. Gene expression
and biochemical analyses suggested that downstream mediators of VEGF in this
network include transcriptional factors ETS1 and HIF2a (hypoxia-inducible factor 
2a), components of the PDGFß (platelet-derived growth factor ß) and TGFß
(transforming growth factor-ß) receptor signaling pathways, matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), and cathepsins. Prenatal administration of
glucocorticoids markedly reduced mortality and cerebral hemorrhage in mutant
animals, as in human neonates. This protective effect was not due to blocking
vasculogenesis, but was instead associated with inhibition of neurovascular
proteases, notably MMP-9, cathepsin B, and caspase-3. Collectively, these results
support a causative role of VEGF in perinatal cerebral hemorrhage and implicate
its downstream proteases as potential therapeutic targets.

PMID: 23843451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 20;8(6):e66255. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066255. Print 2013.

hypoxia-inducible factors activate CD133 promoter through ETS family
transcription factors.

Ohnishi S(1), Maehara O, Nakagawa K, Kameya A, Otaki K, Fujita H, Higashi R,
Takagi K, Asaka M, Sakamoto N, Kobayashi M, Takeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. sonishi@pop.med.hokudai.ac.jp

CD133 is a cellular surface protein that has been reported to be a cancer stem
cell marker, and thus it is considered to be a potential target for cancer
treatment. However, the mechanism regulating CD133 expression is not yet
understood. In this study, we analyzed the activity of five putative promoters
(P1-P5) of CD133 in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells and colon cancer cell 
line WiDr, and found that the activity of promoters, particularly of P5, is
elevated by overexpression of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF-1a and HIF-2a).
Deletion and mutation analysis identified one of the two E-twenty six (ETS)
binding sites (EBSs) in the P5 region as being essential for its promoter
activity induced by HIF-1a and HIF-2a. In addition, a chromatin
imunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that HIF-1a and HIF-2a bind to the proximal
P5 promoter at the EBSs. The immunoprecipitation assay showed that HIF-1a
physically interacts with Elk1; however, HIF-2a did not bind to Elk1 or ETS1.
Furthermore, knockdown of both HIF-1a and HIF-2a resulted in a reduction of CD133
expression in WiDr. Taken together, our results revealed that HIF-1a and HIF-2a
activate CD133 promoter through ETS proteins.

PMCID: PMC3688781
PMID: 23840432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Dec;70(23):4631-44. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1411-4. Epub 
2013 Jun 30.

MiR-126 promotes coxsackievirus replication by mediating cross-talk of ERK1/2 and
Wnt/ß-catenin signal pathways.

Ye X(1), Hemida MG, Qiu Y, Hanson PJ, Zhang HM, Yang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Institute for Heart and
Lung Health, St. Paul's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Rm 166, 1081
Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC, V6Z1Y6, Canada.

Coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) is one of the most prevalent causes of viral myocarditis
and is associated with many other pathological conditions. CVB3 replication
relies on host cellular machineries and causes direct damage to host cells.
MicroRNAs have been found to regulate viral infections but their roles in CVB3
infection are still poorly understood. Here we describe a novel mechanism by
which miR-126 regulates two signal pathways essential for CVB3 replication. We
found that CVB3-induced ERK1/2 activation triggered the phosphorylation of ETS-1 
and ETS-2 transcription factors, which induced miR-126 upregulation. By using
both microRNA mimics and inhibitors, we proved that the upregulated miR-126
suppressed sprouty-related, EVH1 domain containing 1 (SPRED1) and in turn
enhanced ERK1/2 activation. This positive feedback loop of ERK1/2-miR-126-ERK1/2 
promoted CVB3 replication. Meanwhile, miR-126 expression stimulated GSK-3ß
activity and induced degradation of ß-catenin through suppressing LRP6 and WRCH1,
two newly identified targets in the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, which sensitized the
cells to virus-induced cell death and increased viral progeny release to initiate
new infections. Our results demonstrate that upregulated miR-126 upon CVB3
infection targets SPRED1, LRP6, and WRCH1 genes, mediating cross-talk between
ERK1/2 and Wnt/ß-catenin pathways, and thus promoting viral replication and
contributes to the viral cytopathogenicity.

PMID: 23811937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:946268. doi: 10.1155/2013/946268. Epub 2013 May 13.

Hypomethylation of ETS transcription factor binding sites and upregulation of
PARP1 expression in endometrial cancer.

Bi FF(1), Li D, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang 110004, China.

Although PARP1 promoter methylation is involved in the regulation of PARP1
expression in human keratinocyte lines and lymphoblastoid cell lines, its roles
in human endometrial cancer are unknown. DNA from forty normal endometrium (NE)
and fifty endometrial adenocarcinoma (EAC) tissues were analyzed by bisulfite
sequencing using primers focusing on the core promoter region of PARP1.
Expression levels of PARP1 were assessed by immunohistochemistry and real-time
PCR. Associations between patient clinicopathological characteristics and PARP1
protein levels were assessed by Fisher's exact test. Here, PARP1 mRNA and protein
were overexpressed in EAC tissues (P < 0.05). CpG sites within the ETS motif in
the PARP1 promoter exhibited significant hypomethylation in EAC tissues, and
there was a significant negative correlation between PARP1 mRNA levels and the
number of methylated sites in both NE and EAC tissues (R (2) = 0.262, P < 0.001).
Notably, PARP1 protein expression was associated with FIGO stage (P = 0.026),
histological grade (P = 0.002) , and body mass index (P = 0.04). Our findings
imply that PARP1 overexpression may participate in endometrial cancer
progression, and abnormal hypomethylation of CpG sites within the ETS motif in
the core promoter region may be responsible for PARP1 overexpression in EAC
tissues.

PMCID: PMC3666359
PMID: 23762867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Diabetologia. 2013 Sep;56(9):1971-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2950-9. Epub 2013
Jun 12.

Human adipose microRNA-221 is upregulated in obesity and affects fat metabolism
downstream of leptin and TNF-a.

Meerson A(1), Traurig M, Ossowski V, Fleming JM, Mullins M, Baier LJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, 445 North 5th Street, Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short endogenous RNAs that regulate
multiple biological processes including adipogenesis and fat metabolism. We
sought to identify miRNAs that correlate with BMI and to elucidate their upstream
regulation and downstream targets.
METHODS: Microarray-based expression profiling of 233 miRNAs was performed on
subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue biopsies from 29 non-diabetic Pima Indian
participants. Correlation of the expression levels of eight miRNAs with BMI was
assessed by quantitative reverse transcription (QRT) PCR in adipose samples from 
80 non-diabetic Pima Indians with a BMI of 21.6-54.0 kg/m(2). The upstream
regulation of one of these miRNAs, miR-221, was tested by treating cultured human
pre-adipocytes with leptin, TNF-a and insulin. Predicted targets of miR-221 were 
validated using QRT-PCR, immunoblots and luciferase assays. The downstream
effects of miR-221 overexpression were assayed by proteomic analysis.
RESULTS: Expression levels of miR-221 were positively correlated with BMI
(particularly in women) and fasting insulin concentrations, while the levels of
miR-193a-3p and miR-193b-5p were negatively correlated with BMI; other miRNAs did
not show significant associations in the 80 samples. miR-221 was downregulated by
leptin and TNF-a treatment in cultured human pre-adipocytes. Conversely, miR-221 
overexpression upregulated several proteins involved in fat metabolism, mimicking
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) activation. Furthermore,
miR-221 directly downregulated the adiponectin receptor 1 (ADIPOR1) and the
transcription factor v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS1). 
Adiponectin signalling is known to promote insulin sensitivity, and ETS1 is
crucial for angiogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our data suggest that miR-221 may contribute to the
development of the insulin resistance that typically accompanies obesity, by
affecting PPAR signalling pathways and by directly downregulating ADIPOR1 and
ETS1.

PMCID: PMC3737431
PMID: 23756832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):1240-5. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202675. Epub 
2013 Jun 5.

Ethnic specificity of lupus-associated loci identified in a genome-wide
association study in Korean women.

Lee HS(1), Kim T, Bang SY, Na YJ, Kim I, Kim K, Kim JH, Chung YJ, Shin HD, Kang
YM, Shim SC, Suh CH, Park YB, Kim JS, Kang C, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, , Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To identify novel genetic candidates for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) in the Korean population, and to validate the risk loci for SLE identified 
in previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
METHODS: We performed a GWAS in 400 Korean female SLE patients and 445 controls. 
Selected single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were then replicated in an
independent cohort of 385 SLE patients and 583 controls (replication cohort 1),
and in a further 811 SLE patients and 1502 controls (replication cohort 2).
RESULTS: In the GWAS phase, rs9275428 located near HLA-DQB1 showed the strongest 
association with SLE (OR 0.50, false discovery rate (FDR) p=3.07×10(-6)).
Although no loci reached genome-wide significance outside major
histocompatibility complex (MHC), C8orf13-BLK, STAT4, CSMD1, DIAPH3, GLDC and
TNFSF4 showed FDR p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Our results suggest that STAT4, BLK, IRF5,
PTTG1-miR-146a, UBE2L3 and TNFAIP3 are shared susceptibility loci among
Caucasians and Asians, while ETS1, IKZF1, SLC15A4 are likely to be Asian-specific
loci. In a combined analysis of 1596 SLE patients and 2540 controls for selected 
22 candidate SNP, STAT4 and BLK as positive controls showed a strong association 
with SLE (FDR p=9.85×10(-13) and 2.28×10(-8), respectively). Of these, 16
candidates (PEX5L, TRAJ50, MYO18B, SOS1, ARHGAP26, SMURF1, CADPS, HAND1, FAM78B, 
DIAPH3, TBL1XR1, CSMD1, ZBTB20, C3orf21, HIPK1 and AP001042.1) showed only
nominal significance (7.05×10(-4)=FDR p=4.38×10(-2)).
CONCLUSIONS: There are similarities and differences in genetic susceptibility for
SLE between Caucasian and Asian ethnic groups. Although 16 putative novel loci
for SLE have been suggested in the Korean population, further research on a
larger sample is required to discriminate truth from error.

PMID: 23740238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Sci Signal. 2013 Jun 4;6(278):pe21. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004299.

Acetylation of Ets-1 is the key to chromatin remodeling for miR-192 expression.

Dong Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China. zdong@gru.edu

By regulating gene expression, microRNAs (miRNAs) play pivotal roles in
physiological and pathological processes. However, the regulation of miRNAs is
elusive. miR-192 is a key regulator of renal fibrosis and hypertrophy in diabetic
nephropathy. Natarajan et al. showed that the miR-192 gene contains an upstream
region with Ets-1 and Smad3 binding sites. In control cells, all Ets-1 sites were
occupied, resulting in a locked chromatin structure that kept miR-192 expression 
low. In response to transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) stimulation, Smad3 and
Akt were activated, and the latter further activated p300 to induce partial
acetylation and dissociation of Ets-1 and the recruitment of Smad3 to the miR-192
gene, inducing transient miR-192 expression. During prolonged TGF-ß treatment,
p300 acetylated histone and Ets-1, resulting in complete dissociation of Ets-1
and the opening of the chromatin for sustained miR-192 expression. Thus,
transcription factors and chromatin remodeling control microRNA gene expression
in a dynamic, coordinated fashion.

PMID: 23737550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cell Struct Funct. 2013 Jul 6;38(2):145-54. Epub 2013 May 24.

Cell density-dependent nuclear accumulation of ELK3 is involved in suppression of
PAI-1 expression.

Tanaka S(1), Nakao K, Sekimoto T, Oka M, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Frontier Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences,
Osaka University, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Cell-cell contact regulates the proliferation and differentiation of
non-transformed cells, e.g., NIH/3T3 cells show growth arrest at high cell
density. However, only a few reports described the dynamic behavior of
transcription factors involved in this process. In this study, we showed that the
mRNA levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) decreased
drastically at high cell density, and that ELK3, a member of the Ets
transcription factor family, repressed PAI-1 expression. We also demonstrated
that while ELK3 was distributed evenly throughout the cell at low cell density,
it accumulated in the nucleus at high cell density, and that binding of DNA by
ELK3 at the A domain facilitated its nuclear accumulation. Furthermore, we found 
that ETS1, a PAI-1 activator, occupied the ELK3-binding site within the PAI-1
promoter at low cell density, while it was released at high cell density. These
results suggest that at high cell density, the switching of binding of
transcription factors from ETS1 to ELK3 occurs at a specific binding site of the 
PAI-1 promoter, leading to the cell-density dependent suppression of PAI-1
expression.

PMID: 23708702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Immunol. 2013 Jun 15;190(12):5972-80. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300351. Epub 2013 
May 17.

MicroRNA-155 confers encephalogenic potential to Th17 cells by promoting effector
gene expression.

Hu R(1), Huffaker TB, Kagele DA, Runtsch MC, Bake E, Chaudhuri AA, Round JL,
O'Connell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Th17 cells are central to the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease, and recently
specific noncoding microRNAs have been shown to regulate their development.
However, it remains unclear whether microRNAs are also involved in modulating
Th17 cell effector functions. Consequently, we examined the role of miR-155 in
differentiated Th17 cells during their induction of experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis. Using adoptive transfer experiments, we found that highly
purified, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein Ag-specific Th17 cells lacking
miR-155 were defective in their capacity to cause experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis. Gene expression profiling of purified miR-155(-/-)IL-17F(+)
Th17 cells identified a subset of effector genes that are dependent on miR-155
for their proper expression through a mechanism involving repression of the
transcription factor Ets1. Among the genes reduced in the absence of miR-155 was 
IL-23R, resulting in miR-155(-/-) Th17 cells being hyporesponsive to IL-23. Taken
together, our study demonstrates a critical role for miR-155 in Th17 cells as
they unleash autoimmune inflammation and finds that this occurs through a
signaling network involving miR-155, Ets1, and the clinically relevant
IL-23-IL-23R pathway.

PMCID: PMC3773482
PMID: 23686497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Jul 15;319(12):1865-74. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.04.022. Epub
2013 May 7.

Epigenetic control of endothelin-1 axis affects invasiveness of breast carcinoma 
cells with bone tropism.

Matteucci E(1), Maroni P, Bendinelli P, Locatelli A, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per la Salute, Molecular Pathology
Laboratory, Università degli Studi di Milano, via Luigi Mangiagalli, 31, 20133
Milano, Italy.

Here, we report a complex regulation of endothelin-1 (ET-1) axis driven by
epigenetic reactions in 1833-bone metastatic cells, emphasizing the importance in
skeletal metastasis from breast carcinoma. Inhibitors of histone deacetylases,
trichostatin A (TSA), and of DNA methylases, 5'-Azacytidine (Aza), caused,
respectively, reduction and increase in 1833 cell invasiveness, without affecting
the basal migration of parental MDA-MB231 cells. Of note, in the two cell lines
exposed to Aza the blockade of the ET-1 receptor ETAR with BQ-123 oppositely
changed invasive properties. Even if in MDA-MB231 cells the ET-1 axis was
scarcely influenced by epigenetic reactions, ETAR remarkably decreased after Aza.
In contrast, in 1833 cells Aza exposure enhanced ET-1 coupled to ETAR wild type, 
being also ETAR truncated form increased, and invasiveness was stimulated. Under 
demethylation, the increase in ET-1 steady state protein level in 1833 clone
seemed regulated at transcriptional level principally via Ets1 transcription
factor. In fact, actinomycin D almost completely prevented ET-1 mRNA induction
due to Aza. Only in 1833 cells, TSA exposure inactivated ET-1 axis, with
reduction of the expression of ET-1 and ETAR mutated form, in agreement with
Matrigel invasion decrease. This treatment favoured the ET-1 repressional
control, taking place at the level of mRNA stability due to the 3'-untranslated
region in the ET-1 gene, and also decreased transcription via NF-kB.
Environmental conditions that alter the balance between epigenetic reactions
might, therefore, affect metastasis migratory mode influencing ET-1 axis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23660387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PeerJ. 2013 Apr 16;1:e68. doi: 10.7717/peerj.68. Print 2013.

Differential expression of miR-1, a putative tumor suppressing microRNA, in
cancer resistant and cancer susceptible mice.

Fleming JL(1), Gable DL, Samadzadeh-Tarighat S, Cheng L, Yu L, Gillespie JL,
Toland AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, The Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University ,
Columbus, OH , USA.

Mus spretus mice are highly resistant to several types of cancer compared to Mus 
musculus mice. To determine whether differences in microRNA (miRNA) expression
account for some of the differences in observed skin cancer susceptibility
between the strains, we performed miRNA expression profiling of skin RNA for over
300 miRNAs. Five miRNAs, miR-1, miR-124a-3, miR-133a, miR-134, miR-206, were
differentially expressed by array and/or qPCR. miR-1 was previously shown to have
tumor suppressing abilities in multiple tumor types. We found miR-1 expression to
be lower in mouse cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas (cSCCs) compared to normal
skin. Based on the literature and our expression data, we performed detailed
studies on predicted miR-1 targets and evaluated the effect of miR-1 expression
on two murine cSCC cell lines, A5 and B9. Following transfection of miR-1, we
found decreased mRNA expression of three validated miR-1 targets, Met, Twf1 and
Ets1 and one novel target Bag4. Decreased expression of Ets1 was confirmed by
Western analysis and by 3' reporter luciferase assays containing wildtype and
mutated Ets1 3'UTR. We evaluated the effect of miR-1 on multiple tumor phenotypes
including apoptosis, proliferation, cell cycle and migration. In A5 cells,
expression of miR-1 led to decreased proliferation compared to a control miR.
miR-1 expression also led to increased apoptosis at later time points (72 and 96 
h) and to a decrease in cells in S-phase. In summary, we identified five miRNAs
with differential expression between cancer resistant and cancer susceptible mice
and found that miR-1, a candidate tumor suppressor, has targets with defined
roles in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3642704
PMID: 23646287  [PubMed]


215. Physiol Genomics. 2013 Jun 17;45(12):493-8. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00008.2013. Epub 2013 Apr 30.

miR-222 contributes to sex-dimorphic cardiac eNOS expression via ets-1.

Evangelista AM(1), Deschamps AM, Liu D, Raghavachari N, Murphy E.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

It is well recognized that there is sex-dimorphic expression of mRNA and protein 
in the heart; however, the underlying mechanism is poorly understood. Endothelial
nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) is an important regulator of cardiac function, and
the expression levels of eNOS differ between male and female hearts. The aim of
this study was to examine whether expression of specific microRNA (miRNA, miR) in
males and females contributes to changes in the expression of eNOS. miRNA was
extracted from the myocardium of male and female C57BL/6 mice and subjected to an
Affymetrix miRNA array. Decreased expression of miR-222 was discovered in females
and confirmed by qRT-PCR from whole heart or isolated cardiomyocytes. The
transcription factor V-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog-1 (ets-1) 
was identified as a potential target of miR-222 using TargetScan, and fivefold
increased ets-1 protein expression in females was confirmed by Western blot.
Targeting of ets-1 by miR-222 was determined in HEK293 cells overexpressing
luciferase under regulation of either the ets-1 3'-UTR, a null 3'-UTR control, or
a scrambled ets-1 3'-UTR and treated with a small molecule miR-222 mimic or
inhibitor. Additionally qRT-PCR confirmed that mRNA levels of the ets-1
transcriptional target, eNOS, were 25% higher in females. Compared with untreated
myocyte controls, 50% inhibition of eNOS expression was achieved by treatment
with a miR-222 mimic, compared with a 25% increase due to miR-222 inhibitor. Our 
findings indicate that sex-dependent miR-222 regulation alters the expression of 
the cardiac regulatory protein eNOS.

PMCID: PMC3680778
PMID: 23632416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Ann Hum Genet. 2013 Jul;77(4):344-50. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12018. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

Epistatic interaction between genetic variants in susceptibility gene ETS1
correlates with IL-17 levels in SLE patients.

Zhang J(1), Zhang Y, Zhang L, Yang J, Ying D, Zeng S, Lee TL, Lau CS, Chan TM,
Leung AM, Mok CC, Wong SN, Lee KW, Ho MH, Lee PP, Chung BH, Chong CY, Wong RW,
Mok MY, Wong WH, Lau YL, Yang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, LKS
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Hong Kong.

T-helper cells that produce IL-17 (Th17 cells) are a subset of CD4(+) T-cells
with pathological roles in autoimmune diseases including systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), and ETS1 is a negative regulator of Th17 cell
differentiation. Our previous work on genome-wide association study (GWAS)
identified two variants in the ETS1 gene (rs10893872 and rs1128334) as being
associated with SLE. However, like many other risk alleles for complex diseases, 
little is known on how these genetic variants might affect disease pathogenesis. 
In this study, we examined serum IL-17 levels from 283 SLE cases and observed a
significant correlation between risk variants in ETS1 and serum IL-17
concentration in patients, which suggests a potential mechanistic link between
these variants and the disease. Furthermore, we found that the two variants act
synergistically in influencing IL-17 production, with evidence of significant
genetic interaction between them as well as higher correlation between the
haplotype formed by the risk alleles and IL-17 level in patient serum. In
addition, the correlation between ETS1 variants and IL-17 level seems to be more 
significant in SLE patients manifesting renal involvement, dsDNA autoantibody
production or early-onset.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 23614478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(12):6758-68. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03241-12. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Ets-1 is required for the activation of VEGFR3 during latent Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection of endothelial cells.

Gutierrez KD(1), Morris VA, Wu D, Barcy S, Lagunoff M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), the etiologic agent of Kaposi's
sarcoma (KS), is present in the predominant tumor cells of KS, the spindle cells.
Spindle cells express markers of lymphatic endothelium and, interestingly, KSHV
infection of blood endothelial cells reprograms them to a lymphatic endothelial
cell phenotype. KSHV-induced reprogramming requires the activation of STAT3 and
phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3)/AKT through the activation of cellular receptor
gp130. Importantly, KSHV-induced reprogramming is specific to endothelial cells, 
indicating that there are additional host genes that are differentially regulated
during KSHV infection of endothelial cells that contribute to lymphatic
reprogramming. We found that the transcription factor Ets-1 is highly expressed
in KS spindle cells and is upregulated during KSHV infection of endothelial cells
in culture. The KSHV latent vFLIP gene is sufficient to induce Ets-1 expression
in an NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent fashion. Ets-1 is required for KSHV-induced expression of
VEGFR3, a lymphatic endothelial-cell-specific receptor important for
lymphangiogenesis, and Ets-1 activates the promoter of VEGFR3. Ets-1 knockdown
does not alter the expression of another lymphatic-specific gene, the podoplanin 
gene, but does inhibit the expression of VEGFR3 in uninfected lymphatic
endothelium, indicating that Ets-1 is a novel cellular regulator of VEGFR3
expression. Knockdown of Ets-1 affects the ability of KSHV-infected cells to
display angiogenic phenotypes, indicating that Ets-1 plays a role in KSHV
activation of endothelial cells during latent KSHV infection. Thus, Ets-1 is a
novel regulator of VEGFR3 and is involved in the induction of angiogenic
phenotypes by KSHV.

PMCID: PMC3676105
PMID: 23552426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Gene. 2013 Sep 10;526(2):287-94. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.103. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

DAXX silencing suppresses mouse ovarian surface epithelial cell growth by
inducing senescence and DNA damage.

Pan WW(1), Yi FP, Cao LX, Liu XM, Shen ZF, Bu YQ, Xu Y, Fan HY, Song FZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

Mouse ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) is a single layer of cubodial epithelial
cells that covers the ovary surface and is involved in regulating the secretion
and transport of 17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. Recently, OSE cells have
attracted particular interest as a major source of ovarian cancer.
Death-associated protein DAXX along with PML (promyelocytic leukemia protein)
nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) reportedly play roles in transcriptional regulation and 
apoptosis. However, little is known regarding a role for DAXX in mOSE cells. In
this study, we both over-expressed DAXX and depleted DAXX in primary mOSE cells. 
We found that Daxx deletion accelerated senescence in a p53/p21-dependent manner 
and promoted DNA damage by interacting with PML bodies without affecting cell
cycle progression. These results suggest that DAXX may transform mOSE cells to an
ovarian oncogenic phenotype and may be an anti-cancer target.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23542781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 9;110(15):6091-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304234110. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Transposon mutagenesis reveals cooperation of ETS family transcription factors
with signaling pathways in erythro-megakaryocytic leukemia.

Tang JZ(1), Carmichael CL, Shi W, Metcalf D, Ng AP, Hyland CD, Jenkins NA,
Copeland NG, Howell VM, Zhao ZJ, Smyth GK, Kile BT, Alexander WS.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052, 
Australia.

To define genetic lesions driving leukemia, we targeted cre-dependent Sleeping
Beauty (SB) transposon mutagenesis to the blood-forming system using a
hematopoietic-selective vav 1 oncogene (vav1) promoter. Leukemias of diverse
lineages ensued, most commonly lymphoid leukemia and erythroleukemia. The
inclusion of a transgenic allele of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)V617F resulted in
acceleration of transposon-driven disease and strong selection for
erythroleukemic pathology with transformation of bipotential
erythro-megakaryocytic cells. The genes encoding the E-twenty-six (ETS)
transcription factors Ets related gene (Erg) and Ets1 were the most common sites 
for transposon insertion in SB-induced JAK2V617F-positive erythroleukemias,
present in 87.5% and 65%, respectively, of independent leukemias examined. The
role of activated Erg was validated by reproducing erythroleukemic pathology in
mice transplanted with fetal liver cells expressing translocated in liposarcoma
(TLS)-ERG, an activated form of ERG found in human leukemia. Via application of
SB mutagenesis to TLS-ERG-induced erythroid transformation, we identified
multiple loci as likely collaborators with activation of Erg. Jak2 was identified
as a common transposon insertion site in TLS-ERG-induced disease, strongly
validating the cooperation between JAK2V617F and transposon insertion at the Erg 
locus in the JAK2V617F-positive leukemias. Moreover, loci expressing other
regulators of signal transduction pathways were conspicuous among the common
transposon insertion sites in TLS-ERG-driven leukemia, suggesting that a key
mechanism in erythroleukemia may be the collaboration of lesions disturbing
erythroid maturation, most notably in genes of the ETS family, with mutations
that reduce dependence on exogenous signals.

PMCID: PMC3625293
PMID: 23533276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Leuk Res. 2013 Jun;37(6):647-56. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.02.019. Epub 2013
Mar 20.

MicroRNA profiling reveals aberrant microRNA expression in adult ETP-ALL and
functional studies implicate a role for miR-222 in acute leukemia.

Coskun E(1), Neumann M, Schlee C, Liebertz F, Heesch S, Goekbuget N, Hoelzer D,
Baldus CD.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Oncology, Charité, University Hospital Benjamin Franklin,
Berlin, Germany.

Early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ETP-ALL) has been identified
as high-risk subgroup in acute T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). To
investigate the immature and myeloid nature of ETP-ALL we examined global
microRNA (miRNA) expression in adult ETP-ALL. miRNA profiling of ETP-ALL (n=8),
non-ETP T-ALL (n=6), and healthy controls was performed and results were
validated in independent cohorts of 66 ETP-ALL and 111 non-ETP T-ALL using
real-time RT-PCR. Furthermore, in vitro studies were performed on deregulated
miRNAs in acute leukemia. We identified miR-221 and miR-222 as the most
upregulated and six miRNAs (miR-151-3p, miR-19a, miR-20b, miR-342-3p, miR-363,
and miR-576-3p) as downregulated in ETP-ALL compared to non-ETP T-ALL. In the
validation cohorts, miR-221 and miR-222 were significantly upregulated in
ETP-ALL, and miR-363 and miR-19a were downregulated in ETP-ALL. ETS1,
downregulated in ETP-ALL, was identified as direct target of miR-222. In our in
vitro studies miR-222 significantly inhibited proliferation, and caused cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis in leukemic cells. In conclusion, our study revealed
aberrant miRNA expression in ETP-ALL, with miR-221 and miR-222 as the most
overexpressed miRNAs and implied a functional role for miR-222 in leukemic cells.
Importantly, miR-222 may impact leukemogenesis by altering expression of the
proto-oncogene ETS1 in acute leukemia.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23522449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Arch Virol. 2013 Aug;158(8):1773-81. doi: 10.1007/s00705-013-1655-1. Epub 2013
Mar 9.

HBx and HBs regulate RhoC expression by upregulating transcription factor Ets-1.

Qin D(1), Li K, Qu J, Wang S, Zou C, Sheng Y, Huang A, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on Infectious Diseases, Ministry of
Education, Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, 400016
Chongqing, China.

The available evidence suggests that HBV proteins play an important role in the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). RhoC, a member of the Rho
subfamily of the Ras superfamily of homologous genes, had been implicated in
tumorigenesis and tumor progression. In a previous study, we demonstrated that
HBx and HBs could up-regulate RhoC expression by enhancing its promoter activity.
However, the specific mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that
overexpression of Ets-1 results in upregulation of RhoC promoter activity and
mRNA and protein levels. Expression of transcription factor Ets-1 was
significantly higher in HepG2.2.15 cells than that in HepG2 cells. Meanwhile,
infection of HepG2 cells with an HBV-adenovirus recombinant virus led to
up-regulation of Ets-1. Of the four HBV proteins, HBx and HBs, could increase
expression of Ets-1, which consequently contributed to the upregulation of RhoC. 
These findings might provide a novel insight into HBV-induced HCC metastasis.

PMID: 23474984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55883. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055883. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

The level of Ets-1 protein is regulated by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1)
in cancer cells to prevent DNA damage.

Legrand AJ(1), Choul-Li S, Spriet C, Idziorek T, Vicogne D, Drobecq H, Dantzer F,
Villeret V, Aumercier M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS USR 3078, Institut de Recherche Interdisciplinaire, Campus CNRS de la
Haute Borne, Université Lille Nord de France, IFR 147, BP 70478, Villeneuve
d'Ascq, France.

Ets-1 is a transcription factor that regulates many genes involved in cancer
progression and in tumour invasion. It is a poor prognostic marker for breast,
lung, colorectal and ovary carcinomas. Here, we identified poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 (PARP-1) as a novel interaction partner of Ets-1. We show that Ets-1
activates, by direct interaction, the catalytic activity of PARP-1 and is then
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated in a DNA-independent manner. The catalytic inhibition of
PARP-1 enhanced Ets-1 transcriptional activity and caused its massive
accumulation in cell nuclei. Ets-1 expression was correlated with an increase in 
DNA damage when PARP-1 was inhibited, leading to cancer cell death. Moreover,
PARP-1 inhibitors caused only Ets-1-expressing cells to accumulate DNA damage.
These results provide new insight into Ets-1 regulation in cancer cells and its
link with DNA repair proteins. Furthermore, our findings suggest that PARP-1
inhibitors would be useful in a new therapeutic strategy that specifically
targets Ets-1-expressing tumours.

PMCID: PMC3566071
PMID: 23405229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55719. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055719. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

microRNA-9 suppresses the proliferation, invasion and metastasis of gastric
cancer cells through targeting cyclin D1 and Ets1.

Zheng L(1), Qi T, Yang D, Qi M, Li D, Xiang X, Huang K, Tong Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Union Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.

Recent evidence shows that altered microRNA-9 (miR-9) expression is implicated in
the progression of gastric cancer. However, the exact roles and underlying
mechanisms of miR-9 in the proliferation, invasion and metastasis of gastric
cancer still remain unknown. In this study, miR-9 was found to be down-regulated 
and inversely correlated with the expression of cyclin D1 and v-ets
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (Ets1) in gastric cancer tissues
and cell lines. Bioinformatics analysis revealed the putative miR-9 binding sites
in the 3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTR) of cyclin D1 and Ets1 mRNA. Ectopic
expression or knockdown of miR-9 resulted in responsively altered expression of
cyclin D1, Ets1 and their downstream targets phosphorylated retinoblastoma and
matrix metalloproteinase 9 in cultured gastric cancer cell lines SGC-7901 and
AGS. In the luciferase reporter system, miR-9 directly targeted the 3'-UTR of
cyclin D1 and Ets1, and these effects were abolished by mutating the miR-9
binding sites. Over-expression of miR-9 suppressed the proliferation, invasion,
and metastasis of SGC-7901 and AGS cells in vitro and in vivo. Restoration of
miR-9-mediated down-regulation of cyclin D1 and Ets1 by transient transfection,
rescued the cancer cells from decrease in proliferation, migration and invasion. 
Furthermore, anti-miR-9 inhibitor promoted the proliferation, migration and
invasion of gastric cancer cells, while knocking down of cyclin D1 or Ets1
partially phenocopied the effects of miR-9 over-expression. These data indicate
that miR-9 suppresses the expression of cyclin D1 and Ets1 via the binding sites 
in their 3'-UTR, thus inhibiting the proliferation, invasion and metastasis of
gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3561302
PMID: 23383271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Gastroenterol. 2013 Nov;48(11):1222-33. doi: 10.1007/s00535-012-0745-2. Epub
2013 Jan 30.

Ets1 and heat shock factor 1 regulate transcription of the Transformer 2ß gene in
human colon cancer cells.

Kajita K(1), Kuwano Y, Kitamura N, Satake Y, Nishida K, Kurokawa K, Akaike Y,
Honda M, Masuda K, Rokutan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stress Science, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University 
of Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15 Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima, 770-8503, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Transformer (Tra) 2ß is a member of the serine/arginine-rich
(SR)-like protein family that regulates alternative splicing of numerous genes in
a concentration-dependent manner. Several types of cancer cells up-regulate Tra2ß
expression, while the regulatory mechanism of Tra2ß expression remains to be
elucidated. In this study, we examined the transcriptional regulation and
possible functions of Tra2ß in human colon cancer cells.
METHODS: We cloned 959 bp-upstream of the human TRA2ß 5'-flank into luciferase
constructs. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was employed to identify crucial
cis element(s) and trans activator(s) of the TRA2ß promoter. Tra2ß expression in 
the human colon and colon cancer tissues was examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In response to sodium arsenite, colon cancer cells (HCT116) increased
levels of TRA2ß1 mRNA encoding a functional, full-length Tra2ß with a peak around
6 h without changing its mRNA stability. Transient expression assays using a
reporter gene driven by serially truncated TRA2ß promoters and Chip assay
demonstrated that an Ets1-binding site present at -64 to -55 bp was crucial for
basal transcription, while three heat shock elements (HSEs) located at -145 to
-99 bp mediated the oxidant-induced transactivation of TRA2ß. Tra2ß knockdown
caused apoptosis of HCT116 cells. Tra2ß were preferentially expressed in
proliferative compartment of normal human colonic glands and adenocarcinomas,
where Ets1 and heat shock factor 1 were also highly expressed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that oxidative stress-responsive Tra2ß may play 
an important role in colon cancer growth.

PMID: 23361474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 1;288(9):6488-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.413302. Epub 2013
Jan 13.

Inactivation of max-interacting protein 1 induces renal cilia disassembly through
reduction in levels of intraflagellar transport 20 in polycystic kidney.

Ko JY(1), Yoo KH, Song SA, Kim do Y, Kong HK, Ahn C, Lee HW, Kang DH, Oh GT, Park
JH.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biological Science, Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul
140-742, Republic of Korea.

Cilia in ciliated cells consist of protruding structures that sense mechanical
and chemical signals from the extracellular environment. Cilia are assembled with
variety molecules via a process known as intraflagellar transport (IFT). What
controls the length of cilia in ciliated cells is critical to understand ciliary 
disease such as autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, which involves
abnormally short cilia. But this control mechanism is not well understood.
Previously, multiple tubular cysts have been observed in the kidneys of
max-interacting protein 1 (Mxi1)-deficient mice aged 6 months or more. Here, we
clarified the relationship between Mxi1 inactivation and cilia disassembly. Cilia
phenotypes were observed in kidneys of Mxi1-deficient mice using scanning
electron microscopy to elucidate the effect of Mxi1 on renal cilia phenotype, and
cilia disassembly was observed in Mxi1-deficient kidney. In addition, genes
related to cilia were validated in vitro and in vivo using quantitative PCR, and 
Ift20 was selected as a candidate gene in this study. The length of cilium
decreased, and p-ERK level induced by a cilia defect increased in kidneys of
Mxi1-deficient mice. Ciliogenesis of Mxi1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) decreased, and this abnormality was restored by Mxi1 transfection in
Mxi1-deficient MEFs. We confirmed that ciliogenesis and Ift20 expression were
regulated by Mxi1 in vitro. We also determined that Mxi1 regulates Ift20 promoter
activity via Ets-1 binding to the Ift20 promoter. These results indicate that
inactivating Mxi1 induces ciliary defects in polycystic kidney.

PMCID: PMC3585082
PMID: 23316056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2013 Mar-Apr;31(2):263-71. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

The role of miR-125b in T lymphocytes in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Luo X(1), Zhang L, Li M, Zhang W, Leng X, Zhang F, Zhao Y, Zeng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China. lxf692@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to explore miRNA expression profiles in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) and the potential biological functions of the associated miRNA in the
pathogenesis of SLE.
METHODS: Fifty patients with active SLE and 26 healthy controls were enrolled.
Four patients and four controls were used for miRNA microarray analysis to detect
the levels of 847 miRNAs in PBMCs. The others were used for qRT-PCR confirmation 
and miRNA functional studies. A reporter gene assay was used to determine the
biological function of miR-125b.
RESULTS: Eleven miRNAs were found to be up-regulated and 26 miRNAs were
down-regulated in SLE patients. Further analysis showed that the down-regulation 
of miR-125b, mainly in T cells, was negatively correlated with lupus nephritis.
We also confirmed that ETS1 and STAT3 are target genes of miR-125b using a
dual-luciferase reporter transfection assay.
CONCLUSIONS: These data identified this miRNA expression profile as a possible
new biomarker of SLE. Moreover, the down-regulation of miR-125b mainly in T cells
may contribute to the pathogenesis of SLE by regulating ETS1 and STAT3 gene
expression.

PMID: 23305626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53042. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053042. Epub 2013 Jan 3.

Discovery, validation and characterization of Erbb4 and Nrg1 haplotypes using
data from three genome-wide association studies of schizophrenia.

Agim ZS(1), Esendal M, Briollais L, Uyan O, Meschian M, Martinez LA, Ding Y,
Basak AN, Ozcelik H.

Author information: 
(1)Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory, Molecular Biology and Genetics
Department, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Schizophrenia is one of the most common and complex neuropsychiatric disorders,
which is contributed both by genetic and environmental exposures. Recently, it is
shown that NRG1-mediated ErbB4 signalling regulates many important cellular and
molecular processes such as cellular growth, differentiation and death,
particularly in myelin-producing cells, glia and neurons. Recent association
studies have revealed genomic regions of NRG1 and ERBB4, which are significantly 
associated with risk of developing schizophrenia; however, inconsistencies exist 
in terms of validation of findings between distinct populations. In this study,
we aim to validate the previously identified regions and to discover novel
haplotypes of NRG1 and ERBB4 using logistic regression models and Haploview
analyses in three independent datasets from GWAS conducted on European subjects, 
namely, CATIE, GAIN and nonGAIN. We identified a significant 6-kb block in ERBB4 
between chromosome locations 212,156,823 and 212,162,848 in CATIE and GAIN
datasets (p = 0.0206 and 0.0095, respectively). In NRG1, a significant 25-kb
block, between 32,291,552 and 32,317,192, was associated with risk of
schizophrenia in all CATIE, GAIN, and nonGAIN datasets (p = 0.0005, 0.0589, and
0.0143, respectively). Fine mapping and FastSNP analysis of genetic variation
located within significantly associated regions proved the presence of binding
sites for several transcription factors such as SRY, SOX5, CEPB, and ETS1. In
this study, we have discovered and validated haplotypes of ERBB4 and NRG1 in
three independent European populations. These findings suggest that these
haplotypes play an important role in the development of schizophrenia by
affecting transcription factor binding affinity.

PMCID: PMC3536812
PMID: 23301017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Lab Invest. 2013 Mar;93(3):354-64. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.172. Epub 2013 Jan
7.

Berberine represses DAXX gene transcription and induces cancer cell apoptosis.

Li J(1), Gu L, Zhang H, Liu T, Tian D, Zhou M, Zhou S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Tongji hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Death-domain-associated protein (DAXX) is a multifunctional protein that
regulates a wide range of cellular signaling pathways for both cell survival and 
apoptosis. Regulation of DAXX gene expression remains largely obscure. We
recently reported that berberine (BBR), a natural product derived from a plant
used in Chinese herbal medicine, downregulates DAXX expression at the
transcriptional level. Here, we further investigate the mechanisms underlying the
transcriptional suppression of DAXX by BBR. By analyzing and mapping the putative
DAXX gene promoter, we identified the core promoter region (from -161 to -1),
which contains consensus sequences for the transcriptional factors Sp1 and Ets1. 
We confirmed that Sp1 and Ets1 bound to the core promoter region of DAXX and
stimulated DAXX transcriptional activity. In contrast, BBR bound to the DAXX core
promoter region and suppressed its transcriptional activity. Following studies
demonstrated a possible mechanism that BBR inhibited the DAXX promoter activity
through blocking or disrupting the association of Sp1 or Ets1 and their consensus
sequences in the promoter. Downregulation of DAXX by BBR resulted in inhibition
of MDM2 and subsequently, activation of p53, leading to cancer cell death. Our
results reveal a novel possible mechanism: by competitively binding to the Sp1
and Ets1 consensus sequences, BBR inhibits the transcription of DAXX, thus
inducing cancer cell apoptosis through a p53-dependent pathway.

PMCID: PMC3961588
PMID: 23295648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Sep;70(18):3375-90. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1243-7. Epub 
2013 Jan 5.

Review of Ets1 structure, function, and roles in immunity.

Garrett-Sinha LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Center of
Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, Room B3-306, 701 Ellicott Street,
Buffalo, NY 14203, USA. leesinha@buffalo.edu

The Ets1 transcription factor is a member of the Ets gene family and is highly
conserved throughout evolution. Ets1 is known to regulate a number of important
biological processes in normal cells and in tumors. In particular, Ets1 has been 
associated with regulation of immune cell function and with an aggressive
behavior in tumors that express it at high levels. Here we review and summarize
the general features of Ets1 and describe its roles in immunity and autoimmunity,
with a focus on its roles in B lymphocytes. We also review evidence that suggests
that Ets1 may play a role in malignant transformation of hematopoietic
malignancies including B cell malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3636162
PMID: 23288305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(12):e1003142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003142. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Dynamic and differential regulation of stem cell factor FoxD3 in the neural crest
is Encrypted in the genome.

Simões-Costa MS(1), McKeown SJ, Tan-Cabugao J, Sauka-Spengler T, Bronner ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California,
USA.

The critical stem cell transcription factor FoxD3 is expressed by the
premigratory and migrating neural crest, an embryonic stem cell population that
forms diverse derivatives. Despite its important role in development and stem
cell biology, little is known about what mediates FoxD3 activity in these cells. 
We have uncovered two FoxD3 enhancers, NC1 and NC2, that drive reporter
expression in spatially and temporally distinct manners. Whereas NC1 activity
recapitulates initial FoxD3 expression in the cranial neural crest, NC2 activity 
recapitulates initial FoxD3 expression at vagal/trunk levels while appearing only
later in migrating cranial crest. Detailed mutational analysis, in vivo chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and morpholino knock-downs reveal that transcription factors
Pax7 and Msx1/2 cooperate with the neural crest specifier gene, Ets1, to bind to 
the cranial NC1 regulatory element. However, at vagal/trunk levels, they function
together with the neural plate border gene, Zic1, which directly binds to the NC2
enhancer. These results reveal dynamic and differential regulation of FoxD3 in
distinct neural crest subpopulations, suggesting that heterogeneity is encrypted 
at the regulatory level. Isolation of neural crest enhancers not only allows
establishment of direct regulatory connections underlying neural crest formation,
but also provides valuable tools for tissue specific manipulation and
investigation of neural crest cell identity in amniotes.

PMCID: PMC3527204
PMID: 23284303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jan;73(1):170-6. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-201627. Epub
2012 Dec 25.

MicroRNA-146a and Ets-1 gene polymorphisms in ocular Behcet's disease and
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome.

Zhou Q(1), Hou S, Liang L, Li X, Tan X, Wei L, Lei B, Kijlstra A, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, and Chongqing Eye Institute, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, , Chongqing, P R
China.

AIM: MicroRNA-146a (miR-146a) is involved in certain immune-mediated diseases.
Transcription factor Ets-1 strongly affects miR-146a promoter activity and
directly regulates miR-146a expression. This study was performed to investigate
the association of miR-146a and Ets-1 gene polymorphisms with Behçet's disease
(BD) and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) disease in a Chinese Han population.
METHODS: A total of 809 patients with BD, 613 patients with VKH and 1132 normal
controls were genotyped for miR-146a/rs2910164, rs57095329 and rs6864584,
Ets-1/rs1128334 and rs10893872 using a PCR restriction fragment length
polymorphism assay. miR-146a expression was examined in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) by real-time PCR. Cytokine production by PBMCs was
measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: A significantly decreased frequency of the homozygous rs2910164 CC
genotype and C allele was observed in patients with BD compared with controls
(pc(a)=1.24×10(-5), OR 0.61; pc(a)=1.33×10(-4), OR 0.75, respectively). MiR-146a 
expression in GG cases was 2.45-fold and 1.99-fold higher, respectively, than
that in CC cases and GC cases. There was no association of the other four single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with BD. There was also no association of these
five SNPs with its main clinical features. No associations were found with the
five SNPs tested or with its clinical manifestations in VKH disease. Interleukin 
(IL)-17, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)a and IL-1ß production from rs2910164 CC
cases was markedly lower than that in GG cases. No effect of genotype was
observed on IL-6 and monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1 production and IL-8
expression was slightly higher in CC cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a strong association of rs2910164 of miR-146a
with BD in a Chinese population and decreased expression of miR-146a and certain 
proinflammatory cytokines in individuals carrying the CC genotype.

PMID: 23268366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2013 Apr;157(3):272-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2012.12.003. Epub 2012 Dec 23.

Exposure to copper induces oxidative and stress responses and DNA damage in the
coral Montastraea franksi.

Schwarz JA(1), Mitchelmore CL, Jones R, O'Dea A, Seymour S.

Author information: 
(1)Vassar College, 124 Raymond Ave., Poughkeepsie, NY 12604, USA.
joschwarz@vassar.edu

Copper is a common chemical contaminant in coastal environments, including coral 
reefs. Ecotoxicological studies have demonstrated that exposure to copper can
cause stress and detrimental effects in both host cnidarian and algal symbionts. 
The objective of this study was to investigate the sublethal effects of copper on
the reef-building coral Montastraea franksi, by identifying genes with altered
expression in corals exposed to dissolved copper, and by measuring the extent of 
damage to DNA in response to copper exposure. Corals exposed to 30 µg L(-1)
copper for 48 h experienced significant DNA damage and displayed changes in
expression patterns of genes that are known to play role cellular and oxidative
stress responses. Corals also experienced changes in gene expression of genes
that are not already known to play roles in oxidative stress in corals. Our data 
suggest that these genes may either play roles directly in mediating a stress
response, or may be genes acting downstream of the stress response. These include
an ETS domain-containing transcription factor related to the ETS1 family of
transcription factors, known in mammals to mediate development, disease, and
stress response, and two genes that are associated with biomineralization:
galaxin, a protein from the organic matrix of the coral skeleton, and a
coral-specific gene SCRIP2.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23268349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Calcif Tissue Int. 2013 Apr;92(4):339-53. doi: 10.1007/s00223-012-9683-5. Epub
2012 Dec 22.

1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) regulation of fibroblast growth factor-23 expression
in bone cells: evidence for primary and secondary mechanisms modulated by leptin 
and interleukin-6.

Saini RK(1), Kaneko I, Jurutka PW, Forster R, Hsieh A, Hsieh JC, Haussler MR,
Whitfield GK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Mathematical and Natural Sciences, Arizona State University,
Phoenix, AZ 85306, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF23) is a circulating hormone that acts to correct
hyperphosphatemic states by inhibiting renal phosphate reabsorption and to
prevent hypervitaminosis D by feedback repressing 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
(1,25(OH)2D3) biosynthesis. FGF23 gene expression in the osteoblast/osteocyte is 
induced by the nuclear vitamin D receptor (VDR) bound to 1,25(OH)2D3, but
cycloheximide sensitivity of this induction suggests that it may occur largely
via secondary mechanisms requiring cooperating transcription factors. We
therefore sought to identify 1,25(OH)2D3-regulated transcription factors that
might impact FGF23 expression. Although neither leptin nor interleukin-6 (IL-6)
alone affects FGF23 expression, leptin treatment was found to potentiate
1,25(OH)2D3 upregulation of FGF23 in UMR-106 cells, whereas IL-6 treatment
blunted this upregulation. Genomic analyses revealed conserved binding sites for 
STATs (signal transduction mediators of leptin and IL-6 action) along with
transcription factor ETS1 in human and other mammalian FGF23 genes. Further,
STAT3, STAT1, ETS1, and VDR mRNAs were induced in a dose-dependent manner by
1,25(OH)2D3 in UMR-106 cells. Bioinformatic analysis identified nine potential
VDREs in a genomic interval containing human FGF23. Six of the putative VDREs
were capable of mediating direct transcriptional activation of a heterologous
reporter gene when bound by a 1,25(OH)2D3-liganded VDR complex. A model is
proposed wherein 1,25(OH)2D3 upregulates FGF23 production directly via multiple
VDREs and indirectly via induction of STAT3, ETS1, and VDR transcription factors 
that are then activated via cell surface and intracellular signaling to cooperate
in the induction of FGF23 through DNA looping and generation of euchromatin
architecture.

PMCID: PMC3595337
PMID: 23263654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Sep;21(9):994-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.277. Epub 2012 Dec 
19.

Genes identified in Asian SLE GWASs are also associated with SLE in Caucasian
populations.

Wang C(1), Ahlford A, Järvinen TM, Nordmark G, Eloranta ML, Gunnarsson I,
Svenungsson E, Padyukov L, Sturfelt G, Jönsen A, Bengtsson AA, Truedsson L,
Eriksson C, Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Sjöwall C, Julkunen H, Criswell LA, Graham RR, 
Behrens TW, Kere J, Rönnblom L, Syvänen AC, Sandling JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Medicine and Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Recent genome-wide association studies (GWASs) conducted in Asian populations
have identified novel risk loci for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Here, we 
genotyped 10 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in eight such loci and
investigated their disease associations in three independent Caucasian SLE
case-control cohorts recruited from Sweden, Finland and the United States. The
disease associations of the SNPs in ETS1, IKZF1, LRRC18-WDFY4, RASGRP3, SLC15A4, 
TNIP1 and 16p11.2 were replicated, whereas no solid evidence of association was
observed for the 7q11.23 locus in the Caucasian cohorts. SLC15A4 was
significantly associated with renal involvement in SLE. The association of TNIP1 
was more pronounced in SLE patients with renal and immunological disorder, which 
is corroborated by two previous studies in Asian cohorts. The effects of all the 
associated SNPs, either conferring risk for or being protective against SLE, were
in the same direction in Caucasians and Asians. The magnitudes of the allelic
effects for most of the SNPs were also comparable across different ethnic groups.
On the contrary, remarkable differences in allele frequencies between Caucasian
and Asian populations were observed for all associated SNPs. In conclusion, most 
of the novel SLE risk loci identified by GWASs in Asian populations were also
associated with SLE in Caucasian populations. We observed both similarities and
differences with respect to the effect sizes and risk allele frequencies across
ethnicities.

PMCID: PMC3746253
PMID: 23249952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Gene. 2013 Dec 10;532(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.009. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Regulation of the MIR155 host gene in physiological and pathological processes.

Elton TS(1), Selemon H, Elton SM, Parinandi NL.

Author information: 
(1)Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, USA; College of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmacology, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic address:
terry.elton@osumc.edu.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a family of small nonprotein-coding RNAs, play a critical
role in posttranscriptional gene regulation by acting as adaptors for the
miRNA-induced silencing complex to inhibit gene expression by targeting mRNAs for
translational repression and/or cleavage. miR-155-5p and miR-155-3p are processed
from the B-cell Integration Cluster (BIC) gene (now designated, MIR155 host gene 
or MIR155HG). MiR-155-5p is highly expressed in both activated B- and T-cells and
in monocytes/macrophages. MiR-155-5p is one of the best characterized miRNAs and 
recent data indicate that miR-155-5p plays a critical role in various
physiological and pathological processes such as hematopoietic lineage
differentiation, immunity, inflammation, viral infections, cancer, cardiovascular
disease, and Down syndrome. In this review we summarize the mechanisms by which
MIR155HG expression can be regulated. Given that the pathologies mediated by
miR-155-5p result from the over-expression of this miRNA it may be possible to
therapeutically attenuate miR-155-5p levels in the treatment of several
pathological processes.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23246696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2012 Dec;16(14):1967-73.

Gene networks implicated in diabetic kidney disease.

Tang W(1), Gao Y, Li Y, Shi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated Jiangyin Hospital of Southeast
University Medical College, Jiangyin, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
drtangwei@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is one of the main causes of renal
end-stage disease. The incidence of DKD has increased substantially over the past
few years. However, our understanding to the molecular mechanism of DKD is still 
essential, and an effective treatment has not been developed.
AIM: We aimed to explore the molecule mechanism in the development of DKD, and
provide a comparison of DKD in different compartments.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we implemented a system biology approach
and analyzed gene expression profiles in 22 microdissected human renal glomerular
and 22 tubule samples from healthy patients and patients with DKD.
RESULTS: The WGCNA (Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis) analysis
identified 10 modules of genes with high topological overlap in tubuli and 12
modules in glomeruli. Several TFs (transcription factors) were found expressed in
both compartments, such as ETS1, ETV4, JUN, LITAF, NFE2, RARG and STAT5A. These
genes may be used as therapeutic targets for DKD. By comparing the modules in the
two compartments, we found that dysregulation of cell proliferation may
significantly contribute to the development of DKD. Furthermore, our results
concluded that DKD may be an immune-mediated degenerative disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies identified multiple genes that may play an important
role in the pathogenesis of DKD and provided a system understanding of the
potential relationships among these genes. We hope our study could aid in
understanding of DKD and could provide the basis for DKD biomarker discovery.

PMID: 23242724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51090. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051090. Epub 2012 Dec 7.

Gene-gene and gene-sex epistatic interactions of MiR146a, IRF5, IKZF1, ETS1 and
IL21 in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Leng RX(1), Wang W, Cen H, Zhou M, Feng CC, Zhu Y, Yang XK, Yang M, Zhai Y, Li
BZ, Wang XS, Li R, Chen GM, Chen H, Pan HF, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.

Several confirmed genetic susceptibility loci involved in the interferon
signaling and Th17/B cell response for SLE in Chinese Han populations have been
described. Available data also indicate that sex-specific genetic differences
contribute to SLE susceptibility. The aim of this study was to test for
gene-gene/gene-sex epistasis (interactions) in these known lupus susceptibility
loci. Six single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in MiR146a, IRF5, IKZF1, ETS1
and IL21 were genotyped by Sequenom MassArray system. A total of 1,825 subjects
(858 SLE patients and 967 controls) were included in the final analysis.
Epistasis was tested by additive model, multiplicative model and multifactor
dimensionality reduction (MDR) method. Additive interaction analysis revealed
interactions between IRF5 and IKZF1 (OR 2.26, 95% CI 1.48-3.44 [P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.21×10(4)]).
A similar tendency was also observed between IL21 and ETS1 by parametric methods.
In addition, multiple high dimensional gene-gene or gene-sex interactions
(three-and four-way) were identified by MDR analysis. Our study identified novel 
gene-gene/gene-sex interactions in lupus. Furthermore, these findings highlight
sex, interferon pathway, and Th17/B cells as important contributors to the
pathogenesis of SLE.

PMCID: PMC3517573
PMID: 23236436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Feb;11(2):182-93. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0534. Epub
2012 Dec 11.

miRNA-145 targets v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 to suppress
the invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis of gastric cancer cells.

Zheng L(1), Pu J, Qi T, Qi M, Li D, Xiang X, Huang K, Tong Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Union Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, Hubei Province, PR China.

Recent evidence shows that v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1
(Ets1) is implicated in tumor development and progression. However, the clinical 
potentials and underlying mechanisms of Ets1 in gastric cancer progression and
metastasis remain largely unknown. In this study, Ets1 immunostaining was
identified in 56 of 84 (66.7%) gastric cancer tissues, which was correlated with 
tumor invasion and metastasis. In gastric cancer specimens and cell lines,
miRNA-145 (miR-145) was downregulated and inversely correlated with Ets1
expression. Bioinformatics analysis and luciferase reporter assay revealed that
miR-145 directly targeted the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of Ets1 mRNA.
Overexpression or knockdown of miR-145 responsively altered both the mRNA and
protein levels of Ets1 and its downstream genes, matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP-1)-1 and -9, in gastric cancer cell lines SGC-7901 and MKN-45. Ectopic
expression of miR-145 suppressed the invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis of
SGC-7901 and MKN-45 cells in vitro and in vivo. In addition, the effects of
miR-145 on Ets1 expression, migration, invasion, and angiogenesis were rescued by
restoration of Ets1 expression in these cells. Furthermore, anti-miR-145
inhibitor promoted the migration, invasion, and angiogenesis, whereas
siRNA-mediated Ets1 knockdown phenocopied the effects of miR-145 overexpression
in gastric cancer cells. These results show that miR-145 suppresses Ets1
expression via the binding site in the 3'-UTR, thus inhibiting the invasion,
metastasis, and angiogenesis of gastric cancer cells.

PMID: 23233482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Med Mol Morphol. 2012 Dec;45(4):190-8. doi: 10.1007/s00795-011-0559-y. Epub 2012 
Dec 7.

Production and degradation of extracellular matrix in reversible glomerular
lesions in rat model of habu snake venom-induced glomerulonephritis.

Kawazu T(1), Nishino T, Obata Y, Furusu A, Miyazaki M, Abe K, Koji T, Kohno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan.

We investigated the mechanism of development and repair process of glomerular
injury in a rat model of habu snake (Trimeresurus flavoviridis) venom
(HSV)-induced glomerulonephritis. Glomerulonephritis was induced in rats by
intravenously injecting HSV at 3 mg/kg. Renal tissue was isolated and subjected
to immunohistochemical analysis for expression levels of type IV collagen, heat
shock protein 47 (HSP47), transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß), and matrix
metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3), as well as its transcription factor Ets-1.
Expression levels of HSP47, TGF-ß, and type IV collagen began to increase in the 
mesangial area starting from day 14 and peaked on day 21, followed by a gradual
decrease. Expression levels of MMP-3 and Ets-1 started to increase coinciding
with peak production of mesangial matrix on day 21, peaking on day 35, followed
by gradual decrease. Expression of MMP-3 and Ets-1 persisted until day 63,
whereas that of HSP47 and type IV collagen returned to baseline level at this
time point. Time-course changes of extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation in
glomeruli in the HSV-induced glomerulonephritis model were correlated with those 
of factors involved in both ECM production and degradation systems. Continued
expression of factors in the degradation system seems particularly important for 
the repair process. These findings might lead to new therapies that prevent and
repair glomerular injury.

PMID: 23224597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Feb;7(2):365-70. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1201. Epub 2012 Nov 23.

Reduction of fatty acid oxidation and responses to hypoxia correlate with the
progression of de-differentiation in HCC.

Tanaka M(1), Masaki Y, Tanaka K, Miyazaki M, Kato M, Sugimoto R, Nakamura K,
Aishima S, Shirabe K, Nakamuta M, Enjoji M, Kotoh K, Takayanagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) may be improved by 
novel treatments focusing on the characteristic metabolic changes of this
disease. Therefore, we analyzed the biological interactions of metabolic features
with the degree of tumor differentiation and the level of malignant potential in 
41 patients with completely resectable HCC. The expression levels in resected
samples of mRNAs encoded by genes related to tumor metabolism and metastasis were
investigated, and the correlation between these expression levels and degrees of 
differentiation was analyzed. Of the 41 patients, 2 patients had grade I, 27 had 
grade II, and 12 had grade III tumors. Reductions in the levels of
3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (HADHA) and acyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX)-2 mRNAs, and 
increases in pyruvate kinase isoenzyme type M2 (PKM2) mRNA were significantly
correlated with the progression of de-differentiation. Analysis of partial
correlation coefficients showed that the level of PKM2 mRNA expression was
significantly correlated with those of pro-angiogenic genes, vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and ETS-1. Moreover, the levels of VEGF-A and ETS-1 mRNA
expression were independently correlated with that of the epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT)-related gene SNAIL. These findings suggest that reductions in
fatty acid oxidation and responses to hypoxia may affect the progression of
malignant phenotypes in HCC.

PMID: 23178736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Acta Biochim Pol. 2012;59(4):467-74. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

The role of microRNA in metastatic colorectal cancer and its significance in
cancer prognosis and treatment.

Tokarz P(1), Blasiak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Biology and Environmental
Protection, University of Lodz, Lódz, Poland.

microRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNA molecules that regulate gene
expression by targeting specific mRNAs. microRNAs play a role in several
physiological processes in the cell, including migration, proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. Apart from their role in regular metabolism,
abnormal profiles of miRNA expression accompany cancer transformation, including 
colorectal cancer (CRC) metastasis. microRNAs may play a role in each phase of
CRC metastasis including angiogenesis, invasion, intravasation, circulation,
extravasation and metastatic colonization. microRNA levels may serve as a
predictive CRC marker, which was confirmed by the serum level of miR-29a
targeting KLF4, a marker of cell stemness, and the plasma level of miR-221
down-regulating c-Kit, Stat5A and ETS1, which are signal transducers and
transcription factor, respectively. In turn, the level of miR-143 in CRC cells
decreasing the amount of MACC1 (metastasis-associated in colon cancer-1) and
oncogenic KRAS protein, may be utilized as a prognostic marker. Also, single
nucleotide polymorphisms of genes encoding miRNAs, including miR-423 and miR-608,
which correlate with tumor recurrence, may be useful as diagnostic, prognostic
and predictive indicators in CRC metastasis. Pre-miR-34a and pre-miR-199a
decreased the level of Axl, a tyrosine-protein kinase receptor, so they can be
considered as drugs in antimetastatic therapy. On the other hand, miR-222
targeting ADAM-17, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase, and miR-328 interacting
with ABCG2, an ABC transporter, may overcome drug resistance of cancer cells.
microRNAs may be considered in wide-range application to facilitate CRC
metastasis diagnosis, prognosis, prediction and therapy, however, further
clinical, epidemiological and in vitro studies should be conducted to verify
their utility.

PMID: 23173124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Jan 16;415:239-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.11.002. Epub 2012
Nov 12.

Identification and characterization of novel microRNA candidates from deep
sequencing.

Wu Q(1), Wang C, Guo L, Ge Q, Lu Z.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Hygienic
Analysis and Detection, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, 140 
Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, China. wuqian@njmu.edu.cn

In our previous study, we screened a candidate new microRNA (miRNA) based on the 
deep sequencing and bioinformatics analysis. In this paper, we evaluated the
novel miRNA in the following experiment: 1) the secondary structure of the
precursor of novel-miR has the characteristic of a stem-loop hairpin structure,
and mature miRNA is far from loops and bulges. 2) we used BLAST (Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool) to compare the novel-miR sequence to that found in the
GenBank. Novel-miR sequence existed in Mus musculus, Drosophila grimshawi, Rattus
norvegicus, Xenopus laevis, Spodoptera frugiperda, Papio anubis, Salmo salar and 
so on. Then multiple sequence alignment (MSA) showed that sequence from 5 to 11
bp and 13 to 17 bp exhibited 100% similarity, where there is significant sequence
conservation. Novel-miR showed similarity in the seed region with the known
miR-3675-3p, indicating that these miRNAs are likely to belong to the same family
and thus may share common biology. 3) novel-miR from MCF-7 and MB-MDA-231 was
validated by Northern blot and detected in the serum and tissue samples of BC
patients, respectively, by real-time PCR. The data showed that novel-miR was
downregulated in the BC cancerous tissues and serum of breast cancer patients
(P<0.05). 4) transfection of novel-miR mimics into MCF-7 cell significantly
inhibited cell growth detected by CCK-8 assay (P<0.05). 5) to identify the mRNA
targets of novel-miR, we performed a computational screen for genes with
novel-miR complementary sites in their 3'-UTR using several open access
databases. In addition, we used the CapitalBio® Molecule Annotation System V3.0
to perform gene ontology (GO) analysis on the target genes of novel-miR and
specific biological process categories were enriched. 7 genes (CUL3, KRAS, ETS1, 
MNT, CNTN3, CCNK and FOXO3) which have a high prediction score and are associated
with cell proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle were chosen. 3'-UTR luciferase 
report assay suggested that miR-BS1 negatively regulated CNTN3. In the
conclusion, novel-miR, named miR-3675b, is a true, functional and novel miRNA.
Candidate novel miRNA from deep sequencing which will be qualified as a "real"
miRNA must be validated by a series of functional experiments.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23153516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Gene Regul Syst Bio. 2012;6:139-49. doi: 10.4137/GRSB.S10343. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

FOXO1 Up-Regulates Human L-selectin Expression Through Binding to a Consensus
FOXO1 Motif.

Lou Y(1), Lu X, Dang X.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology, Branch Hospital of Shanghai First People's Hospital,
Shanghai, china.

L-selectin plays important roles in lymphocyte homing and leukocyte rolling.
Mounting evidence shows that it is involved in many disease entities including
diabetes, ischemia/reperfusion injuries, inflammatory diseases, and tumor
metastasis. Regulation of L-selectin at protein level has been well
characterized. However, the regulation of human L-selectin transcription remains 
largely unknown. To address transcriptional regulation of L-selectin, we cloned
1088 bp 5' of the start codon ATG. Luciferase analysis of the serial 5' deletion 
mutants located the core promoter region at -288/-1. A major transcription
initiation site was mapped at -115 by 5'RACE. Transcription factors Sp1, Ets1,
Mzf1, Klf2, and Irf1 bind to and transactivate the L-selectin promoter.
Significantly, FOXO1 binds to a FOXO1 motif, CCCTTTGG, at -87/-80, and
transactivates the L-selectin promoter in a dose-dependent manner.
Over-expression of a constitutive-active FOXO1 increased the endogenous
L-selectin expression in Jurkat cells. We conclude that FOXO1 regulates
L-selectin expression through targeting its promoter.

PMCID: PMC3486891
PMID: 23133314  [PubMed]


244. BMC Res Notes. 2012 Nov 2;5:617. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-617.

Lung cancer signature biomarkers: tissue specific semantic similarity based
clustering of digital differential display (DDD) data.

Srivastava M(1), Khurana P, Sugadev R.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Group, Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences,
Lucknow Road, Timarpur, Delhi-110054, India.

BACKGROUND: The tissue-specific Unigene Sets derived from more than one million
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in the NCBI, GenBank database offers a platform
for identifying significantly and differentially expressed tissue-specific genes 
by in-silico methods. Digital differential display (DDD) rapidly creates
transcription profiles based on EST comparisons and numerically calculates, as a 
fraction of the pool of ESTs, the relative sequence abundance of known and novel 
genes. However, the process of identifying the most likely tissue for a specific 
disease in which to search for candidate genes from the pool of differentially
expressed genes remains difficult. Therefore, we have used 'Gene Ontology
semantic similarity score' to measure the GO similarity between gene products of 
lung tissue-specific candidate genes from control (normal) and disease (cancer)
sets. This semantic similarity score matrix based on hierarchical clustering
represents in the form of a dendrogram. The dendrogram cluster stability was
assessed by multiple bootstrapping. Multiple bootstrapping also computes a
p-value for each cluster and corrects the bias of the bootstrap probability.
RESULTS: Subsequent hierarchical clustering by the multiple bootstrapping method 
(a = 0.95) identified seven clusters. The comparative, as well as subtractive,
approach revealed a set of 38 biomarkers comprising four distinct lung cancer
signature biomarker clusters (panel 1-4). Further gene enrichment analysis of the
four panels revealed that each panel represents a set of lung cancer linked
metastasis diagnostic biomarkers (panel 1), chemotherapy/drug resistance
biomarkers (panel 2), hypoxia regulated biomarkers (panel 3) and lung extra
cellular matrix biomarkers (panel 4).
CONCLUSIONS: Expression analysis reveals that hypoxia induced lung cancer related
biomarkers (panel 3), HIF and its modulating proteins (TGM2, CSNK1A1, CTNNA1,
NAMPT/Visfatin, TNFRSF1A, ETS1, SRC-1, FN1, APLP2, DMBT1/SAG, AIB1 and AZIN1) are
significantly down regulated. All down regulated genes in this panel were highly 
up regulated in most other types of cancers. These panels of proteins may
represent signature biomarkers for lung cancer and will aid in lung cancer
diagnosis and disease monitoring as well as in the prediction of responses to
therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3532198
PMID: 23122428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Transcription. 2012 Nov-Dec;3(6):323-35. doi: 10.4161/trns.22518. Epub 2012 Nov
1.

Ets1 and Elk1 transcription factors regulate cancerous inhibitor of protein
phosphatase 2A expression in cervical and endometrial carcinoma cells.

Pallai R(1), Bhaskar A, Sodi V, Rice LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Signaling and Cell Cycle, Venenum Biodesign, L.L.C,
Hamilton, NJ, USA.

Cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A (CIP2A) has been identified as a
proto-oncogene that is overexpressed in various types of human cancers. CIP2A
acts by inhibiting protein phosphatase 2A-dependent destabilization of c-Myc,
resulting in increased cell proliferation. Here, we have characterized the
proximal promoter region of the human CIP2A gene in cervical, endometrial and
liver carcinoma cells. The 5' flanking minimal proximal promoter of the CIP2A
gene consists of putative binding sites for Ets1 and Elk1 in forward and reverse 
orientations. Here, we show that Ets1 and Elk1 binding is essential for CIP2A
basal expression in several urogenital cancer cell lines. Interestingly, both
Ets1 and Elk1 are required together for CIP2A expression, as siRNA knockdown of
Ets1 and Elk1 together decreased CIP2A gene transcription, whereas knockdown of
Ets1 or Elk1 alone had no effect. Moreover, ectopic expression of Ets1 and Elk1
together increased CIP2A expression. To gain physiological significance of the
Ets1 and Elk1 regulation we observed, a panel of matched human cervical carcinoma
samples was analyzed for the expression of CIP2A and Ets1 and/or Elk1. We found a
direct correlation between the levels of CIP2A and the levels of Ets1 and Elk1.
Our results suggest that the binding of Ets1 and Elk1 together to the proximal
CIP2A promoter is absolutely required for CIP2A expression in cervical,
endometrial and liver carcinoma cell lines. Thus, different factors regulate
CIP2A expression in a cell-type specific manner. As previous work has shown a
requirement for only Ets1 in prostate and gastric carcinomas, our results now
indicate that CIP2A regulation is more complex than previously determined.

PMCID: PMC3630189
PMID: 23117818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Epigenetics. 2012 Dec 1;7(12):1413-20. doi: 10.4161/epi.22713. Epub 2012 Nov 1.

Modifying metabolically sensitive histone marks by inhibiting glutamine
metabolism affects gene expression and alters cancer cell phenotype.

Simpson NE(1), Tryndyak VP, Pogribna M, Beland FA, Pogribny IP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemical Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological
Research, Jefferson, AR, USA.

The interplay of metabolism and epigenetic regulatory mechanisms has become a
focal point for a better understanding of cancer development and progression. In 
this study, we have acquired data supporting previous observations that
demonstrate glutamine metabolism affects histone modifications in human breast
cancer cell lines. Treatment of non-invasive epithelial (T-47D and MDA-MB-361)
and invasive mesenchymal (MDA-MB-231 and Hs-578T) breast cancer cell lines with
the glutaminase inhibitor, Compound 968, resulted in cytotoxicity in all cell
lines, with the greatest effect being observed in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.
Compound 968-treatment induced significant downregulation of 20 critical
cancer-related genes, the majority of which are anti-apoptotic and/or promote
metastasis, including AKT, BCL2, BCL2L1, CCND1, CDKN3, ERBB2, ETS1, E2F1, JUN,
KITLG, MYB, and MYC. Histone H3K4me3, a mark of transcriptional activation, was
reduced at the promoters of all but one of these critical cancer genes. The
decrease in histone H3K4me3 at global and gene-specific levels correlated with
reduced expression of SETD1 and ASH2L, genes encoding the histone H3K4
methyltransferase complex. Further, the expression of other epigenetic regulatory
genes, known to be downregulated during apoptosis (e.g., DNMT1, DNMT3B, SETD1 and
SIRT1), was also downregulated by Compound 968. These changes in gene expression 
and histone modifications were accompanied by the activation of apoptosis, and
decreased invasiveness and resistance of MDA-MB-231 cells to chemotherapeutic
drug doxorubicin. The results of this study provide evidence to a link between
cytotoxicity caused by inhibiting glutamine metabolism with alterations of the
epigenome of breast cancer cells and suggest that modification of intracellular
metabolism may enhance the efficiency of epigenetic therapy.

PMCID: PMC3528696
PMID: 23117580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Scand J Rheumatol. 2013;42(1):11-4. doi: 10.3109/03009742.2012.711367. Epub 2012 
Oct 26.

Altered sequence of the ETS1 transcription factor may predispose to rheumatoid
arthritis susceptibility.

Chatzikyriakidou A(1), Voulgari PV, Georgiou I, Drosos AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical School, University of
Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: ETS1 belongs to the ETS family of transcription factors that regulate 
the expression of various immune-related genes. The aim of this study was to
identify whether the ETS1 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs11221332,
described in Caucasian subjects, plays a role in rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
susceptibility.
METHODS: We genotyped this polymorphism in 136 unrelated patients with RA and 147
healthy individuals with no history of autoimmune disease. Genotyping was
performed with a polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay and the data were analysed using SPSS statistical
software.
RESULTS: A statistically significant difference was observed in the distribution 
of the rs11221332 genotypes between RA patients and controls (p = 0.041).
Comparing the distribution of rs11221332 alleles between the groups studied, a
greater difference was found [odds ratio (OR) 1.504, 95% confidence interval (CI)
1.036-2.183; p = 0.039].
CONCLUSIONS: The present study revealed, for first time, the positive association
of a polymorphism in the sequence of the ETS1 transcription factor with RA
susceptibility. Further studies in other ethnic groups of patients are needed to 
confirm the results of the present genetic association study related to ETS1, a
widely used transcription factor in the regulation of the expression of various
genes.

PMID: 23101665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Asian J Androl. 2012 Nov;14(6):860-3. doi: 10.1038/aja.2012.107. Epub 2012 Oct
15.

Overexpression of ETS-1 is associated with malignant biological features of
prostate cancer.

Li B(1), Shimizu Y, Kobayashi T, Terada N, Yoshimura K, Kamba T, Mikami Y, Inoue 
T, Nishiyama H, Ogawa O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

E26 transformation-specific-1 (ETS-1), an ETS family transcription factor, has
been reported to play an important role in a variety of physiological and
pathological processes, but clinical implications of ETS-1 expression in prostate
cancer (PCa), particularly high-risk cases, including response to
androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) have yet to be elucidated. We examined the
expression of ETS-1 using immunohistochemical staining of paraffin-embedded
prostate carcinoma tissue obtained by needle biopsy from 69 mostly advanced PCa
patients. ETS-1 expression was compared with the clinicopathological
characteristics of the 69 patients, including 25 who underwent ADT as a primary
treatment. As a result, PCa patients with higher expression of ETS-1 were
significantly more likely to be of high stage and high Gleason score (P<0.05).
There was no significant association between ETS-1 expression and the initial
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level. In the 25 patients treated by ADT, the
staining score for ETS-1 was significantly associated with rapid development of
castration-resistant disease within 24 months (P<0.05), whereas the Gleason score
and PSA level were not. In conclusion, increased ETS-1 expression was associated 
with a higher stage, higher Gleason score and shorter time to
castration-resistant progression. These data suggest that immunostaining for
ETS-1 could be a molecular marker for predicting a poor clinical outcome for PCa 
patients, particularly those with high-risk disease.

PMCID: PMC3720114
PMID: 23064684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 30;287(49):41032-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.413294. Epub
2012 Oct 11.

The microRNA miR-199a-5p down-regulation switches on wound angiogenesis by
derepressing the v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1-matrix
metalloproteinase-1 pathway.

Chan YC(1), Roy S, Huang Y, Khanna S, Sen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State
University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

miR-199a-5p plays a critical role in controlling cardiomyocyte survival. However,
its significance in endothelial cell biology remains ambiguous. Here, we report
the first evidence that miR-199a-5p negatively regulates angiogenic responses by 
directly targeting v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (Ets-1).
Induction of miR-199a-5p in human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HMECs) 
blocked angiogenic response in Matrigel® culture, whereas miR-199a-5p-deprived
cells exhibited enhanced angiogenesis in vitro. Bioinformatics prediction and miR
target reporter assay recognized Ets-1 as a novel direct target of miR-199a-5p.
Delivery of miR-199a-5p blocked Ets-1 expression in HMECs, whereas knockdown
endogenous miR-199a-5p induced Ets-1 expression. Matrix metalloproteinase 1
(MMP-1), one of the Ets-1 downstream mediators, was negatively regulated by
miR-199a-5p. Overexpression of Ets-1 not only rescued miR-199a-5p-dependent
anti-angiogenic effects but also reversed miR-199a-5p-induced loss of MMP-1
expression. Similarly, Ets-1 knockdown blunted angiogenic response and induction 
of MMP-1 in miR-199a-5p-deprived HMECs. Examination of cutaneous wound dermal
tissue revealed a significant down-regulation of miR-199a-5p expression, which
was associated with induction of Ets-1 and MMP-1. Mice carrying homozygous
deletions in the Ets-1 gene exhibited blunted wound blood flow and reduced
abundance of endothelial cells. Impaired wound angiogenesis was associated with
compromised wound closure, insufficient granulation tissue formation, and blunted
induction of MMP-1. Thus, down-regulation of miR-199a-5p is involved in the
induction of wound angiogenesis through derepressing of the Ets-1-MMP1 pathway.

PMCID: PMC3510806
PMID: 23060436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biochimie. 2013 Feb;95(2):271-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.09.023. Epub 2012 Sep
27.

Promoter scanning of the human COX-2 gene with 8-ring polyamides: unexpected
weakening of polyamide-DNA binding and selectivity by replacing an internal
N-Me-pyrrole with ß-alanine.

Bashkin JK(1), Aston K, Ramos JP, Koeller KJ, Nanjunda R, He G, Dupureur CM,
David Wilson W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Center for Nanoscience, University of 
Missouri-St. Louis, One University Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63121, USA.
bashkinj@umsl.edu

Rules for polyamide-DNA recognition have proved invaluable for the design of
sequence-selective DNA binding agents in cell-free systems. However, these rules 
are not fully transferrable to predicting activity in cells, tissues or animals, 
and additional refinements to our understanding of DNA recognition would help
biomedical studies. Similar complexities are encountered when using internal
ß-alanines as polyamide building blocks in place of N-methylpyrrole; ß-alanines
were introduced in polyamide designs to maintain good hydrogen bonding registry
with the target DNA, especially for long polyamides or those with several GC bp
(P.B. Dervan, A.R. Urbach, Essays Contemp. Chem. (2001) 327-339). Thus, to
clarify important subtleties of molecular recognition, we studied the effects of 
replacing a single pyrrole with ß-alanine in 8-ring polyamides designed against
the Ets-1 transcription factor. Replacement of a single internal N-methylpyrrole 
with ß-alanine to generate a ß/Im pairing in two 8-ring polyamides causes a
decrease in DNA binding affinity by two orders of magnitude and decreases DNA
binding selectivity, contrary to expectations based on the literature.
Measurements were made by fluorescence spectroscopy, quantitative DNA
footprinting and surface plasmon resonance, with these vastly different
techniques showing excellent agreement. Furthermore, results were validated for a
range of DNA substrates from small hairpins to long dsDNA sequences. Docking
studies helped show that ß-alanine does not make efficient hydrophobic contacts
with the rest of the polyamide or nearby DNA, in contrast to pyrrole. These
results help refine design principles and expectations for polyamide-DNA
recognition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3557744
PMID: 23023196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Jan;372(1-2):199-210. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1461-1. Epub
2012 Sep 24.

Serum protein N-glycan alterations of diethylnitrosamine-induced hepatocellular
carcinoma mice and their evolution after inhibition of the placental growth
factor.

Blomme B(1), Heindryckx F, Stassen JM, Geerts A, Colle I, Van Vlierberghe H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Ghent University Hospital, 9000
Ghent, Belgium. bram.blomme@ugent.be

Placental growth factor (PlGF) inhibition produced promising results in reducing 
tumor burden in a diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced mouse model for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). The aim of this study was to non-invasively assess the improved 
histology by performing a serum glycomic analysis. To elucidate the molecular
mechanism underlying the observed glycomic effects, we investigated the
transcription and expression of E26 transformation-specific sequence 1 (Ets-1), a
transcription factor essential for the glycomic and angiogenic changes in
malignant transformation, including its different phosphorylated forms that
result from activation of the MAP kinase and a Ca(2+)-dependent pathway. In
addition, three Ets-1-dependent glycosyltransferase genes, Mgat4a, Mgat4b, and
Mgat5, were also evaluated. HCC was induced in mice by weekly injections with DEN
for 16, 20, 25, and 30 w. In the treatment study, mice were injected with DEN for
25 w and subsequently treated with PlGF antibodies (5D11D4) for 5 w. Finally,
PlGF-/- mice were injected with DEN for 20, 25, and 30 w. Serum N-glycans were
analyzed with DNA sequencer-assisted fluorophore-assisted capillary
electrophoresis and compared with histology. Maximum altered N-glycan phenotype
was reached after 20 w of DEN-injections, i.e., when the first neoplastic lesions
started to appear. 5D11D4-treatment improved the glycomic phenotype in that 7 of 
the 11 altered glycans tended to normalize. The PlGF-/- mice also showed a
normalization trend, although not to the same extent of the treatment group.
Number of Ets1, Mgat4a, Mgat4b, and Mgat5 transcripts increased considerably in
DEN-injected mice, however, a non-significant decrease was observed after
5D11D4-treatment. On the protein level, 5D11D4-treatment had a prominent effect
on the MAP kinase pathway with a significant p38 activation, yet independent of
Ets-1 function.

PMID: 23001868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Hypertension. 2012 Nov;60(5):1226-33. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.197871.
Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Role of the transcription factor erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogen homolog-1
(ETS-1) as mediator of the renal proinflammatory and profibrotic effects of
angiotensin II.

Feng W(1), Chumley P, Hua P, Rezonzew G, Jaimes D, Duckworth MW, Xing D, Jaimes
EA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Ziegler Research 
Building 637, 1530 3rd Ave South, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Angiotensin II (Ang II) plays a major role in the pathogenesis of end-organ
injury in hypertension via its diverse hemodynamic and nonhemodynamic effects.
Erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogen homolog-1 (ETS-1) is an important
transcription factor recently recognized as an important mediator of cell
proliferation, inflammation, and fibrosis. In the present studies, we tested the 
hypothesis that ETS-1 is a common mediator of the renal proinflammatory and
profibrotic effects of Ang II. C57BL6 mice (n=6 per group) were infused with
vehicle (control), Ang II (1.4 mg/kg per day), Ang II and an ETS-1
dominant-negative peptide (10 mg/kg per day), or Ang II and an ETS-1 mutant
peptide (10 mg/kg per day) via osmotic minipump for 2 or 4 weeks. The infusion of
Ang II resulted in significant increases in blood pressure and left ventricular
hypertrophy, which were not modified by ETS-1 blockade. The administration of
ETS-1 dominant-negative peptide significantly attenuated Ang II-induced renal
injury as assessed by urinary protein excretion, mesangial matrix expansion, and 
cell proliferation. Furthermore, ETS-1 dominant-negative peptide but not ETS-1
mutant peptide significantly reduced Ang II-mediated upregulation of transforming
growth factor-ß, connective tissue growth factor, and a-smooth muscle actin. In
addition, ETS-1 blockade reduced several proinflammatory effects of Ang II,
including macrophage infiltration, nitrotyrosine expression, and NOX4 mRNA
expression. Our studies suggest that ETS-1 is a common mediator of the
proinflammatory and profibrotic effects of Ang II-induced hypertensive renal
damage and may result in the development of novel strategies in the treatment and
prevention of end-organ injury in hypertension.

PMCID: PMC4309546
PMID: 22966006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Protein Sci. 2012 Nov;21(11):1716-25. doi: 10.1002/pro.2151. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

The PNT domain from Drosophila pointed-P2 contains a dynamic N-terminal helix
preceded by a disordered phosphoacceptor sequence.

Lau DK(1), Okon M, McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Pointed-P2, the Drosophila ortholog of human ETS1 and ETS2, is a transcription
factor involved in Ras/MAP kinase-regulated gene expression. In addition to a
DNA-binding ETS domain, Pointed-P2 contains a PNT (or SAM) domain that serves as 
a docking module to enhance phosphorylation of an adjacent phosphoacceptor
threonine by the ERK2 MAP kinase Rolled. Using NMR chemical shift, ¹5N
relaxation, and amide hydrogen exchange measurements, we demonstrate that the
Pointed-P2 PNT domain contains a dynamic N-terminal helix H0 appended to a core
conserved five-helix bundle diagnostic of the SAM domain fold. Neither the
secondary structure nor dynamics of the PNT domain is perturbed significantly
upon in vitro ERK2 phosphorylation of three threonine residues in a disordered
sequence immediately preceding this domain. These data thus confirm that the
Drosophila Pointed-P2 PNT domain and phosphoacceptors are highly similar to those
of the well-characterized human ETS1 transcription factor. NMR-monitored
titrations also revealed that the phosphoacceptors and helix H0, as well as
region of the core helical bundle identified previously by mutational analyses as
a kinase docking site, are selectively perturbed upon ERK2 binding by Pointed-P2.
Based on a homology model derived from the ETS1 PNT domain, helix H0 is predicted
to partially occlude the docking interface. Therefore, this dynamic helix must be
displaced to allow both docking of the kinase, as well as binding of Mae, a
Drosophila protein that negatively regulates Pointed-P2 by competing with the
kinase for its docking site.

Copyright © 2012 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3527708
PMID: 22936607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Leukemia. 2013 Mar;27(3):610-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.253. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Genome-wide profiling of methylation identifies novel targets with aberrant
hypermethylation and reduced expression in low-risk myelodysplastic syndromes.

del Rey M(1), O'Hagan K, Dellett M, Aibar S, Colyer HA, Alonso ME, Díez-Campelo
M, Armstrong RN, Sharpe DJ, Gutiérrez NC, García JL, De Las Rivas J, Mills KI,
Hernández-Rivas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Universidad de Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, 
Spain.

Gene expression profiling signatures may be used to classify the subtypes of
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) patients. However, there are few reports on the
global methylation status in MDS. The integration of genome-wide epigenetic
regulatory marks with gene expression levels would provide additional information
regarding the biological differences between MDS and healthy controls. Gene
expression and methylation status were measured using high-density microarrays. A
total of 552 differentially methylated CpG loci were identified as being present 
in low-risk MDS; hypermethylated genes were more frequent than hypomethylated
genes. In addition, mRNA expression profiling identified 1005 genes that
significantly differed between low-risk MDS and the control group. Integrative
analysis of the epigenetic and expression profiles revealed that 66.7% of the
hypermethylated genes were underexpressed in low-risk MDS cases. Gene network
analysis revealed molecular mechanisms associated with the low-risk MDS group,
including altered apoptosis pathways. The two key apoptotic genes BCL2 and ETS1
were identified as silenced genes. In addition, the immune response and micro RNA
biogenesis were affected by the hypermethylation and underexpression of IL27RA
and DICER1. Our integrative analysis revealed that aberrant epigenetic regulation
is a hallmark of low-risk MDS patients and could have a central role in these
diseases.

PMID: 22936014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Nov;30(5):1029-33. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1097. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

ERG is specifically associated with ETS-2 and ETV-4, but not with ETS-1, in
prostate cancer.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Ochsenfahrt J, Fuchs K, Kristiansen G, Perner S, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany.

The erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS) family of transcription factors
plays important roles in both physiological and pathological conditions. Even
though many studies have focused on single ETS factors within a single tissue and
within the context of specific promoters, the functional impact of multiple ETS
members present within a specific cell type has not yet been investigated,
especially in prostate cancer (PCa). As the most prominent gene rearrangement in 
PCa leads to the overexpression of the ETS-related gene (ERG), the aim of this
study was to investigate whether ERG is part of a complex integrated
transcriptional network that involves other ETS factors. More specifically, as
the ETS family consists of 27 members, we focused our efforts initially on
investigating whether ERG is associated with the three family members, ETS-1,
ETS-2 and ETS variant gene-4 (ETV-4), in PCa as a proof of principle. Using
western blot analysis, we show that ERG, ETS-1, ETS-2 and ETV-4 are expressed in 
PC3 cell nuclear extracts and in protein lysates prepared from human PCa
prostatectomy specimens. Immunoprecipitations using an anti-ERG antibody were
used with PC3 cell nuclear extracts as well as with a pooled protein lysate
sample prepared from the PCa tissue samples of five patients. Importantly, our
results revealed that ERG is specifically associated with ETS-2 and ETV-4, but
not with ETS-1, in PC3 cell nuclear extracts and PCa tissue protein lysates. Our 
findings strongly support the notion that ERG is part of a complex integrated
transcriptional network that involves other ETS factors, which are likely to
cooperate or influence the activity of ERG in PCa. The functional impact of
multiple ETS factors being associated with ERG in PCa requires further study, as 
it may provide insights into the mechanism by which ERG exerts its influence in
PCa and may subsequently contribute to our understanding of the molecular basis
of PCa.

PMCID: PMC3572757
PMID: 22922762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Aug-Sep;28(8-9):708-10. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2012288012.
Epub 2012 Aug 22.

[Deciphering functional activity of TLX homeodomain oncogenes in T-ALL: a clue
for a differentiating therapy?].

[Article in French]

Asnafi V, Ferrier P.

PMID: 22920872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cancer Discov. 2012 Nov;2(11):1036-47. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0348. Epub
2012 Aug 22.

PI3K inhibition impairs BRCA1/2 expression and sensitizes BRCA-proficient
triple-negative breast cancer to PARP inhibition.

Ibrahim YH(1), García-García C, Serra V, He L, Torres-Lockhart K, Prat A, Anton
P, Cozar P, Guzmán M, Grueso J, Rodríguez O, Calvo MT, Aura C, Díez O, Rubio IT, 
Pérez J, Rodón J, Cortés J, Ellisen LW, Scaltriti M, Baselga J.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Laboratory, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology
(VHIO), Pg Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2012 Nov;2(11):982-4.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Oct;12(10):658.

PARP inhibitors are active in tumors with defects in DNA homologous recombination
(HR) due to BRCA1/2 mutations. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling
pathway preserves HR steady state. We hypothesized that in BRCA-proficient
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), PI3K inhibition would result in HR
impairment and subsequent sensitization to PARP inhibitors. We show in TNBC cells
that PI3K inhibition leads to DNA damage, downregulation of BRCA1/2, gain in
poly-ADP-ribosylation, and subsequent sensitization to PARP inhibition. In TNBC
patient-derived primary tumor xenografts, dual PI3K and PARP inhibition with
BKM120 and olaparib reduced the growth of tumors displaying BRCA1/2
downregulation following PI3K inhibition. PI3K-mediated BRCA downregulation was
accompanied by extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation.
Overexpression of an active form of MEK1 resulted in ERK activation and
downregulation of BRCA1, whereas the MEK inhibitor AZD6244 increased BRCA1/2
expression and reversed the effects of MEK1. We subsequently identified that the 
ETS1 transcription factor was involved in the ERK-dependent BRCA1/2
downregulation and that knockdown of ETS1 led to increased BRCA1/2 expression,
limiting the sensitivity to combined BKM120 and olaparib in 3-dimensional
culture.SIGNIFICANCE: Treatment options are limited for patients with TNBCs. PARP
inhibitors have clinical activity restricted to a small subgroup of patients with
BRCA mutations. Here, we show that PI3K blockade results in HR impairment and
sensitization to PARP inhibition in TNBCs without BRCA mutations, providing a
rationale to combine PI3K and PARP inhibitors in this indication. Our findings
could greatly expand the number of patients with breast cancer that would benefit
from therapy with PARP inhibitors. On the basis of our findings, a clinical trial
with BKM120 and olaparib is being initiated in patients with TNBCs.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22915752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Dec 1;21(23):5048-65. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds349. Epub 2012 Aug 
21.

ETS1 regulates the expression of ATXN2.

Scoles DR(1), Pflieger LT, Thai KK, Hansen ST, Dansithong W, Pulst SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.
daniel.scoles@hsc.utah.edu

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by 
the expansion of a CAG tract in the ATXN2 gene. The SCA2 phenotype is
characterized by cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy and slow saccades. SCA2
foreshortens life span and is currently without symptomatic or disease-modifying 
treatments. Identifying function-specific therapeutics for SCA2 is problematic
due to the limited knowledge of ATXN2 function. As SCA2 is likely caused by a
gain-of-toxic or gain-of-normal function like other polyglutamine disorders,
targeting ATXN2 expression may represent a valid therapeutic approach. This study
characterized aspects of ATXN2 expression control using an ATXN2
promoter-luciferase (luc) reporter construct. We verified the fidelity of
construct expression by generating transgenic mice expressing the reporter
construct. High reporter expression was seen in the cerebellum and olfactory bulb
in vivo but there was relatively low expression in other tissues, similar to the 
expression of endogenous ataxin-2. We verified the second of two possible start
codons as the functional start codon in ATXN2. By evaluating deletions in the
ATXN2 promoter, we identified an E-twenty six (ETS)-binding site required for
ATXN2 expression. We verified that endogenous ETS1 interacted with the ATXN2
promoter by an electromobility supershift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation
polymerase chain reaction. ETS1 overexpression increased ATXN2-luc
(ATXN2-luciferase) as well as endogenous ATXN2 expression. Deletion of the
putative ETS1-binding site abrogated the effects on the expression of ATXN2-luc. 
A dominant negative ETS1 and an ETS1 short-hairpin RNA both reduced ATXN2-luc
expression. Our study broadens the understanding on the transcriptional control
of ATXN2 and reveals specific regulatory features of the ATXN2 promoter that can 
be exploited therapeutically.

PMCID: PMC3490512
PMID: 22914732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Laryngol Otol. 2013 Jan;127 Suppl 1:S13-20. doi: 10.1017/S0022215112001661.
Epub 2012 Aug 15.

Utilising silk fibroin membranes as scaffolds for the growth of tympanic membrane
keratinocytes, and application to myringoplasty surgery.

Levin B(1), Redmond SL, Rajkhowa R, Eikelboom RH, Atlas MD, Marano RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ear Science Institute Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
DrBrettLevin@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Chronic tympanic membrane perforations can cause significant
morbidity. The term myringoplasty describes the operation used to close such
perforations. A variety of graft materials are available for use in
myringoplasty, but all have limitations and few studies report post-operative
hearing outcomes. Recently, the biomedical applications of silk fibroin protein
have been studied. This material's biocompatibility, biodegradability and ability
to act as a scaffold to support cell growth prompted an investigation of its
interaction with human tympanic membrane keratinocytes.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Silk fibroin membranes were prepared and human tympanic
membrane keratinocytes cultured. Keratinocytes were seeded onto the membranes and
immunostained for a number of relevant protein markers relating to cell
proliferation, adhesion and specific epithelial differentiation.
RESULTS: The silk fibroin scaffolds successfully supported the growth and
adhesion of keratinocytes, whilst also maintaining their cell lineage.
CONCLUSION: The properties of silk fibroin make it an attractive option for
further research, as a potential alternative graft in myringoplasty.

PMID: 22892109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 1;132(3):E116-27. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27774. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

High-resolution genomic profiling reveals clonal evolution and competition in
gastrointestinal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma and its large cell variant.

Flossbach L(1), Holzmann K, Mattfeldt T, Buck M, Lanz K, Held M, Möller P, Barth 
TF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.

We studied marginal zone B-cell lymphomas of the gastrointestinal tract including
seven small cell lymphomas, eight large cell areas of composite lymphomas and 13 
large cell variants using SNP array profiling. We found an increase of genomic
complexity with lymphoma progression from small to large cytology, and identified
gains of prominent (proto) oncogenes such as REL, BCL11A, ETS1, PTPN1, PTEN and
KRAS which were found exclusively in the large cell variants. Copy numbers of
ADAM3A, SCAPER and SIRPB1 were varying between the three different modes of
presentation, hence suggestive for aberrations associated with progression from
small to large cell lymphoma. The number of aberrations was slightly higher in
the large cell part of composite lymphomas than in large cell lymphomas,
suggesting that clonal selection takes place and that composite lymphomas are in 
a transition state. To further investigate this, we comparatively analyzed
samples of two morphologically different regions of the same small cell tumor
with a BIRC3-MALT1 translocation, as well as material acquired at two different
time points from one composite lymphoma. We found genomic heterogeneity in both
cases, supporting the theory of competing subclones in the evolution and
progression of extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22890838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 20;21(17):3069-80. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0155. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

A stable cranial neural crest cell line from mouse.

Ishii M(1), Arias AC, Liu L, Chen YB, Bronner ME, Maxson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Cranial neural crest cells give rise to ectomesenchymal derivatives such as
cranial bones, cartilage, smooth muscle, dentin, as well as melanocytes, corneal 
endothelial cells, and neurons and glial cells of the peripheral nervous system. 
Previous studies have suggested that although multipotent stem-like cells may
exist during the course of cranial neural crest development, they are transient, 
undergoing lineage restriction early in embryonic development. We have developed 
culture conditions that allow cranial neural crest cells to be grown as
multipotent stem-like cells. With these methods, we obtained 2 independent cell
lines, O9-1 and i10-1, which were derived from mass cultures of Wnt1-Cre;
R26R-GFP-expressing cells. These cell lines can be propagated and passaged
indefinitely, and can differentiate into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, smooth muscle
cells, and glial cells. Whole-genome expression profiling of O9-1 cells revealed 
that this line stably expresses stem cell markers (CD44, Sca-1, and Bmi1) and
neural crest markers (AP-2a, Twist1, Sox9, Myc, Ets1, Dlx1, Dlx2, Crabp1, Epha2, 
and Itgb1). O9-1 cells are capable of contributing to cranial mesenchymal
(osteoblast and smooth muscle) neural crest fates when injected into E13.5 mouse 
cranial tissue explants and chicken embryos. These results suggest that O9-1
cells represent multipotent mesenchymal cranial neural crest cells. The O9-1 cell
line should serve as a useful tool for investigating the molecular properties of 
differentiating cranial neural crest cells.

PMCID: PMC3495126
PMID: 22889333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2545-50. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35537. Epub 2012
Aug 7.

SNP array and phenotype correlation shows that FLI1 deletion per se is not
responsible for thrombocytopenia development in Jacobsen syndrome.

Trkova M(1), Becvarova V, Hynek M, Hnykova L, Hlavova E, Kreckova G, Kulovany E, 
Cutka D, Zatloukalova J, Markova K, Sukova M, Horacek J, Stejskal D.

Author information: 
(1)Gennet, Centre for Fetal Medicine, Praha, Czech Republic.
marie.trkova@gennet.cz

Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is a rare chromosomal disorder caused by terminal
deletion of the long arm of chromosome 11. We report on four prenatally diagnosed
patients with JBS with variable prenatal and postnatal phenotypes and 11q
deletions of varying sizes. Precise characterization of the deleted region in
three patients was performed by SNP arrays. The severity of both the prenatal and
postnatal phenotypes did not correlate with the size of the haploinsufficient
region. Despite the large difference in the deletion size (nearly 6 Mb), both of 
the live-born patients had similar phenotypes corresponding to JBS. However, one 
of the most prominent features of JBS, thrombocytopenia, was only present in the 
live-born boy. The girl, who had a significantly longer deletion spanning all
four genes suspected of being causative of JBS-related thrombocytopenia (FLI1,
ETS1, NFRKB, and JAM3), did not manifest a platelet phenotype. Therefore, our
findings do not support the traditional view of deletion size correlation in JBS 
or the causative role of FLI1, ETS1, NFRKB, and JAM3 deletion per se for the
development of disease-related thrombocytopenia.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22887642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Angiogenesis. 2012 Dec;15(4):657-69. doi: 10.1007/s10456-012-9293-x. Epub 2012
Aug 7.

Ets-1 transcription is required in tissue factor driven microvessel formation and
stabilization.

Arderiu G(1), Peña E, Aledo R, Espinosa S, Badimon L.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center (CSIC-ICCC), Hospital de Sant Pau (UAB),
IIB-Sant Pau. CiberOBN, Instituto de Salut Carlos III, C/ Sant Antoni Mª Claret
167, 08025, Barcelona, Spain.

Tissue factor (TF) has well-recognized roles as initiator of blood coagulation as
well as an intracellular signaling receptor. TF signaling regulates gene
transcription and protein translation. Recently, we have shown that TF-induced
mature neovessel formation is ultimately driven by CCL2 expression. However, the 
signaling process induced by TF to promote microvessel formation remains to be
determined. This study was designed with the objective to investigate the
mechanisms involved in TF-induced neovessel formation. Here, we have identified
that Ets-1 expression is a downstream effector of TF signaling. TF-siRNA induced 
a highly significant reduction in Ets-1 expression levels and in Ets-1/DNA
binding while inducing abrogation of microvessel formation. Activation of Ets-1
rescued the effect of TF inhibition and restored microvessel formation confirming
the critical role of Ets-1 in TF-induced angiogenesis. VE-cadherin expression, a 
key regulator of endothelial intercellular junctions, and an Ets-1 target
molecule was dependent of TF-inhibition. We show that TF signals through ERK1/2
to activate Ets-1 and induce CCL2 gene expression by binding to its promoter
region. We conclude that endothelial cell TF signals through ERK1/2 and Ets-1 to 
trigger microvessel formation.

PMID: 22869003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Oct;369(1-2):247-54. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1388-6. Epub 
2012 Jul 25.

Inhibitory effects of the transcription factor Ets-1 on the expression of type I 
collagen in TGF-ß1-stimulated renal epithelial cells.

Okano K(1), Hibi A, Miyaoka T, Inoue T, Sugimoto H, Tsuchiya K, Akiba T, Nitta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Purification, Kidney Center, Tokyo Women's Medical
University, Tokyo, Japan. kaokano@kc.twmu.ac.jp

Extracellular matrix (ECM) production and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
are important for phenotypic conversion in normal development and disease states 
such as tissue fibrosis. Transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGFß1) is one of the most
potent inducers of ECM proteins, and its role in the pathogenesis of fibrosis is 
well established. Ets family is involved in a diverse array of biologic functions
including cellular growth, migration, and differentiation. In the present study, 
we investigated whether Ets-1 has a role in ECM production and EMT in human renal
tubuloepithelial cells (HKC cells). TGFß1 treatment increases Ets-1 expression
and nuclear translocation in the HKC cells. Overexpression of recombinant Ets-1
suppressed transcription of a2(I) collagen (COL1A2) and type I collagen
production in the TGFß1-activated HKC cells. From the experiments using specific 
inhibitors against Smad3 or mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways,
Ets-1 has an inhibitory role for COL1A2 transcription and the p38 MAPK pathway
participates in the negative contribution of Ets-1 in TGFß1/Smad3-activated renal
cells.

PMID: 22829018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Curr Mol Med. 2012 Sep;12(8):982-94.

The PP2A-Aß gene is regulated by multiple transcriptional factors including
Ets-1, SP1/SP3, and RXRa/ß.

Liu J(1), Ji W, Sun S, Zhang L, Chen HG, Mao Y, Liu L, Zhang X, Gong L, Deng M,
Chen L, Han WJ, Chen PC, Hu WF, Hu X, Woodward Z, Liu WB, Xiao YM, Liang SP, Liu 
Y, Liu SJ, Li DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5870, USA.

Protein phosphatase-2A (PP-2A) is a major serine/threonine phosphatase abundantly
expressed in eukaryotes. PP-2A is a heterotrimer that contains a 65 kD scaffold A
subunit, a 36 kD catalytic C subunit, and a regulatory B subunit of variable
isoforms ranging from 54-130 kDs. The scaffold subunits, PP2A-Aa/ß, act as
platforms for both the C and B subunits to bind, and thus are key structural
components for PP-2A activity. Mutations in both genes encoding PP2A-Aa and
PP2A-Aß lead to carcinogenesis and likely other human diseases. Our previous work
showed that the gene coding for PP2A-Aa is positively regulated by multiple
transcription factors including Ets-1, CREB, and AP-2a but negatively regulated
by SP-1/SP-3. In the present study, we have functionally dissected the promoter
of the mouse PP2A-Aß gene. Our results demonstrate that three major cis-elements,
including the binding sites for Ets-1, SP1/SP3, and RXRa/ß, are present in the
proximal promoter of the mouse PP2A-Aß gene. Gel mobility shifting assays reveal 
that Ets-1, SP1/SP3, and RXRa/ß all bind to PP2A-Aß gene promoter. In vitro
mutagenesis and reporter gene activity assays demonstrate that while Ets-1
displays negative regulation, SP1/SP3 and RXRa/ß positively regulate the promoter
of the PP2A-Aß gene. Co-expression of the cDNAs encoding Ets-1, SP1/SP3, or
RXRa/ß and the luciferase reporter gene driven by PP2A-Aß promoter further
confirm their control over the PP2A-Aß promoter. Finally, ChIP assays demonstrate
that Ets-1, SP1/SP3, and RXRa/ß can all bind to the PP2A-Aß gene promoter.
Together, our results reveal that multiple transcription factors regulate the
PP2A-Aß gene. Moreover, our results provide important information explaining why 
PP2A-Aa and PP2A-Aß display distinct expression levels.

PMID: 22827437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 7;109(32):13016-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1120299109. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

Transcription factors ETS2 and MESP1 transdifferentiate human dermal fibroblasts 
into cardiac progenitors.

Islas JF(1), Liu Y, Weng KC, Robertson MJ, Zhang S, Prejusa A, Harger J,
Tikhomirova D, Chopra M, Iyer D, Mercola M, Oshima RG, Willerson JT, Potaman VN, 
Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Bioscience and
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Unique insights for the reprograming of cell lineages have come from embryonic
development in the ascidian Ciona, which is dependent upon the transcription
factors Ci-ets1/2 and Ci-mesp to generate cardiac progenitors. We tested the idea
that mammalian v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 (ETS2) and
mesoderm posterior (MESP) homolog may be used to convert human dermal fibroblasts
into cardiac progenitors. Here we show that murine ETS2 has a critical role in
directing cardiac progenitors during cardiopoiesis in embryonic stem cells. We
then use lentivirus-mediated forced expression of human ETS2 to convert normal
human dermal fibroblasts into replicative cells expressing the cardiac mesoderm
marker KDR(+). However, although neither ETS2 nor the purported cardiac master
regulator MESP1 can by themselves generate cardiac progenitors de novo from
fibroblasts, forced coexpression of ETS2 and MESP1 or cell treatment with
purified proteins reprograms fibroblasts into cardiac progenitors, as shown by
the de novo appearance of core cardiac transcription factors, Ca(2+) transients, 
and sarcomeres. Our data indicate that ETS2 and MESP1 play important roles in a
genetic network that governs cardiopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3420197
PMID: 22826236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 31;287(36):30842-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.393983. Epub
2012 Jul 20.

Biochemical characterization of human tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 2
(TDP2/TTRAP): a Mg(2+)/Mn(2+)-dependent phosphodiesterase specific for the repair
of topoisomerase cleavage complexes.

Gao R(1), Huang SY, Marchand C, Pommier Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Center for Cancer Research, NCI,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

TDP2 is a multifunctional enzyme previously known for its role in signal
transduction as TRAF and TNF receptor-associated protein (TTRAP) and
ETS1-associated protein 2 (EAPII). The gene has recently been renamed TDP2
because it plays a critical role for the repair of topoisomerase II cleavage
complexes (Top2cc) and encodes an enzyme that hydrolyzes 5'-tyrosine-DNA adducts 
that mimic abortive Top2cc. Here we further elucidate the DNA-processing
activities of human recombinant TDP2 and its biochemical characteristics. The
preferred substrate for TDP2 is single-stranded DNA or duplex DNA with a
four-base pair overhang, which is consistent with the known structure of Top2cc
or Top3cc. The k(cat)/K(m) of TDP1 and TDP2 was determined. It was found to be 4 
× 10(5) s(-1)M(-1) for TDP2 using single-stranded 5'-tyrosyl-DNA. The processing 
of substrates as short as five nucleotides long suggests that TDP2 can directly
bind DNA ends. 5'-Phosphodiesterase activity requires a phosphotyrosyl linkage
and tolerates an extended group attached to the tyrosine. TDP2 requires Mg(2+) or
Mn(2+) for efficient catalysis but is weakly active with Ca(2+) or Zn(2+).
Titration with Ca(2+) demonstrates a two-metal binding site in TDP2. Sequence
alignment suggests that TDP2 contains four conserved catalytic motifs shared by
Mg(2+)-dependent endonucleases, such as APE1. Substitutions at each of the four
catalytic motifs identified key residues Asn-120, Glu-152, Asp-262, and His-351, 
whose mutation to alanine significantly reduced or completely abolished enzymatic
activity. Our study characterizes the substrate specificity and kinetic
parameters of TDP2. In addition, a two-metal catalytic mechanism is proposed.

PMCID: PMC3436327
PMID: 22822062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039474. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

Syndecan-1 enhances proliferation, migration and metastasis of HT-1080 cells in
cooperation with syndecan-2.

Péterfia B(1), Füle T, Baghy K, Szabadkai K, Fullár A, Dobos K, Zong F, Dobra K, 
Hollósi P, Jeney A, Paku S, Kovalszky I.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary.

Syndecans are transmembrane heparan sulphate proteoglycans. Their role in the
development of the malignant phenotype is ambiguous and depends upon the
particular type of cancer. Nevertheless, syndecans are promising targets in
cancer therapy, and it is important to elucidate the mechanisms controlling their
various cellular effects. According to earlier studies, both syndecan-1 and
syndecan-2 promote malignancy of HT-1080 human fibrosarcoma cells, by increasing 
the proliferation rate and the metastatic potential and migratory ability,
respectively. To better understand their tumour promoter role in this cell line, 
syndecan expression levels were modulated in HT-1080 cells and the growth rate,
chemotaxis and invasion capacity were studied. For in vivo testing, syndecan-1
overexpressing cells were also inoculated into mice. Overexpression of full
length or truncated syndecan-1 lacking the entire ectodomain but containing the
four juxtamembrane amino acids promoted proliferation and chemotaxis. These
effects were accompanied by a marked increase in syndecan-2 protein expression.
The pro-migratory and pro-proliferative effects of truncated syndecan-1 were not 
observable when syndecan-2 was silenced. Antisense silencing of syndecan-2, but
not that of syndecan-1, inhibited cell migration. In vivo, both full length and
truncated syndecan-1 increased tumour growth and metastatic rate. Based on our in
vitro results, we conclude that the tumour promoter role of syndecan-1 observed
in HT-1080 cells is independent of its ectodomain; however, in vivo the presence 
of the ectodomain further increases tumour proliferation. The enhanced migratory 
ability induced by syndecan-1 overexpression is mediated by syndecan-2.
Overexpression of syndecan-1 also leads to activation of IGF1R and increased
expression of Ets-1. These changes were not evident when syndecan-2 was
overexpressed. These findings suggest the involvement of IGF1R and Ets-1 in the
induction of syndecan-2 synthesis and stimulation of proliferation by syndecan-1.
This is the first report demonstrating that syndecan-1 enhances malignancy of a
mesenchymal tumour cell line, via induction of syndecan-2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3383727
PMID: 22745764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cytokine. 2012 Nov;60(2):498-504. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2012.05.029. Epub 2012 Jun 
26.

TNF-inducible expression of lymphotoxin-ß in hepatic cells: an essential role for
NF-<U+03BA>B and Ets1 transcription factors.

Subrata LS(1), Voon DC, Yeoh GC, Ulgiati D, Quail EA, Abraham LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The 
University of Western Australia, Crawley 6009, Australia.

As TNF is one of the earliest signals that can be detected in the
leukocyte-derived inflammatory cascade which drives subsequent cytokine
production, we are interested in determining whether TNF is one of the initiating
factors controlling liver remodeling and regeneration following chronic liver
damage. One of the early responses is the expression of lymphotoxin-ß by hepatic 
progenitor oval cells. The aim of this study was to determine whether hepatic
expression of LT-ß was controlled by TNF and to understand the basis of this
regulation. We previously showed that LT-ß expression is transcriptionally
controlled via the TNF-induced, inflammatory NF-<U+03BA>B pathway in T lymphocytes. Here
we show that TNF is able to upregulate LT-ß expression in hepatic cells at the
transcriptional level by the binding of NF-<U+03BA>B p50/p65 heterodimers and Ets1 to
their respective sites in the LT-ß promoter.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22742857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Gut. 2013 Sep;62(9):1315-26. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301846. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

MicroRNA-200c modulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human
colorectal cancer metastasis.

Hur K(1), Toiyama Y, Takahashi M, Balaguer F, Nagasaka T, Koike J, Hemmi H, Koi
M, Boland CR, Goel A.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Cancer Research Laboratory, Baylor Research Institute and
Sammons Cancer Center, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75246, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Distant metastasis is the major cause of cancer-related death in
patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). Although the microRNA-200 (miR-200) family
is a crucial inhibitor of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human
cancer, the role of miR-200 members in the pathogenesis of metastatic CRC has not
been investigated.
DESIGN: Fifty-four pairs of primary CRC and corresponding matched liver
metastasis tissue specimens were analysed for expression and methylation status
of the miR-200 family members. Functional analysis of miR-200c overexpression was
investigated in CRC cell lines, and cells were analysed for proliferation,
invasion and migration. Expression of several miR-200c target genes (ZEB1, ETS1
and FLT1) and EMT markers (E-cadherin and vimentin) in CRC cell lines and tissue 
specimens was validated.
RESULTS: Liver metastasis tissues showed higher expression of miR-200c (primary
CRC = 1.31 vs. liver metastasis = 1.59; p = 0.0014) and miR-141 (primary CRC =
0.14 vs. liver metastasis = 0.17; p = 0.0234) than did primary CRCs, which was
significantly associated with hypomethylation of the promoter region of these
miRNAs (primary CRC = 61.2% vs. liver metastasis = 46.7%; p < 0.0001). The
invasive front in primary CRC tissues revealed low miR-200c expression by in situ
hybridization analysis. Transfection of miR-200c precursors resulted in enhanced 
cell proliferation but reduced invasion and migration behaviours in CRC cell
lines. Overexpression of miR-200c in CRC cell lines caused reduced expression of 
putative gene targets, and resulted in increased E-cadherin and reduced vimentin 
expression. The associations between miR-200c, target genes and EMT markers were 
validated in primary CRCs and matching liver metastasis tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-200c plays an important role in mediating EMT and metastatic
behaviour in the colon. Its expression is epigenetically regulated, and miR-200c 
may serve as a potential diagnostic marker and therapeutic target for patients
with CRC.

PMCID: PMC3787864
PMID: 22735571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Mol Model. 2012 Nov;18(11):4865-84. doi: 10.1007/s00894-012-1489-x. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Structural insights into interacting mechanism of ID1 protein with an antagonist 
ID1/3-PA7 and agonist ETS-1 in treatment of ovarian cancer: molecular docking and
dynamics studies.

Muthu K(1), Panneerselvam M, Jayaraman M, Topno NS, Das AA, Ramadas K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Bioinformatics, School of Life sciences, Pondicherry University,
Puducherry 605014, India.

Among the many abnormally expressed proteins in ovarian cancer, the prominent
cancer in women, ID1 (inhibitors of DNA binding protein 1) is a potential one
among other several targets. Interaction of ID1 with ETS-1 (transcriptional
activator of p16(INK4a)) suppresses the transcription of p16(INK4a) and causes
abnormal cell proliferation. A peptide aptamer (ID1/3-PA7) has been designed to
prevent this interaction and thereby leading to the transcription of p16(INK4a). 
However, the structural basis behind the molecular interaction of ID1 with ETS-1 
(agonist) and ID1/3-PA7 (antagonist) is poorly understood. In order to understand
this structural recognition and their interaction mechanism, in silico methods
were used. From this interaction analysis, the residues of ETS-1 involved in
interaction with the p16(INK4a) promoter were found to be targeted by ID1.
Subsequently, ETS-1 binding residues of ID1 were found to be targeted by its
aptamer- ID1/3-PA7. These results suggest that both ETS-1 and ID1/3-PA7 binds at 
the same region harbored by the residues-H97, D100, R103, D104, L107, A144, C145,
D149, D150 and C154 of ID1. All these observations correlate with the
experimental reports, suggesting that the identified residues might play a
crucial role in promulgating the oncogenic effects of ID1. In silico alanine
scanning mutagenesis also confirms the role of identified hot spot residues in
p16(INK4a) regulation. Finally, the molecular dynamic simulation studies reveal
the prolonged stability of the aforementioned interacting complexes. The obtained
results throw light on the structure and residues of ID1 involved in
transcriptional regulation of p16(INK4a).

PMID: 22714536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Infect Immun. 2012 Aug;80(8):2847-57. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00258-12. Epub 2012 Jun
11.

Identification of signaling pathways mediating cell cycle arrest and apoptosis
induced by Porphyromonas gingivalis in human trophoblasts.

Inaba H(1), Kuboniwa M, Sugita H, Lamont RJ, Amano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Frontier Biology, Center for Frontier Oral Science, Osaka
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Suita-Osaka, Japan.
hinaba@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

Epidemiological and interventional studies of humans have revealed a close
association between periodontal diseases and preterm delivery of low-birth-weight
infants. Porphyromonas gingivalis, a periodontal pathogen, can translocate to
gestational tissues following oral-hematogenous spread. We previously reported
that P. gingivalis invades extravillous trophoblast cells (HTR-8) derived from
the human placenta and inhibits proliferation through induction of arrest in the 
G(1) phase of the cell cycle. The purpose of the present study was to identify
signaling pathways mediating cellular impairment caused by P. gingivalis.
Following P. gingivalis infection, the expression of Fas was induced and p53
accumulated, responses consistent with response to DNA damage. Ataxia
telangiectasia- and Rad3-related kinase (ATR), an essential regulator of DNA
damage checkpoints, was shown to be activated together with its downstream
signaling molecule Chk2, while the p53 degradation-related protein MDM2 was not
induced. The inhibition of ATR prevented both G(1) arrest and apoptosis caused by
P. gingivalis in HTR-8 cells. In addition, small interfering RNA (siRNA)
knockdown of p53 abrogated both G(1) arrest and apoptosis. The regulation of
apoptosis was associated with Ets1 activation. HTR-8 cells infected with P.
gingivalis exhibited activation of Ets1, and knockdown of Ets1 with siRNA
diminished both G(1) arrest and apoptosis. These results suggest that P.
gingivalis activates cellular DNA damage signaling pathways that lead to G(1)
arrest and apoptosis in trophoblasts.

PMCID: PMC3434559
PMID: 22689813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Hypertension. 2012 Aug;60(2):459-66. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.191270.
Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Chronic matrix metalloproteinase inhibition retards age-associated arterial
proinflammation and increase in blood pressure.

Wang M(1), Zhang J, Telljohann R, Jiang L, Wu J, Monticone RE, Kapoor K, Talan M,
Lakatta EG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Science, Intramural Research Program, 5600 Nathan
Shock Dr, National Institute on Aging-National Institutes of Health, Baltimore,
MD 21030, USA. mingyiw@grc.nia.nih.gov

Age-associated arterial remodeling involves arterial wall collagen deposition and
elastin fragmentation, as well as an increase in arterial pressure. This arterial
remodeling is linked to proinflammatory signaling, including transforming growth 
factor-ß1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, and proendothelin 1, activated by 
extracellular matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and orchestrated, in part, by the 
transcriptional factor ets-1. We tested the hypothesis that inhibition of MMP
activation can decelerate the age-associated arterial proinflammation and its
attendant increase in arterial pressure. Indeed, chronic administration of a
broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor, PD166739, via a daily gavage, to 16-month-old rats 
for 8 months markedly blunted the expected age-associated increases in arterial
pressure. This was accompanied by the following: (1) inhibition of the
age-associated increases in aortic gelatinase and interstitial collagenase
activity in situ; (2) preservation of the elastic fiber network integrity; (3) a 
reduction of collagen deposition; (4) a reduction of monocyte chemoattractant
protein 1 and transforming growth factor-ß1 activation; (5) a diminution in the
activity of the profibrogenic signaling molecule SMAD-2/3 phosphorylation; (6)
inhibition of proendothelin 1 activation; and (7) downregulation of expression of
ets-1. Acute exposure of cultured vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro to
proendothelin 1 increased both the transcription and translation of ets-1, and
these effects were markedly reduced by MMP inhibition. Furthermore, infection of 
vascular smooth muscle cells with an adenovirus harboring a full-length ets-1
cDNA increased activities of both transforming growth factor-ß1 and monocyte
chemoattractant protein 1. Collectively, our results indicate that MMP inhibition
retards age-associated arterial proinflammatory signaling, and this is
accompanied by preservation of intact elastin fibers, a reduction in collagen,
and blunting of an age-associated increase in blood pressure.

PMCID: PMC3537179
PMID: 22689745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:357060. doi: 10.1155/2012/357060. Epub 2012 May
17.

Multiple signaling pathways are involved in the interleukine-4 regulated
expression of DC-SIGN in THP-1 cell line.

Jin C(1), Wu L, Li J, Fang M, Cheng L, Wu N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Disease, The
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310003, China.

Dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3 grabbing nonintegrin
(DC-SIGN) is an important pattern recognition receptor on dendritic cells (DCs), 
and its expression shows significant cytological and histological specificity,
being interleukine-4 (IL-4) dependent. The signaling pathways through which IL-4 
regulates expression of DC-SIGN are still unclear. We used phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate- (PMA-) differentiated THP-1 cells as the in vitro model of
monocyte/macrophage cells to study the signaling pathways involved in
IL-4-regulated expression of DC-SIGN. We found that a high expression of DC-SIGN 
could be induced by IL-4 at the levels of mRNA and cell surface protein.
Upregulated expression of DC-SIGN was almost completely blocked by the specific
inhibitor of ERK pathway, and partly reduced by the specific inhibitors of
JAK-STAT and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways. The activation of the three signaling pathways was
directly confirmed by testing the phosphorylation of protein kinase within the
cytoplasm and nucleus over time. The analysis of cis-acting elements of DC-SIGN
promoter showed that the activity of DC-SIGN promoter without Ets-1 transcription
factors binding site almost completely disappeared. Our results demonstrated that
multiple signaling pathways are involved in IL-4 induced high expression of
DC-SIGN on THP-1 cells, in which ERK pathway is the main signaling pathway and
mediated by the Ets-1 transcription factors binding site.

PMCID: PMC3363004
PMID: 22675249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Oncol Rep. 2012 Aug;28(2):701-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1850. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

MicroRNA-1 and microRNA-499 downregulate the expression of the ets1
proto-oncogene in HepG2 cells.

Wei W(1), Hu Z, Fu H, Tie Y, Zhang H, Wu Y, Zheng X.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, PR China.

MicroRNAs may function to promote or suppress tumor development, depending on the
cellular context. The important role of microRNAs in regulating molecular
pathways underlying tumorigenesis has been emphasized in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). MicroRNAs regulate gene expression via post-transcriptional mechanisms by 
inhibiting translation or by degrading mRNA. In this study, we show that
microRNA-1 (miR-1) and microRNA-499 (miR-499) are capable of repressing the
expression of the ets1 proto-oncogene, which plays a fundamental role in the
extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation, a process required for tumor cell
invasion and migration. We used luciferase reporter assays to demonstrate that
miR-1 and miR-499 target the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of ets1. Overexpression
of miR-1 and miR-499 in HepG2 cells led to downregulation of ets1 mRNA and
protein as assessed by quantitative reverse transcription PCR and western blot
analysis. Furthermore, overexpression of miR-1 and miR-499 inhibited the invasion
and migration of HepG2 cells in matrigel invasion and transwell migration assays,
respectively. These results suggest that miR-1 and miR-499 may play an important 
role in the pathogenesis of HCC by regulating ets1.

PMID: 22664953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37151. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037151. Epub 2012 May 17.

The SAM domain of human TEL2 can abrogate transcriptional output from TEL1
(ETV-6) and ETS1/ETS2.

Vivekanand P(1), Rebay I.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America.

Regulation of gene expression downstream of the Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
signaling pathway in Drosophila relies on a transcriptional effector network
featuring two conserved Ets family proteins, Yan and Pointed, known as TEL1
(ETV6) and ETS1/ETS2, respectively, in mammals. As in Drosophila, both TEL1 and
ETS1/ETS2 operate as Ras pathway transcriptional effectors and misregulated
activity of either factor has been implicated in many human leukemias and solid
tumors. Providing essential regulation to the Drosophila network, direct
interactions with the SAM domain protein Mae attenuate both Yan-mediated
repression and PointedP2-mediated transcriptional activation. Given the critical 
contributions of Mae to the Drosophila circuitry, we investigated whether the
human Ets factors TEL1 and ETS1/ETS2 could be subject to analogous regulation.
Here we demonstrate that the SAM domain of human TEL2 can inhibit the
transcriptional activities of ETS1/2 and TEL1. Drosophila Mae can also attenuate 
human ETS1/ETS2 function, suggesting there could be cross-species conservation of
underlying mechanism. In contrast, Mae is not an effective inhibitor of TEL1,
suggesting the mode of TEL2SAM-mediated inhibition of TEL1 may be distinct from
how Drosophila Mae antagonizes Yan. Together our results reveal both further
similarities and new differences between the mammalian and Drosophila networks
and more broadly suggest that SAM domain-mediated interactions could provide an
effective mechanism for modulating output from the TEL1 and ETS1/2 oncogenes.

PMCID: PMC3355116
PMID: 22615925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Immunity. 2012 Jun 29;36(6):921-32. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.04.006. Epub 2012 
May 17.

Gene deregulation and chronic activation in natural killer cells deficient in the
transcription factor ETS1.

Ramirez K(1), Chandler KJ, Spaulding C, Zandi S, Sigvardsson M, Graves BJ, Kee
BL.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60615, USA.

Multiple transcription factors guide the development of mature functional natural
killer (NK) cells, yet little is known about their function. We used global gene 
expression and genome-wide binding analyses combined with developmental and
functional studies to unveil three roles for the ETS1 transcription factor in NK 
cells. ETS1 functions at the earliest stages of NK cell development to promote
expression of critical transcriptional regulators including T-BET and ID2, NK
cell receptors (NKRs) including NKp46, Ly49H, and Ly49D, and signaling molecules 
essential for NKR function. As a consequence, Ets1(-/-) NK cells fail to
degranulate after stimulation through activating NKRs. Nonetheless, these cells
are hyperresponsive to cytokines and have characteristics of chronic stimulation 
including increased expression of inhibitory NKRs and multiple
activation-associated genes. Therefore, ETS1 regulates a broad gene expression
program in NK cells that promotes target cell recognition while limiting
cytokine-driven activation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3389314
PMID: 22608498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 1;368(1):127-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.05.002. Epub 2012
May 14.

Initial deployment of the cardiogenic gene regulatory network in the basal
chordate, Ciona intestinalis.

Woznica A(1), Haeussler M, Starobinska E, Jemmett J, Li Y, Mount D, Davidson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Molecular Cardiovascular
Research Program, University of Arizona, Arizona 85724, USA.

The complex, partially redundant gene regulatory architecture underlying
vertebrate heart formation has been difficult to characterize. Here, we dissect
the primary cardiac gene regulatory network in the invertebrate chordate, Ciona
intestinalis. The Ciona heart progenitor lineage is first specified by Fibroblast
Growth Factor/Map Kinase (FGF/MapK) activation of the transcription factor Ets1/2
(Ets). Through microarray analysis of sorted heart progenitor cells, we
identified the complete set of primary genes upregulated by FGF/Ets shortly after
heart progenitor emergence. Combinatorial sequence analysis of these co-regulated
genes generated a hypothetical regulatory code consisting of Ets binding sites
associated with a specific co-motif, ATTA. Through extensive reporter analysis,
we confirmed the functional importance of the ATTA co-motif in primary heart
progenitor gene regulation. We then used the Ets/ATTA combination motif to
successfully predict a number of additional heart progenitor gene regulatory
elements, including an intronic element driving expression of the core conserved 
cardiac transcription factor, GATAa. This work significantly advances our
understanding of the Ciona heart gene network. Furthermore, this work has begun
to elucidate the precise regulatory architecture underlying the conserved,
primary role of FGF/Ets in chordate heart lineage specification.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3383925
PMID: 22595514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jun 12;586(12):1693-701. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.014. Epub
2012 May 12.

Expression of BMP-2 and Ets1 in BMP-2-stimulated mouse pre-osteoblast
differentiation is regulated by microRNA-370.

Itoh T(1), Ando M, Tsukamasa Y, Akao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Food Science, Department of Fisheries, Faculty of
Agriculture, Kinki University, 3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan.
titoh@nara.kindai.ac.jp

MicroRNAs (miRs) regulate several biological functions such as cell growth, cell 
differentiation, and carcinogenesis, by binding to the 3'-untranslated regions
(3'-UTR) of specific target genes, in order to repress translation or promote
degradation of the transcribed mRNAs. In the present study, using microRNA array 
and in silico analyses, we found that miR-370 regulates the expression of bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) and V-ets Erythroblastosis Virus E26 Oncogene
Homolog 1 (Ets1) in BMP-2-stimulated murine pre-osteoblast MC3T3-E1 cell
differentiation. The enforced expression of mature miR-370 in MC3T3-E1 cells or
primary osteoblast cells remarkably attenuated BMP-2-induced pre-osteoblast
differentiation. To ascertain the mechanisms underlying the regulation of
osteoblast differentiation by miR-370, we hypothesized a BMP-2-Ets1-PTHrP
feed-forward loop regulatory mechanism.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22587915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Mol Biol. 2012 Aug 3;421(1):67-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.05.010. Epub 2012
May 12.

Autoinhibition of ETV6 (TEL) DNA binding: appended helices sterically block the
ETS domain.

Coyne HJ 3rd(1), De S, Okon M, Green SM, Bhachech N, Graves BJ, McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z3.

ETV6 (or TEL), a transcriptional repressor belonging to the ETS family, is
frequently involved in chromosomal translocations linked with human cancers. It
displays a DNA-binding mode distinct from other ETS proteins due to the presence 
of a self-associating PNT domain. In this study, we used NMR spectroscopy to
dissect the structural and dynamic bases for the autoinhibition of ETV6 DNA
binding by sequences C-terminal to its ETS domain. The C-terminal inhibitory
domain (CID) contains two helices, H4 and H5, which sterically block the
DNA-binding interface of the ETS domain. Importantly, these appended helices are 
only marginally stable as revealed by amide hydrogen exchange and (15)N
relaxation measurements. The CID is thus poised to undergo a facile
conformational change as required for DNA binding. The CID also dampens
millisecond timescale motions of the ETS domain hypothesized to be critical for
the recognition of specific ETS target sequences. This work illustrates the use
of appended sequences on conserved structural domains to generate biological
diversity and complements previous studies of the allosteric mechanism of ETS1
autoinhibition to reveal both common and divergent features underlying the
regulation of DNA binding by ETS transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3392548
PMID: 22584210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Haematologica. 2012 Oct;97(10):1612-4. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.061770. Epub
2012 May 11.

ETS1 encoding a transcription factor involved in B-cell differentiation is
recurrently deleted and down-regulated in classical Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Overbeck BM, Martin-Subero JI, Ammerpohl O, Klapper W, Siebert R, Giefing M.

PMCID: PMC3487565
PMID: 22581005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035258. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Ets-1 is essential for connective tissue growth factor (CTGF/CCN2) induction by
TGF-ß1 in osteoblasts.

Geisinger MT(1), Astaiza R, Butler T, Popoff SN, Planey SL, Arnott JA.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Sciences Department, The Commonwealth Medical College, Scranton,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Ets-1 controls osteoblast differentiation and bone development;
however, its downstream mechanism of action in osteoblasts remains largely
undetermined. CCN2 acts as an anabolic growth factor to regulate osteoblast
differentiation and function. CCN2 is induced by TGF-ß1 and acts as a mediator of
TGF-ß1 induced matrix production in osteoblasts; however, the molecular
mechanisms that control CCN2 induction are poorly understood. In this study, we
investigated the role of Ets-1 for CCN2 induction by TGF-ß1 in primary
osteoblasts.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that Ets-1 is expressed and induced by TGF-ß1 treatment 
in osteoblasts, and that Ets-1 over-expression induces CCN2 protein expression
and promoter activity at a level similar to TGF-ß1 treatment alone. Additionally,
we found that simultaneous Ets-1 over-expression and TGF-ß1 treatment synergize
to enhance CCN2 induction, and that CCN2 induction by TGF-ß1 treatment was
impaired using Ets-1 siRNA, demonstrating the requirement of Ets-1 for CCN2
induction by TGF-ß1. Site-directed mutagenesis of eight putative Ets-1 motifs
(EBE) in the CCN2 promoter demonstrated that specific EBE sites are required for 
CCN2 induction, and that mutation of EBE sites in closer proximity to TRE or SBE 
(two sites previously shown to regulate CCN2 induction by TGF-ß1) had a greater
effect on CCN2 induction, suggesting potential synergetic interaction among these
sites for CCN2 induction. In addition, mutation of EBE sites prevented protein
complex binding, and this protein complex formation was also inhibited by
addition of Ets-1 antibody or Smad 3 antibody, demonstrating that protein binding
to EBE motifs as a result of TGF-ß1 treatment require synergy between Ets-1 and
Smad 3.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that Ets-1 is an essential downstream
signaling component for CCN2 induction by TGF-ß1 in osteoblasts, and that
specific EBE sites in the CCN2 promoter are required for CCN2 promoter
transactivation in osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC3335151
PMID: 22539964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Life Sci. 2012 Oct 15;91(13-14):562-71. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2012.04.014. Epub 2012
Apr 12.

ETS-dependent p16INK4a and p21waf1/cip1 gene expression upon endothelin-1
stimulation in malignant versus and non-malignant proximal tubule cells.

von Brandenstein M(1), Schlosser M, Richter C, Depping R, Fries JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

AIM: Cellular senescence, leading to cell death through prevention of regular
cell renewal, is associated with the upregulation of the tumor suppressor gene
p16(INK4a). While this mechanism has been described as leading to progressive
nephron loss, p16(INK4a) upregulation in renal cell carcinoma has been linked to 
a disease-specific improved patient survival rate. While in both conditions
endothelin-1 is also upregulated, the signaling pathway connecting ET-1 to
p16(INK4a) has not been characterized until this study.
MAIN METHODS: Cell culture, qRT-PCR, Western Blot, immunoprecipitation (IP),
proximity ligation assay (PLA), and non-radioactive electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA).
KEY FINDINGS: In malignant renal proximal tumor cells (Caki-1), an activation of 
p16(INK4a) and p21(waf1/cip1) was observed. An increased expression of E-26
transformation-specific (ETS) transcription factors was detectable. Using
specific antibodies, a complex formation between ETS1 and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase-2 (ERK2) was shown. A further complex partner was Mxi2.
EMSA with supershift analysis for ETS1 and Mxi2 indicated the involvement of both
factors in the protein-DNA interaction. After specifically blocking the
endothelin receptors, ETS1 expression was significantly downregulated. However,
the endothelin B receptor dependent downregulation was stronger than that of the 
A receptor. In contrast, primary proximal tubule cells showed a nuclear decrease 
after ET-1 stimulation. This indicates that other ETS members may be involved in 
the observed p16(INK4a) upregulation (as described in the literature).
SIGNIFICANCE: ETS1, ERK2 and Mxi2 are important complex partners initiating
increased p16(INK4a) and p21w(af1/cip1) activation in renal tumor cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22521293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cancer Cell. 2012 Apr 17;21(4):563-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.02.013.

TLX homeodomain oncogenes mediate T cell maturation arrest in T-ALL via
interaction with ETS1 and suppression of TCRa gene expression.

Dadi S(1), Le Noir S, Payet-Bornet D, Lhermitte L, Zacarias-Cabeza J, Bergeron J,
Villarèse P, Vachez E, Dik WA, Millien C, Radford I, Verhoeyen E, Cosset FL,
Petit A, Ifrah N, Dombret H, Hermine O, Spicuglia S, Langerak AW, Macintyre EA,
Nadel B, Ferrier P, Asnafi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematologye, Université de Médecine Paris Descartes Sorbonne
Cité, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), France.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 Apr 17;21(4):453-5.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs) are characterized by multistep oncogenic
processes leading to cell-differentiation arrest and proliferation. Specific
abrogation of maturation blockage constitutes a promising therapeutic option in
cancer, which requires precise understanding of the underlying molecular
mechanisms. We show that the cortical thymic maturation arrest in T-lineage ALLs 
that overexpress TLX1 or TLX3 is due to binding of TLX1/TLX3 to ETS1, leading to 
repression of T cell receptor (TCR) a enhanceosome activity and blocked TCR-Ja
rearrangement. TLX1/TLX3 abrogation or enforced TCRaß expression leads to TCRa
rearrangement and apoptosis. Importantly, the autoextinction of clones carrying
TCRa-driven TLX1 expression supports TLX "addiction" in TLX-positive leukemias
and provides further rationale for targeted therapy based on disruption of
TLX1/TLX3.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22516263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Biophys Chem. 2012 May;165-166:74-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bpc.2012.03.007. Epub 2012
Mar 23.

Importance of local interactions for the stability of inhibitory helix 1 in apo
Ets-1.

Karolak A(1), van der Vaart A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, 4202 East Fowler Avenue 
CHE 205, Tampa, FL 33620, USA.

Inhibitory helix 1 (HI-1) of the Ets-1 human transcription factor unfolds upon
binding the target DNA sequence. To identify the interactions that stabilize HI-1
in the apo state, we performed replica exchange and molecular dynamics
simulations of various apo Ets-1 constructs. The simulations indicate the
importance of local interactions for the stability of HI-1. The HI-2 and H4
helices stabilize the helical state of HI-1 through specific residue-residue
contacts and macrodipolar interactions. The amount of stabilization in small
length HI-1+H2 and HI-1+H4 constructs was similar to that in the protein. The
studies suggest that the partial unfolding of Ets-1 upon DNA binding can be
achieved by the removal of just a few specific local contacts.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22494801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Immunol. 2012 May 1;188(9):4394-404. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103352. Epub 2012
Mar 30.

Differential transcription factor use by the KIR2DL4 promoter under constitutive 
and IL-2/15-treated conditions.

Presnell SR(1), Zhang L, Chlebowy CN, Al-Attar A, Lutz CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

KIR2DL4 is unique among human KIR genes in expression, cellular localization,
structure, and function, yet the transcription factors required for its
expression have not been identified. Using mutagenesis, EMSA, and cotransfection 
assays, we identified two redundant Runx binding sites in the 2DL4 promoter as
essential for constitutive 2DL4 transcription, with contributions by a cyclic AMP
response element (CRE) and initiator elements. IL-2- and IL-15-stimulated human
NK cell lines increased 2DL4 promoter activity, which required functional Runx,
CRE, and Ets sites. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments show that Runx3 and
Ets1 bind the 2DL4 promoter in situ. 2DL4 promoter activity had similar
transcription factor requirements in T cells. Runx, CRE, and Ets binding motifs
are present in 2DL4 promoters from across primate species, but other postulated
transcription factor binding sites are not preserved. Differences between 2DL4
and clonally restricted KIR promoters suggest a model that explains the unique
2DL4 expression pattern in human NK cells.

PMCID: PMC3331908
PMID: 22467658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Mol Cell. 2012 Mar 30;45(6):764-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.01.029.

ErbB2-driven breast cancer cell invasion depends on a complex signaling network
activating myeloid zinc finger-1-dependent cathepsin B expression.

Rafn B(1), Nielsen CF, Andersen SH, Szyniarowski P, Corcelle-Termeau E, Valo E,
Fehrenbacher N, Olsen CJ, Daugaard M, Egebjerg C, Bøttzauw T, Kohonen P,
Nylandsted J, Hautaniemi S, Moreira J, Jäättelä M, Kallunki T.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cell Death and Metabolism and Centre for Genotoxic Stress Research,
Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Strandboulevarden 49, Copenhagen 2100,
Denmark.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jul 1;11(13):2415-6.

Aberrant ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase activation in breast cancer is strongly
linked to an invasive disease. The molecular basis of ErbB2-driven invasion is
largely unknown. We show that cysteine cathepsins B and L are elevated in ErbB2
positive primary human breast cancer and function as effectors of ErbB2-induced
invasion in vitro. We identify Cdc42-binding protein kinase beta, extracellular
regulated kinase 2, p21-activated protein kinase 4, and protein kinase C alpha as
essential mediators of ErbB2-induced cysteine cathepsin expression and breast
cancer cell invasiveness. The identified signaling network activates the
transcription of cathepsin B gene (CTSB) via myeloid zinc finger-1 transcription 
factor that binds to an ErbB2-responsive enhancer element in the first intron of 
CTSB. This work provides a model system for ErbB2-induced breast cancer cell
invasiveness, reveals a signaling network that is crucial for invasion in vitro, 
and defines a specific role and targets for the identified serine-threonine
kinases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Blood. 2012 May 3;119(18):4174-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-378182. Epub 2012
Mar 20.

The Ets-1 transcription factor is required for Stat1-mediated T-bet expression
and IgG2a class switching in mouse B cells.

Nguyen HV(1), Mouly E, Chemin K, Luinaud R, Despres R, Fermand JP, Arnulf B,
Bories JC.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Universitaire
d'Hématologie Hôpital Saint Louis, 1 avenue Claude Vellefaux, Paris Cedex 10,
France.

In response to antigens and cytokines, mouse B cells undergo class-switch
recombination (CSR) and differentiate into Ig-secreting cells. T-bet, a T-box
transcription factor that is up-regulated in lymphocytes by IFN-<U+03B3> or IL-27, was
shown to regulate CSR to IgG2a after T cell-independent B-cell stimulations.
However, the molecular mechanisms controlling this process remain unclear. In the
present study, we show that inactivation of the Ets-1 transcription factor
results in a severe decrease in IgG2a secretion in vivo and in vitro. No T-bet
expression was observed in Ets-1-deficient (Ets-1(-/-)) B cells stimulated with
IFN-<U+03B3> and lipopolysaccharide, and forced expression of T-bet in these cells
rescued IgG2a secretion. Furthermore, we identified a transcriptional enhancer in
the T-bet locus with an activity in B cells that relies on ETS-binding sites.
After IFN-<U+03B3> stimulation of Ets-1(-/-) B cells, activated Stat1, which forms a
complex with Ets-1 in wild-type cells, no longer binds to the T-bet enhancer or
promotes histone modifications at this site. These results demonstrate that Ets-1
is critical for IgG2a CSR and acts as an essential cofactor for Stat1 in the
regulation of T-bet expression in B cells.

PMID: 22438254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033698. Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Structural basis of Ets1 cooperative binding to widely separated sites on
promoter DNA.

Babayeva ND(1), Baranovskaya OI, Tahirov TH.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.

Ets1 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors. Ets1 is expressed in
autoinhibited form and its DNA binding depends on partner proteins bound to
adjacent sequences or the relative positioning of a second Ets-binding site
(EBS). The autoinhibition of Ets1 is mediated by structural coupling of regions
flanking the DNA-binding domain. The NMR structure of Ets1 revealed that the
inhibitory regions comprised of helices HI1 and HI2 and H4 are packed together on
the Ets domain to form an inhibitory module. The crystal structure of Ets1
unexpectedly revealed a homodimer in which homodimerisation occurs via swapping
of HI1 helices. Modeling of DNA binding indicates that the Ets1 dimer can bind to
two antiparallel pieces of DNA. To verify this, we crystallized and solved the
structure of the complex comprised of Ets1 dimer and two pieces of DNA. DNA
binding by Ets1 dimer resulted in formation of additional intermolecular
proteinDNA interactions, implying that the complex formation is cooperative.

PMCID: PMC3303851
PMID: 22432043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Retrovirology. 2012 Mar 15;9:21. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-21.

The endogenous retrovirus ENS-1 provides active binding sites for transcription
factors in embryonic stem cells that specify extra embryonic tissue.

Mey A(1), Acloque H, Lerat E, Gounel S, Tribollet V, Blanc S, Curton D, Birot AM,
Nieto MA, Samarut J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon, CNRS, INRA,
Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France. anne.mey@lyon.inra.fr

BACKGROUND: Long terminal repeats (LTR) from endogenous retroviruses (ERV) are
source of binding sites for transcription factors which affect the host
regulatory networks in different cell types, including pluripotent cells. The
embryonic epiblast is made of pluripotent cells that are subjected to opposite
transcriptional regulatory networks to give rise to distinct embryonic and
extraembryonic lineages. To assess the transcriptional contribution of ERV to
early developmental processes, we have characterized in vitro and in vivo the
regulation of ENS-1, a host adopted and developmentally regulated ERV that is
expressed in chick embryonic stem cells.
RESULTS: We show that Ens-1 LTR activity is controlled by two transcriptional
pathways that drive pluripotent cells to alternative developmental fates. Indeed,
both Nanog that maintains pluripotency and Gata4 that induces differentiation
toward extraembryonic endoderm independently activate the LTR. Ets coactivators
are required to support Gata factors' activity thus preventing inappropriate
activation before epigenetic silencing occurs during differentiation. Consistent 
with their expression patterns during chick embryonic development, Gata4, Nanog
and Ets1 are recruited on the LTR in embryonic stem cells; in the epiblast the
complementary expression of Nanog and Gata/Ets correlates with the Ens-1 gene
expression pattern; and Ens-1 transcripts are also detected in the hypoblast, an 
extraembryonic tissue expressing Gata4 and Ets2, but not Nanog. Accordingly, over
expression of Gata4 in embryos induces an ectopic expression of Ens-1.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that Ens-1 LTR have co-opted conditions required for
the emergence of extraembryonic tissues from pluripotent epiblasts cells. By
providing pluripotent cells with intact binding sites for Gata, Nanog, or both,
Ens-1 LTR may promote distinct transcriptional networks in embryonic stem cells
subpopulations and prime the separation between embryonic and extraembryonic
fates.

PMCID: PMC3362752
PMID: 22420414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012 Jun 15;302(12):F1630-9. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00400.2011. Epub 2012 Mar 14.

MicroRNA-126 contributes to renal microvascular heterogeneity of VCAM-1 protein
expression in acute inflammation.

Asgeirsdóttir SA(1), van Solingen C, Kurniati NF, Zwiers PJ, Heeringa P, van
Meurs M, Satchell SC, Saleem MA, Mathieson PW, Banas B, Kamps JA, Rabelink TJ,
van Zonneveld AJ, Molema G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, Medical Biology Section,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands.

Endothelial cells in different microvascular segments of the kidney have diverse 
functions and exhibit differential responsiveness to disease stimuli. The
responsible molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. We previously showed that
during hemorrhagic shock, VCAM-1 protein was expressed primarily in
extraglomerular compartments of the kidney, while E-selectin protein was highly
induced in glomeruli only (van Meurs M, Wulfert FM, Knol AJ, de Haes A,
Houwertjes M, Aarts LPHJ, Molema G. Shock 29: 291-299, 2008). Here, we
investigated the molecular control of expression of these endothelial cell
adhesion molecules in mouse models of renal inflammation. Microvascular
segment-specific responses to the induction of anti-glomerular basement membrane 
(anti-GBM), glomerulonephritis and systemic TNF-a treatment showed that
E-selectin expression was transcriptionally regulated, with high E-selectin mRNA 
and protein levels preferentially expressed in the glomerular compartment. In
contrast, VCAM-1 mRNA expression was increased in both arterioles and glomeruli, 
while VCAM-1 protein expression was limited in the glomeruli. These high VCAM-1
mRNA/low VCAM-1 protein levels were accompanied by high local microRNA (miR)-126 
and Egfl7 levels, as well as higher Ets1 levels compared with arteriolar
expression levels. Using miR-reporter constructs, the functional activity of
miR-126 in glomerular endothelial cells could be demonstrated. Moreover, in vivo 
knockdown of miR-126 function unleashed VCAM-1 protein expression in the
glomeruli upon inflammatory challenge. These data imply that miR-126 has a major 
role in the segmental, heterogenic response of renal microvascular endothelial
cells to systemic inflammatory stimuli.

PMID: 22419694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Sep;20(9):945-52. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.40. Epub 2012 Mar 
14.

Promoter alteration causes transcriptional repression of the POMGNT1 gene in
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2O.

Raducu M(1), Baets J, Fano O, Van Coster R, Cruces J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto
Sols' UAM-CSIC, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid,
Spain.

Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2O (LGMD2O) belongs to a group of rare
muscular dystrophies named dystroglycanopathies, which are characterized
molecularly by hypoglycosylation of a-dystroglycan (a-DG). Here, we describe the 
first dystroglycanopathy patient carrying an alteration in the promoter region of
the POMGNT1 gene (protein O-mannose ß-1,2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 1),
which involves a homozygous 9-bp duplication (-83_-75dup). Analysis of the
downstream effects of this mutation revealed a decrease in the expression of
POMGNT1 mRNA and protein because of negative regulation of the POMGNT1 promoter
by the transcription factor ZNF202 (zinc-finger protein 202). By functional
analysis of various luciferase constructs, we localized a proximal POMGNT1
promoter and we found a 75% decrease in luciferase activity in the mutant
construct when compared with the wild type. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay 
(EMSA) revealed binding sites for the Sp1, Ets1 and GATA transcription factors.
Surprisingly, the mutation generated an additional ZNF202 binding site and this
transcriptional repressor bound strongly to the mutant promoter while failing to 
recognize the wild-type promoter. Although the genetic causes of
dystroglycanopathies are highly variable, they account for only 50% of the cases 
described. Our results emphasize the importance of extending the mutational
screening outside the gene-coding region in dystroglycanopathy patients of
unknown aetiology, because mutations in noncoding regions may be the cause of
disease. Our findings also underline the requirement to perform functional
studies that may assist the interpretation of the pathogenic potential of
promoter alterations.

PMCID: PMC3421125
PMID: 22419172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32624. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032624. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

EBV-encoded LMP1 upregulates Ig<U+03BA> 3'enhancer activity and Ig<U+03BA> expression in
nasopharyngeal cancer cells by activating the Ets-1 through ERKs signaling.

Liu H(1), Duan Z, Zheng H, Hu D, Li M, Tao Y, Bode AM, Dong Z, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, China.

Accumulating evidence indicates that epithelial cancer cells, including
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells, express immunoglobulins (Igs). We
previously found that the expression of the kappa light chain protein in NPC
cells can be upregulated by the EBV-encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1). In 
the present study, we used NPC cell lines as models and found that LMP1-augmented
kappa production corresponds with elevations in ERKs phosphorylation. PD98059
attenuates LMP1-induced ERKs phosphorylation resulting in decreased expression of
the kappa light chain. ERK-specific small interfering RNA blunts LMP1-induced
kappa light chain gene expression. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrate that
immunoglobulin <U+03BA> 3' enhancer (3'E(<U+03BA>)) is active in Ig<U+03BA>-expressing NPC cells and
LMP1 upregulates the activity of 3'E(<U+03BA>) in NPC cells. Moreover, mutation analysis
of the PU binding site in 3'E(<U+03BA>) and inhibition of the MEK/ERKs pathway by
PD98059 indicate that the PU site is functional and LMP1-enhanced 3'E(<U+03BA>) activity
is partly regulated by this site. PD98059 treatment also leads to a
concentration-dependent inhibition of LMP1-induced Ets-1 expression and
phosphorylation, which corresponds with a dose-dependent attenuation of
LMP1-induced ERK phosphorylation and kappa light chain expression. Suppression of
endogenous Ets-1 by small interfering RNA is accompanied by a decrease of Ig
kappa light chain expression. Gel shift assays using nuclear extracts of NPC
cells indicate that the transcription factor Ets-1 is recruited by LMP1 to the PU
motif within 3'E(<U+03BA>)in vitro. ChIP assays further demonstrate Ets-1 binding to the
PU motif of 3'E(<U+03BA>) in cells. These results suggest that LMP1 upregulates 3'E(<U+03BA>)
activity and kappa gene expression by activating the Ets-1 transcription factor
through the ERKs signaling pathway. Our studies provide evidence for a novel
regulatory mechanism of kappa expression, by which virus-encoded proteins
activate the kappa 3' enhancer through activating transcription factors in non-B 
epithelial cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3291551
PMID: 22396784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Int J Nanomedicine. 2012;7:781-7. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S28509. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

Gambogic acid-loaded magnetic Fe(3)O(4) nanoparticles inhibit Panc-1 pancreatic
cancer cell proliferation and migration by inactivating transcription factor
ETS1.

Wang C(1), Zhang H, Chen Y, Shi F, Chen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Zhongda Hospital, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: E26 transformation-specific sequence-1 (ETS1) transcription factor
plays important roles in both carcinogenesis and the progression of a wide range 
of malignancies. Aberrant ETS1 expression correlates with aggressive tumor
behavior and a poorer prognosis in patients with various malignancies. The aim of
the current study was to evaluate the efficacy of a drug delivery system
utilizing gambogic acid-loaded magnetic Fe(3)O(4) nanoparticles
(GA-MNP-Fe(3)O(4)) on the suppression of ETS1-mediated cell proliferation and
migration in Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: The effects caused by GA-MNP-Fe(3)O(4) on the proliferation of Panc-1
pancreatic cancer cells were evaluated using a MTT
(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay while
inhibition of tumor cell migration was investigated in a scratch assay. The
expressions of ETS1, cyclin D1, urokinase-type plasminogen activator (u-PA), and 
VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) were examined by Western blot to
elucidate the possible mechanisms involved.
RESULTS: In Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells, we observed that application of
GA-MNP-Fe(3)O(4) was able to suppress cancer cell proliferation and prevent cells
from migrating effectively. After treatment, Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells
showed significantly decreased expression of ETS1, as well as its downstream
target genes for cyclin D1, u-PA, and VEGF.
CONCLUSION: Our novel finding reaffirmed the significance of ETS1 in the
treatment of pancreatic cancer, and application of GA-MNP-Fe(3)O(4) nanoparticles
targeting ETS1 should be considered as a promising contribution for better
pancreatic cancer care.

PMCID: PMC3289442
PMID: 22393285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Dec;25(24):1111-4.

[Expression of matrix metalloproteinase-1, E26 transformation-specific-1 in
laryngeal carcinoma tissue and the clinical significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu C(1), Zhang S, Ma G, Liang J, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of
Chengde Medical College, Chengde, 067030, China. lch19245@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1),
E26 transformation-specific-1 (Ets-1) in laryngeal carcinoma and to discuss their
relevance and the roles in carcinogenesis and development of laryngeal carcinoma.
METHOD: Immunohistochemical technique was used to detect the expression of MMP-1 
and Ets-1 protein in 34 tissues of laryngeal carcinoma and 34 para-carcinoma
tissues, 15 cases of vocal cord polyps, and the use of the pathological image
analysis software, we analysis the results of immunohistochemical
semi-quantitatively.
RESULT: (1) The expression of MMP-1 and Ets-1 protein in laryngeal carcinoma
tissues is obviously higher than that in para-carcinoma and in vocal cord polyps 
respectively (P < 0.05). There is no significant difference between the
expression of para-carcinoma and vocal cord polyps(P > 0.05). (2) The expression 
of MMP-1, Ets-1 protein isn't related to patients' age and sex, tumor
size,clinical classification (P > 0.05), but related to pathological grade,
clinical stage and lymph nodes metastasis (P < 0.05). (3) There is a positive
correlation between the expression of MMP-1 and Ets-1 in laryngeal carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of MMP-1 and Ets-1 was observed in laryngeal
carcinoma. The high expression of MMP-1 and Ets-1 may contribute to the
carcinogenesis and development of laryngeal carcinoma,which is a important value 
to judge the malignant degree and progress of laryngeal carcinoma.

PMID: 22390030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Blood. 2012 Apr 19;119(16):3724-33. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-380634. Epub 2012 
Mar 1.

Chromatin occupancy analysis reveals genome-wide GATA factor switching during
hematopoiesis.

Doré LC(1), Chlon TM, Brown CD, White KP, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

There are many examples of transcription factor families whose members control
gene expression profiles of diverse cell types. However, the mechanism by which
closely related factors occupy distinct regulatory elements and impart lineage
specificity is largely undefined. Here we demonstrate on a genome wide scale that
the hematopoietic GATA factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 bind overlapping sets of genes, 
often at distinct sites, as a means to differentially regulate target gene
expression and to regulate the balance between proliferation and differentiation.
We also reveal that the GATA switch, which entails a chromatin occupancy exchange
between GATA2 and GATA1 in the course of differentiation, operates on more than
one-third of GATA1 bound genes. The switch is equally likely to lead to
transcriptional activation or repression; and in general, GATA1 and GATA2 act
oppositely on switch target genes. In addition, we show that genomic regions
co-occupied by GATA2 and the ETS factor ETS1 are strongly enriched for regions
marked by H3K4me3 and occupied by Pol II. Finally, by comparing GATA1 occupancy
in erythroid cells and megakaryocytes, we find that the presence of ETS factor
motifs is a major discriminator of megakaryocyte versus red cell specification.

PMCID: PMC3335379
PMID: 22383799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Feb 28;18(8):754-66. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i8.754.

Effects of resistin-like molecule ß over-expression on gastric cancer cells in
vitro.

Zheng LD(1), Yang CL, Qi T, Qi M, Tong L, Tong QS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Union Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, Hubei Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the effects of resistin-like molecule ß (RELMß)
over-expression on the invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis of gastric cancer
cells.
METHODS: Human RELMß encoding expression vector was constructed and transfected
into the RELMß lowly-expressed gastric cancer cell lines SGC-7901 and MKN-45.
Gene expression was measured by Western blotting, reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and real-time quantitative PCR. Cell
proliferation was measured by 2-(4,5-dimethyltriazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl
tetrazolium bromide colorimetry, colony formation and 5-ethynyl-20-deoxyuridine
incorporation assays. The in vitro migration, invasion and metastasis of cancer
cells were measured by cell adhesion assay, scratch assay and matrigel invasion
assay. The angiogenic capabilities of cancer cells were measured by tube
formation of endothelial cells.
RESULTS: Transfection of RELMß vector into SGC-7901 and MKN-45 cells resulted in 
over-expression of RELMß, which did not influence the cellular proliferation.
However, over-expression of RELMß suppressed the in vitro adhesion, invasion and 
metastasis of cancer cells, accompanied by decreased expression of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and MMP-9. Moreover, transfection of RELMß attenuated
the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and in vitro angiogenic
capabilities of cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: Over-expression of RELMß abolishes the invasion, metastasis and
angiogenesis of gastric cancer cells in vitro, suggesting its potentials as a
novel therapeutic target for gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3286138
PMID: 22371635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Life Sci. 2012 Nov 27;91(21-22):1122-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2012.02.004. Epub 2012
Feb 20.

Reciprocal effects of NNK and SLURP-1 on oncogene expression in target epithelial
cells.

Kalantari-Dehaghi M(1), Bernard HU, Grando SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

AIMS: To elucidate how the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors expressed on
bronchial and oral epithelial cells targeted by the tobacco nitrosamine
(4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone) (NNK) facilitate carcinogenic
transformation.
MAIN METHODS: Since NNK-dependent transformation can be abolished by the
nicotinergic secreted mammalian Ly-6/urokinase plasminogen activator receptor
related protein-1 (SLURP-1), we compared effects of NNK and recombinant
(r)SLURP-1 on the expression of genes related to tumorigenesis in human
immortalized bronchial and oral epithelial cell lines BEP2D and Het-1A,
respectively.
KEY FINDINGS: NNK stimulated expression of oncogenic genes, including MYB and
PIK3CA in BEP2D, ETS1, NRAS and SRC in Het-1A, and AKT1, KIT and RB1 in both cell
types, which could be abolished in the presence of rSLURP-1. Other cancer-related
genes whose upregulation by NNK was abolishable by rSLURP-1 were the growth
factors EGF in BEP2D cells and HGF in Het-1A cells, and the transcription factors
CDKN2A and STAT3 (Het-1A only). NNK also upregulated the anti-apoptotic BCL2
(Het-1A) and downregulated the pro-apoptotic TNF (Het-1A), BAX and CASP8 (BEP2D),
all of which could be abolished, in part, by rSLURP-1. NNK decreased expression
of the CTNNB1 gene encoding the intercellular adhesion molecule ß-catenin
(BEP2D), as well as tumor suppressors CDKN3 and FOXD3 in BEP2D cells and SERPINB5
in Het-1A cells. These pro-oncogenic effects of NNK were abolished by rSLURP-1
that also upregulated RUNX3.
SIGNIFICANCE: The obtained results identified target genes for both NNK and
SLURP-1 and shed light on the molecular mechanism of their reciprocal effects on 
tumorigenic transformation of bronchial and oral epithelial cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3371149
PMID: 22369755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jun;40(6):1748-54. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1380. Epub 2012 Feb
21.

ETS transcription factors and prostate cancer: the role of the family prototype
ETS-1 (review).

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany.

The ETS family of transcription factors is known to play important roles in
various biological processes such as development, differentiation, proliferation,
apoptosis, migration, tissue remodeling, invasion and angiogenesis in various
cell types including B cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts as well as diverse
neoplastic cells. In prostate cancer, recurrent gene fusions involving members of
the ETS family are frequently reported. ETS-1, the prototype of the ETS family,
is expressed in different cell types and is known to play various roles during
both physiological and pathological conditions. In this review, we focus on
studies investigating the role of ETS-1 in prostate cancer.

PMID: 22366814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. DNA Repair (Amst). 2012 May 1;11(5):470-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2012.01.016.
Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Double-strand break repair and recombination-dependent replication of DNA in
bacteriophage T4 in the absence of UvsX recombinase: replicative resolution
pathway.

Shcherbakov VP(1), Plugina L, Shcherbakova T, Kudryashova E, Sizova S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics RAS, Chernogolovka, Moscow Region
142432, Russia. svp@icp.ac.ru

The effects of mutations in bacteriophage T4 genes uvsX and 49 on the
double-strand break (DSB)-promoted recombination were studied in crosses, in
which DSBs were induced site-specifically within the rIIB gene by SegC
endonuclease in the DNA of only one of the parents. Frequency of rII+
recombinants was measured in two-factor crosses of the type i×ets1 and in
three-factor crosses of the type i×ets1 a6, where ets1 is an insertion in the
rIIB gene carrying the cleavage site for SegC; i's are rIIB or rIIA point
mutations located at various distances (12-2040 bp) from the ets1 site, and a6 is
rIIA point mutation located at 2040 bp from ets1. The frequency/distance
relationships were obtained in crosses of the wild-type phage and of the amber
mutant S17 (gene uvsX) and the double mutant S17 E727 (genes uvsX and 49). These 
data provide information about the frequency and distance distribution of the
single-exchange (splices) and double-exchange (patches) events. The extended
variant of the splice/patch coupling (SPC) model of recombination, which includes
transition to the replication resolution (RR) alternative is substantiated and
used for interpretation of the frequency/distance relationships. We conclude that
the uvsX mutant executes recombination-dependent replication but does it by a
qualitatively different way. In the absence of UvsX function, the DSB repair runs
largely through the RR subpathway because of inability of the mutant to form a
Holliday junction. In the two-factor crosses, the double uvsX 49- is
recombinationally more proficient than the single uvsX mutant (partial
suppression of the uvsX deficiency), while the patch-related double exchanges are
virtually eliminated in this background.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Vis. 2012;18:426-30. Epub 2012 Feb 11.

Lack of association of miR-146a and Ets-1 gene polymorphisms with Fuchs uveitis
syndrome in Chinese Han patients.

Zhou Q(1), Kijlstra A, Hou S, Yu H, Zhang X, Li X, Xiao X, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, and Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, P.R. China.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to investigate the potential association of
microRNA-146a (miR-146a) and V-Ets oncogene homolog 1 (Ets-1) gene polymorphisms 
with Fuchs Uveitis syndrome (FUS).
METHODS: Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), miR-146a/rs2910164,
ets-1/rs1128334, and ets-1/rs10893872 were genotyped in 219 Han Chinese patients 
with FUS and 612 healthy controls using the polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. Genotype counts were analyzed by 
the <U+03C7>² test.
RESULTS: No significant difference concerning the genotypic and allelic
frequencies of rs2910164, rs1128334, and rs10893872 polymorphisms could be found 
between patients with FUS and the normal controls. Analysis according to gender
did not show any influence of sex on the association of miR-146a and Ets-1 with
FUS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the investigated three SNPs,
miR-146a/rs2910164, ets-1/rs1128334, and ets-1/rs10893872, are not associated
with FUS in the Han Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC3283209
PMID: 22355253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dev Cell. 2012 Feb 14;22(2):459-67. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.12.010.

Opposing functions of the ETS factor family define Shh spatial expression in limb
buds and underlie polydactyly.

Lettice LA(1), Williamson I, Wiltshire JH, Peluso S, Devenney PS, Hill AE, Essafi
A, Hagman J, Mort R, Grimes G, DeAngelis CL, Hill RE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU,
UK.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression during limb development is crucial for specifying
the identity and number of digits. The spatial pattern of Shh expression is
restricted to a region called the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), and this
expression is controlled from a long distance by the cis-regulator ZRS. Here,
members of two groups of ETS transcription factors are shown to act directly at
the ZRS mediating a differential effect on Shh, defining its spatial expression
pattern. Occupancy at multiple GABPa/ETS1 sites regulates the position of the ZPA
boundary, whereas ETV4/ETV5 binding restricts expression outside the ZPA. The ETS
gene family is therefore attributed with specifying the boundaries of the
classical ZPA. Two point mutations within the ZRS change the profile of ETS
binding and activate Shh expression at an ectopic site in the limb bud. These
molecular changes define a pathogenetic mechanism that leads to preaxial
polydactyly (PPD).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3314984
PMID: 22340503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Am J Pathol. 2012 Apr;180(4):1495-508. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.12.021. Epub
2012 Feb 8.

Gene deletions and amplifications in human hepatocellular carcinomas: correlation
with hepatocyte growth regulation.

Nalesnik MA(1), Tseng G, Ding Y, Xiang GS, Zheng ZL, Yu Y, Marsh JW,
Michalopoulos GK, Luo JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15241, USA.

Tissues from 98 human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) obtained from hepatic
resections were subjected to somatic copy number variation (CNV) analysis. Most
of these HCCs were discovered in livers resected for orthotopic transplantation, 
although in a few cases, the tumors themselves were the reason for the
hepatectomies. Genomic analysis revealed deletions and amplifications in several 
genes, and clustering analysis based on CNV revealed five clusters. The LSP1 gene
had the most cases with CNV (46 deletions and 5 amplifications). High frequencies
of CNV were also seen in PTPRD (21/98), GNB1L (18/98), KIAA1217 (18/98),
RP1-1777G6.2 (17/98), ETS1 (11/98), RSU1 (10/98), TBC1D22A (10/98), BAHCC1
(9/98), MAML2 (9/98), RAB1B (9/98), and YIF1A (9/98). The existing literature
regarding hepatocytes or other cell types has connected many of these genes to
regulation of cytoskeletal architecture, signaling cascades related to growth
regulation, and transcription factors directly interacting with nuclear signaling
complexes. Correlations with existing literature indicate that genomic lesions
associated with HCC at the level of resolution of CNV occur on many genes
associated directly or indirectly with signaling pathways operating in liver
regeneration and hepatocyte growth regulation.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3657620
PMID: 22326833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Int J Cancer. 2012 Nov 1;131(9):2034-43. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27480. Epub 2012 Mar
27.

Acid ceramidase-mediated production of sphingosine 1-phosphate promotes prostate 
cancer invasion through upregulation of cathepsin B.

Beckham TH(1), Lu P, Cheng JC, Zhao D, Turner LS, Zhang X, Hoffman S, Armeson KE,
Liu A, Marrison T, Hannun YA, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

Invasiveness is one of the key features of aggressive prostate cancer; however,
our understanding of the precise mechanisms effecting invasion remains limited.
The ceramide hydrolyzing enzyme acid ceramidase (AC), overexpressed in most
prostate tumors, causes an aggressive and invasive phenotype through downstream
effectors that have not yet been well characterized. Here, we demonstrate that
AC, through generation of sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), promotes Ets1 nuclear
expression and binding to the promoter region of matrix-degrading protease
cathepsin B. Through confocal microscopy and flow cytometry, we found that AC
overexpression promotes pericellular localization of cathepsin B and its
translocation to the outer leaflet of the cell membrane. AC overexpressing cells 
have an increased abundance of cathepsin B-enriched invasive structures and
enhanced ability to invade through a collagen matrix, but not in the presence of 
an inhibitor of cathepsin B. In human prostate tissues, AC and cathepsin B
overexpression were strongly associated and may relate to poor outcome. These
results demonstrate a novel pathway by which AC, through S1P, promotes an
invasive phenotype in prostate cancer by causing overexpression and secretion of 
cathepsin B through activation and nuclear expression of Ets1. As prostate cancer
prognosis is dramatically worse when invasion has occurred, this study provides
critical insight into the progression toward lethal prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3384773
PMID: 22322590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Oncol Rep. 2012 May;27(5):1321-4. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1667. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Novel identification of the ETS-1 splice variants p42 and p27 in prostate cancer 
cell lines.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Ochsenfahrt J, Fuchs K, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany.

ETS-1 is involved in cellular functions such as proliferation, migration,
invasion, apoptosis and angiogenesis. The ETS-1 gene encodes three distinct
proteins, ETS-1 p51 encoded by a full-length mRNA, ETS-1 p42 and ETS-1 p27
encoded by an alternatively spliced mRNA lacking exon VII and exons III-VI,
respectively. ETS-1 p51, commonly considered to be the active form, has been
studied in prostate cancer (PCa). However, the ETS-1 p42 and p27 variants have
not yet been identified in PCa. Therefore, we aimed in this study at
investigating whether the splice variants p42 and p27 are expressed in the
androgen-dependent VCaP and LNCaP and the androgen-independent PC3 and DU-145 PCa
cell lines. Using RT-PCR, we found the expression of both splice variants p42 and
p27 at the mRNA level in the VCaP, LNCaP, PC3 and DU-145 PCa cell lines. We then 
confirmed the expression of ETS-1 p51 and its splice variants p42 and p27 at the 
protein level using an anti-ETS-1 antibody directed against the DNA-binding
domain (DBD) in lysates prepared from the latter-mentioned cell lines, as well as
in PC3 cell nuclear extract. Moreover, differences in the expression ratios of
the ETS-1 splice variants within each cell line were also found. In conclusion,
we have demonstrated for the first time the novel identification of the ETS-1
splice variants p42 and p27 in PCa cell lines. It is very likely that the role of
ETS-1 p51 in PCa is significantly influenced by the presence of its splice
variants ETS-1 p42 and p27 as competition, abundance, affinity, interactions and 
cross-talk among them will eventually determine the genes that will be targeted
and subsequently affect cellular functions. Follow-up studies will need to
address in functional terms, the roles of these splice variants in PCa cell
lines, as well as their expression in PCa tissues and its correlation with
clinical outcome.

PMID: 22307076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Pathol. 2012 Jun;227(2):245-53. doi: 10.1002/path.3998. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

An osteosarcoma zebrafish model implicates Mmp-19 and Ets-1 as well as reduced
host immune response in angiogenesis and migration.

Mohseny AB(1), Xiao W, Carvalho R, Spaink HP, Hogendoorn PC, Cleton-Jansen AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

About 40% of osteosarcoma patients die of metastases. Novel strategies to improve
treatment of metastatic patients require a better understanding of the processes 
involved, like angiogenesis, migration, and the immune response. However, the
rarity of osteosarcoma and its heterogeneity make this neoplasm difficult to
study. Recently we reported malignant transformation of mouse mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) which formed osteosarcoma upon transplantation into mice. Here we
studied these cells in zebrafish embryos and found that transformed MSCs induced 
angiogenesis and migrated through the bodies of the embryos, but this was never
observed with non-transformed normal MSCs (progenitors of the transformed MSCs). 
Whole genome expression analysis of both the cells and the host showed that
angiogenesis and migration-related genes matrix metalloproteinase 19 (Mmp-19) and
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homologue 1 (Ets-1) were overexpressed in
transformed MSCs compared to normal MSCs. Investigating the host response,
embryos injected with transformed MSCs showed decreased expression of immune
response-related genes, especially major histocompatibility complex class 1
(mhc1ze), as compared to embryos injected with normal MSCs. These findings
contribute to the identification of genetic events involved in angiogenesis,
migration, and host response providing targets as well as an appropriate model
for high-throughput drug screens.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22297719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mucosal Immunol. 2012 Mar;5(2):207-15. doi: 10.1038/mi.2011.67. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

c-Ets1 inhibits the interaction of NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB, and downregulates
IL-1ß-induced MUC5AC overproduction during airway inflammation.

Song KS(1), Yoon JH, Kim KS, Ahn DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Kosin University College of Medicine, Busan, Korea.

Mucin hypersecretion is frequently observed in many inflammatory diseases of the 
human respiratory tract. As mucin hypersecretion refers to uncontrolled mucin
expression and secretion during inflammation, studies examining the negative
control mechanisms of mucin hypersecretion are vital in developing novel
therapeutic medications. We hypothesized that the c-Ets1 induced by interleukin
(IL)-1ß would decrease MUC5AC overproduction by inhibiting the interaction of
NF-<U+03BA>B with cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) in vivo. Stimulation with
IL-1ß caused the direct binding of NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB to the MUC5AC promoter, thus
increasing MUC5AC gene expression. However, IL-1ß-induced MUC5AC messenger RNA
levels were surprizingly downregulated by c-Ets1 (located -938 to -930).
Interestingly, c-Ets1 also suppressed IL-1ß-induced MUC5AC gene expression in
vitro and in vivo by disrupting the interaction of NF-<U+03BA>B with CREB on the MUC5AC 
promoter. In addition, c-Ets1 also inhibited significant morphologic changes and 
inflammatory cell infiltration after IL-1ß exposure in mouse lungs infected with 
either wild-type or shRNA-c-Ets1. Moreover, reactive oxygen species produced by
NOX4 increased c-Ets1 gene expression and MUC5AC gene expression in alveolar
macrophages from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. These results suggest a molecular 
paradigm for the establishment of a novel mechanism underlying the negative
regulation of mucin overproduction, thus enhancing our understanding of airway
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3282431
PMID: 22294049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 27;287(18):15001-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.284034. Epub
2012 Jan 23.

ETS-1 protein regulates vascular endothelial growth factor-induced matrix
metalloproteinase-9 and matrix metalloproteinase-13 expression in human ovarian
carcinoma cell line SKOV-3.

Ghosh S(1), Basu M, Roy SS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Physiology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 4 Raja S. C. Mullick
Road, Kolkata 700032, India.

Matrix metalloproteinase-mediated degradation of extracellular matrix is a
crucial event for invasion and metastasis of malignant cells. The expressions of 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are regulated by different cytokines and growth 
factors. VEGF, a potent angiogenic cytokine, induces invasion of ovarian cancer
cells through activation of MMPs. Here, we demonstrate that invasion and
scattering in SKOV-3 cells were induced by VEGF through the activation of p38
MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways. VEGF induced the expression of MMP-2, MMP-9, and
MMP-13 and hence regulated the metastasis of SKOV-3 ovarian cancer cells, and the
activities of these MMPs were reduced after inhibition of PI3K/AKT and p38 MAPK
pathways. Interestingly, VEGF induced expression of ETS-1 factor, an important
trans-regulator of different MMP genes. ETS-1 bound to both MMP-9 and MMP-13
promoters. Furthermore, VEGF acted through its receptor to perform the said
functions. In addition, VEGF-induced MMP-9 and MMP-13 expression and in vitro
cell invasion were significantly reduced after knockdown of ETS-1 gene. Again,
VEGF-induced MMP-9 and MMP-13 promoter activities were down-regulated in ETS-1
siRNA-transfected cells. VEGF enriched ETS-1 in the nuclear fraction in a
dose-dependent manner. VEGF-induced expression of ETS-1 and its nuclear
localization were blocked by specific inhibitors of the PI3K and p38 MAPK
pathways. Therefore, based on these observations, it is hypothesized that the
activation of PI3K/AKT and p38 MAPK by VEGF results in ETS-1 gene expression,
which activates MMP-9 and MMP-13, leading to the invasion and scattering of
SKOV-3 cells. The study provides a mechanistic insight into the prometastatic
functions of VEGF-induced expression of relevant MMPs.

PMCID: PMC3340257
PMID: 22270366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 1;188(5):2244-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101614. Epub 2012
Jan 20.

Interaction of Ets-1 with HDAC1 represses IL-10 expression in Th1 cells.

Lee CG(1), Kwon HK, Sahoo A, Hwang W, So JS, Hwang JS, Chae CS, Kim GC, Kim JE,
So HS, Hwang ES, Grenningloh R, Ho IC, Im SH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Immune Synapse Research Center, Gwangju Institute 
of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, The Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2012 Dec 15;189(12):5996.

IL-10 is a multifunctional cytokine that plays a crucial role in immunity and
tolerance. IL-10 is produced by diverse immune cell types, including B cells and 
subsets of T cells. Although Th1 produce IL-10, their expression levels are much 
lower than Th2 cells under conventional stimulation conditions. The potential
role of E26 transformation-specific 1 (Ets-1) transcription factor as a negative 
regulator for Il10 gene expression in CD4(+) T cells has been implicated
previously. In this study, we investigated the underlying mechanism of
Ets-1-mediated Il10 gene repression in Th1 cells. Compared with wild type Th1
cells, Ets-1 knockout Th1 cells expressed a significantly higher level of IL-10, 
which is comparable with that of wild type Th2 cells. Upregulation of IL-10
expression in Ets-1 knockout Th1 cells was accompanied by enhanced chromatin
accessibility and increased recruitment of histone H3 acetylation at the Il10
regulatory regions. Reciprocally, Ets-1 deficiency significantly decreased
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) enrichment at the Il10 regulatory regions.
Treatment with trichostatin A, an inhibitor of HDAC family, significantly
increased Il10 gene expression by increasing histone H3 acetylation recruitment. 
We further demonstrated a physical interaction between Ets-1 and HDAC1.
Coexpression of Ets-1 with HDAC1 synergistically repressed IL-10 transcription
activity. In summary, our data suggest that an interaction of Ets-1 with HDAC1
represses the Il10 gene expression in Th1 cells.

PMID: 22266280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Mar;33(3):572-80. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs007. Epub 2012 Jan 
9.

ETS1 transcriptional activity is increased in advanced prostate cancer and
promotes the castrate-resistant phenotype.

Smith AM(1), Findlay VJ, Bandurraga SG, Kistner-Griffin E, Spruill LS, Liu A,
Golshayan AR, Turner DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Advanced disease accounts for the majority of prostate cancer-related deaths and 
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is the standard of care for these patients.
Many patients undergoing ADT become resistant to its effects and progress to
castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Current therapies for CRPC patients
are inadequate, with progression-free survival rates as low as 2 months. The
molecular events that promote CRPC are poorly understood. ETS (v-ets
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene) transcription factors are regulators of
carcinogenesis. Protein levels of the archetypical ETS factor, ETS1, are
increased in clinical and latent prostate cancer relative to benign prostatic
hyperplasia and normal prostate to promote multiple cancer-associated processes, 
such as energy metabolism, matrix degradation, survival, angiogenesis, migration 
and invasion. Our studies have found that ETS1 expression is highest in
high-grade prostate cancer (Gleason 7 and above). Increased ETS1 expression and
transcriptional activity promotes an aggressive and castrate-resistant phenotype 
in immortalized prostate cancer cells. Elevated AKT (v-akt murine thymoma viral
oncogene homolog) activity was demonstrated to increase ETS1 protein levels
specifically in castrate-resistant cells and exogenous ETS1 expression was
sufficient to rescue invasive potential decreased by inhibition of AKT activity. 
Significantly, targeted androgen receptor activity altered ETS1 expression, which
in turn altered the castrate-resistant phenotype. These data suggest a role for
oncogenic ETS1 transcriptional activity in promoting aggressive prostate cancer
and the castrate-resistant phenotype.

PMID: 22232738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Histopathology. 2012 Jan;60(2):287-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04086.x.

Intramucosal variant of nasal natural killer (NK)/T cell lymphoma has a better
survival than does invasive variant: implication on loss of E26
transformation-specific sequence 1 (ETS-1) and T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet)
with invasion.

Lin TC(1), Chen SU, Chen YF, Chang YC, Lin CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

AIMS: Nasal natural killer/T cell lymphoma (NNKTCL) arises from the nasal mucosa,
and spreads to adjacent tissues via local invasion or to regional lymph nodes and
distant sites via metastasis. The aims of this study were to determine the impact
of invasion on the prognosis of NNKTCL, and correlate invasion with the
expression of cytotoxic markers of lymphoma cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Histopathological evaluations of invasion and
immunohistochemistry for cytotoxic markers, including E26 transformation-specific
sequence 1 (ETS-1), T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet), signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT-1), CD56 and granzyme B (GB), were performed in 
64 NNKTCLs. There were 17 stage I cases without invasion (stage Ia or
intramucosal), 21 stage I cases with invasion (stage Ib), 16 stage II cases and
10 stages III/IV cases. Stage Ia NNKTCLs had a better 5-year overall survival
rate than that of stages Ib, II or III/IV NNKTCLs (85%, 38%, 33% and 20%,
respectively, P < 0.001 by log-rank test). Loss of ETS-1 was found in 24% (four
of 17) stage Ia NNKTCLs and in 65% (28 of 43) stages Ib/II/III/IV NNKTCLs (P =
0.04, Fisher's exact test); loss of T-bet was found in 29% (five of 17) stage Ia 
NNKTCLs and in 67% (30 of 45) stages Ib/II/III/IV NNKTCLs (P = 0.02, Fisher's
exact test).
CONCLUSIONS: NNKTCL is classically an aggressive lymphoma, but the intramucosal
variant is less aggressive. Loss of ETS-1 or T-bet correlated weakly with
invasion, a finding that requires further confirmation.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 22211287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Stem Cells Regen Med. 2012 Nov 26;8(3):190-7. eCollection 2012.

Localization and Molecular Characterization of human Breast Cancer Initiating
Cells from heterogeneous population of Breast Cancer Mesenchymal Stem cells by
Immunofluorescence Microscopy.

Potdar P(1), Monteiro F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Biology, Jaslok Hospital and Research
Centre , 15, Dr. G. Deshmukh Road, Mumbai- 400026, Maharashtra, India.

Breast Cancer (BC) is a heterogeneous disease and arises from breast cancer
initiating stem cell population in the tumor and these cells are resistant to
cancer therapies. Thus identifying this cell type within the tumor clone is an
important area of research to understand the mechanism of breast cancer
development. Recently, our laboratory has isolated and characterized Human breast
cancer mesenchymal stem cells (hBCMSCs) from human breast cancer and showed the
heterogeneity of these cells existing in the tumor. Therefore, our present
objective is to use this model system to identify, localize and define specific
breast cancer initiating cells (BCICs) from the heterogeneous population of
hBCMSCs cell line developed in our laboratory. Localization of specific cell
types can be done by using specific cancer marker antibodies using
Immunofluorescence microscopy. In this study we have used FITC labeled specific
cancer antibodies i.e. p53, Rb1, Hras, Ki67, EGFR, GST, ETS1 and ATF2 to localize
BCICs in this population of cells. Our results have demonstrated that few cells
among many of the BC cells gave fluorescence with specific cancer antibody
indicating that these cell types are BCICs that may be responsible for supporting
the growth of other cell type to form tumors. The Phase Contrast Microscopy
clearly showed giant cells with enlarged nucleus and scanty cytoplasm associated 
with many cytoplasmic granules. It also indicates that these cells are mainly
responsible for supporting proliferation of surrounding cells that form a part of
the BC tumor. We have further hypothesized that molecular profiling of these
tumor cells will open a new avenue of molecular targeted therapies for Breast
Cancer patients even at an advanced stage of disease.

PMCID: PMC3908297
PMID: 24693197  [PubMed]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 20;417(3):966-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.12.047. Epub 2011 Dec 20.

ETS1 promotes chemoresistance and invasion of paclitaxel-resistant,
hormone-refractory PC3 prostate cancer cells by up-regulating MDR1 and MMP9
expression.

Kato T(1), Fujita Y, Nakane K, Kojima T, Nozawa Y, Deguchi T, Ito M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

ETS1, which belongs to the ETS transcription factor family, plays important roles
in diverse aspects of cancer such as drug resistance and metastasis. In the
present study, we examined the functional roles of ETS1 in paclitaxel resistance 
and invasion using human prostate cancer PC3 cells and paclitaxel-resistant PC3PR
cells established from PC3 cells. Our results showed that ETS1mRNA and protein
expression was markedly up-regulated in paclitaxel-resistant PC3PR cells compared
with paclitaxel-sensitive PC3 cells. The mRNA levels of MDR1 as well as MMP1,
MMP3, MMP9 and uPA were positively correlated with that of ETS1. In PC3PR cells, 
silencing of ETS1 expression by siRNAs inhibited the activity of the MDR1
promoter containing ETS binding sites, reduced the mRNA and protein levels of
MDR1 and suppressed paclitaxel resistance. Furthermore, ETS1 knockdown decreased 
secretion of MMP9 as well as its intracellular mRNA level, and dramatically
inhibited invasion of PC3PR cells. Our results suggest that ETS1 promotes
paclitaxel resistance and invasion in part by up-regulating MDR1 and MMP9
expression. Taken together, a novel therapeutic strategy targeting the ETS1 gene 
could be designed to overcome chemoresistance and metastasis of taxane-resistant,
hormone-refractory prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22206665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Exp Mol Med. 2012 Mar 31;44(3):241-9. doi: 10.3858/emm.2012.44.3.020.

Gene mapping study for constitutive skin color in an isolated Mongolian
population.

Paik SH(1), Kim HJ, Son HY, Lee S, Im SW, Ju YS, Yeon JH, Jo SJ, Eun HC, Seo JS, 
Kwon OS, Kim JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul
110-799, Korea.

To elucidate the genes responsible for constitutive human skin color, we measured
the extent of skin pigmentation in the buttock, representative of lifelong
non-sun-exposed skin, and conducted a gene mapping study on skin color in an
isolated Mongolian population composed of 344 individuals from 59 families who
lived in Dashbalbar, Mongolia. The heritability of constitutive skin color was
0.82, indicating significant genetic association on this trait. Through the
linkage analysis using 1,039 short tandem repeat (STR) microsatellite markers, we
identified a novel genomic region regulating constitutive skin color on 11q24.2
with an logarithm of odds (LOD) score of 3.39. In addition, we also found other
candidate regions on 17q23.2, 6q25.1, and 13q33.2 (LOD = 2). Family-based
association tests on these regions with suggestive linkage peaks revealed ten and
two significant single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the linkage regions of 
chromosome 11 and 17, respectively. We were able to discover four possible
candidate genes that would be implicated to regulate human skin color: ETS1,
UBASH3B, ASAM, and CLTC.

PMCID: PMC3317488
PMID: 22198297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Neurosurgery. 2012 Jun;70(6):1534-43; discussion 1543. doi:
10.1227/NEU.0b013e318246a390.

Regression of intracranial aneurysms by simultaneous inhibition of nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B and Ets with chimeric decoy oligodeoxynucleotide treatment.

Aoki T(1), Kataoka H, Nishimura M, Ishibashi R, Morishita R, Miyamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto City, Kyoto, Japan.

Erratum in
    Neurosurgery. 2012 Aug;71(2):502.

BACKGROUND: Despite a high mortality and morbidity of subarachnoid hemorrhage due
to an intracranial aneurysm (IA), there is no effective medical treatment to
prevent the rupture of IAs. Recent studies have revealed the involvement of the
transactivation of proinflammatory genes by nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and Ets-1
in the pathogenesis of IA formation and enlargement.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the regressive effect of chimeric decoy
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs), which simultaneously inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B and Ets-1, on IA
development in the rat model.
METHODS: One month after IA induction, rats were treated with NF-<U+03BA>B decoy ODNs or
chimeric decoy ODNs. Size, media thickness, macrophage infiltration, and collagen
biosynthesis in IA walls were analyzed in both groups.
RESULTS: The treatment with chimeric decoy ODNs decreased IA size and thickened
IA walls of preexisting IAs induced in the rat model, although the treatment with
NF-<U+03BA>B decoy ODNs failed to regress preexisting IAs. Chimeric decoy ODN-treated
rats exhibited decreased expression of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 and
macrophage infiltration in IA walls. In addition, decreased collagen biosynthesis
in IA walls was ameliorated in the chimeric decoy ODN-treated group.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest the possibility of a minimally invasive molecular
therapy targeting the inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B and ets-1 for IAs in humans.

PMID: 22186838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2012:188-99.

Modulating protein-DNA interactions by post-translational modifications at
disordered regions.

Vuzman D(1), Hoffman Y, Levy Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel. dana.golbin@weizmann.ac.il

Intrinsically disordered regions, particularly disordered tails, are very common 
in DNA-binding proteins (DBPs). The ability of disordered tails to modulate
specific and nonspecific interactions with DNA is tightly linked to their being
rich in positively charged residues that are often non-randomly distributed along
the tail. Perturbing the composition and distribution of charged residues in the 
disordered regions by post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation
and acetylation, may impair the ability of the tail to interact nonspecifically
with DNA by reducing its DNA affinity. In this study, we analyzed datasets of
3398 and 8943 human proteins that undergo acetylation or phosphorylation,
respectively. Both modifications are common on the disordered tails of DBPs (3.1 
± 0.2 (0.07 ± 0.007) and 2.0 ± 0.2 (0.02 ± 0.003) acetylation and phosphorylation
sites per tail (per tail residue), respectively). Phosphorylation sites are
abundant in disordered regions and particularly in flexible tails for both DBPs
and non-DBPs. While acetylation sites are also frequently occurred in the
disordered tails of DBPs, in non-DBPs they are often found in ordered regions.
This difference may indicate that acetylation has different function in DBPs and 
non-DBPs. Post-translational modifications, which often take place at disordered 
sites of DBPs, can modulate the interactions of proteins with DNA by changing the
local and global properties of the tails. The effect of the modulation can be
tuned by adjusting the number of modifications and the cross-talks between them.

PMID: 22174274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Br J Haematol. 2012 Mar;156(5):601-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08962.x.
Epub 2011 Dec 8.

Behind the scenes of non-nodal MCL: downmodulation of genes involved in actin
cytoskeleton organization, cell projection, cell adhesion, tumour invasion, TP53 
pathway and mutated status of immunoglobulin heavy chain genes.

Del Giudice I(1), Messina M, Chiaretti S, Santangelo S, Tavolaro S, De Propris
MS, Nanni M, Pescarmona E, Mancini F, Pulsoni A, Martelli M, Di Rocco A,
Finolezzi E, Paoloni F, Mauro FR, Cuneo A, Guarini A, Foà R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology, Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and
Haematology, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive neoplasm with a short survival. Cases
with leukaemic MCL and splenomegaly without adenopathies (non-nodal MCL) may have
a more indolent course. To gain insights into the biological features underlying 
this presentation, we investigated the gene expression profile (GEP) and the IGHV
mutational status in a cohort of leukaemic MCL cases. Comparison of MCL with
other lymphoproliferative disorders (i.e. splenic marginal zone lymphoma,
follicular lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia) revealed a MCL signature
enriched for the following gene categories: mitochondrion, oxidoreductase
activity, response to stress, to DNA damage and TP53-pathway. Furthermore, GEP
analysis revealed that non-nodal MCL cases were characterized by the
down-modulation of the following gene categories: cell projection, actin
cytoskeleton organization, cell adhesion (ITGAE, CELSR1, PCDH9) and tumour
invasion/progression (PGF, ST14, ETS1, OCIAD1, EZR). Many down-modulated genes
were related to the TP53-pathway and to DNA damage response. IGHV status proved
unmutated in all nodal and mutated in all non-nodal MCL. Non-nodal leukaemic MCLs
display a peculiar clinical presentation, with distinctive biological features,
such as mutated IGHV and a transcriptional profile lacking tumour invasion
properties, that might contribute to the absence of nodal involvement and to the 
less aggressive clinical course.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22150124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026952. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Immune response and mitochondrial metabolism are commonly deregulated in DMD and 
aging skeletal muscle.

Baron D(1), Magot A, Ramstein G, Steenman M, Fayet G, Chevalier C, Jourdon P,
Houlgatte R, Savagner F, Pereon Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR915, Nantes, France. daniel.baron@inserm.fr

Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is a complex process involving multiple
pathways downstream of the primary genetic insult leading to fatal muscle
degeneration. Aging muscle is a multifactorial neuromuscular process
characterized by impaired muscle regeneration leading to progressive atrophy. We 
hypothesized that these chronic atrophying situations may share specific myogenic
adaptative responses at transcriptional level according to tissue remodeling.
Muscle biopsies from four young DMD and four AGED subjects were referred to a
group of seven muscle biopsies from young subjects without any neuromuscular
disorder and explored through a dedicated expression microarray. We identified
528 differentially expressed genes (out of 2,745 analyzed), of which 328 could be
validated by an exhaustive meta-analysis of public microarray datasets referring 
to DMD and Aging in skeletal muscle. Among the 328 validated co-expressed genes, 
50% had the same expression profile in both groups and corresponded to
immune/fibrosis responses and mitochondrial metabolism. Generalizing these
observed meta-signatures with large compendia of public datasets reinforced our
results as they could be also identified in other pathological processes and in
diverse physiological conditions. Focusing on the common gene signatures in these
two atrophying conditions, we observed enrichment in motifs for candidate
transcription factors that may coordinate either the immune/fibrosis responses
(ETS1, IRF1, NF1) or the mitochondrial metabolism (ESRRA). Deregulation in their 
expression could be responsible, at least in part, for the same transcriptome
changes initiating the chronic muscle atrophy. This study suggests that distinct 
pathophysiological processes may share common gene responses and pathways related
to specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3212519
PMID: 22096509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Arthritis Res Ther. 2011;13(6):R186. doi: 10.1186/ar3514. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Replicated associations of TNFAIP3, TNIP1 and ETS1 with systemic lupus
erythematosus in a southwestern Chinese population.

Zhong H(1), Li XL, Li M, Hao LX, Chen RW, Xiang K, Qi XB, Ma RZ, Su B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China.

INTRODUCTION: Recent genome-wide and candidate gene association studies in large 
numbers of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients have suggested
approximately 30 susceptibility genes. These genes are involved in three types of
biological processes, including immune complex processing, toll-like receptor
function and type I interferon production, and immune signal transduction in
lymphocytes, and they may contribute to the pathogenesis of SLE. To better
understand the genetic risk factors of SLE, we investigated the associations of
seven SLE susceptibility genes in a Chinese population, including FCGR3A, FCGR2A,
TNFAIP3, TLR9, TREX1, ETS1 and TNIP1.
METHODS: A total of 20 SNPs spanning the seven SLE susceptibility genes were
genotyped in a sample of 564 unrelated SLE patients and 504 unrelated healthy
controls recruited from Yunnan, southwestern China. The associations of SNPs with
SLE were assessed by statistical analysis.
RESULTS: Five SNPs in two genes (TNFAIP3 and ETS1) were significantly associated 
with SLE (corrected P values ranging from 0.03 to 5.5 × 10(-7)). Through
stratified analysis, TNFAIP3 and ETS1 showed significant associations with
multiple SLE subphenotypes (such as malar rash, arthritis, hematologic disorder
and antinuclear antibody) while TNIP1 just showed relatively weak association
with onset age. The associations of the SNPs in the other four genes were not
replicated.
CONCLUSIONS: The replication analysis indicates that TNFAIP3, ETS1 and TNIP1 are 
probably common susceptibility genes for SLE in Chinese populations, and they may
contribute to the pathogenesis of multiple SLE subphenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3334635
PMID: 22087647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26894. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026894. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Genome-wide binding map of the HIV-1 Tat protein to the human genome.

Marban C(1), Su T, Ferrari R, Li B, Vatakis D, Pellegrini M, Zack JA, Rohr O,
Kurdistani SK.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Virologie, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

The HIV-1 Trans-Activator of Transcription (Tat) protein binds to multiple host
cellular factors and greatly enhances the level of transcription of the HIV
genome. While Tat's control of viral transcription is well-studied, much less is 
known about the interaction of Tat with the human genome. Here, we report the
genome-wide binding map of Tat to the human genome in Jurkat T cells using
chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with next-generation sequencing.
Surprisingly, we found that ~53% of the Tat target regions are within DNA repeat 
elements, greater than half of which are Alu sequences. The remaining target
regions are located in introns and distal intergenic regions; only ~7% of
Tat-bound regions are near transcription start sites (TSS) at gene promoters.
Interestingly, Tat binds to promoters of genes that, in Jurkat cells, are bound
by the ETS1 transcription factor, the CBP histone acetyltransferase and/or are
enriched for histone H3 lysine 4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) and H3K27me3. Tat
binding is associated with genes enriched with functions in T cell biology and
immune response. Our data reveal that Tat's interaction with the host genome is
more extensive than previously thought, with potentially important implications
for the viral life cycle.

PMCID: PMC3208564
PMID: 22073215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):439-49. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.023. Epub 2011 
Oct 26.

ETS-dependent regulation of a distal Gata4 cardiac enhancer.

Schachterle W(1), Rojas A, Xu SM, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158-2517, USA.

The developing heart contains an inner tube of specialized endothelium known as
endocardium, which performs multiple essential functions. In spite of the
essential role of the endocardium in heart development and function, the
transcriptional pathways that regulate its development remain largely undefined. 
GATA4 is a zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed in multiple
cardiovascular lineages and is required for endocardial cushion development and
embryonic viability, but the transcriptional pathways upstream of Gata4 in the
endocardium and its derivatives in the endocardial cushions are unknown. Here, we
describe a distal enhancer from the mouse Gata4 gene that is briefly active in
multiple cardiac lineages early in cardiac development but restricts to the
endocardium where it remains active through cardiogenesis. The activity of this
Gata4 cardiac enhancer in transgenic embryos and in cultured aortic endothelial
cells is dependent on four ETS sites. To identify which ETS transcription factors
might be involved in Gata4 regulation via the ETS sites in the enhancer, we
determined the expression profile of 24 distinct ETS factors in embryonic mouse
hearts. Among multiple ETS transcripts present, ETS1, FLI1, ETV1, ETV5, ERG, and 
ETV6 were the most abundant in the early embryonic heart. We found that ETS1,
FLI1, and ERG were strongly expressed in the heart at embryonic day 8.5 and that 
ETS1 and ERG bound to the endogenous Gata4 enhancer in cultured endothelial
cells. Thus, these studies define the ETS expression profile in the early
embryonic heart and identify an ETS-dependent enhancer from the Gata4 locus.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3246565
PMID: 22056786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Int J Oncol. 2012 Feb;40(2):494-500. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1229. Epub 2011 Oct
13.

Heparanase expression is associated with histone modifications in glioblastoma.

Hong X(1), Nelson K, Lemke N, Kalkanis SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Henry Ford Health System, 2799 W Grand Blvd,
Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

In this study we investigated epigenetic modifications such as DNA methylation,
histone acetylation and histone methylation in the regulation of heparanase
expression in glioblastoma. We found that heparanase promoters are differentially
methylated among three glioblastoma cell lines; however, all these cells
expressed baseline levels of heparanase. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC), a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, revoked heparanase expression in all the examined
cells. Trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, activated
heparanase expression in promoter unmethylated LN229 and T98G cells but not in
promoter methylated U251n cells. To identify the mechanisms of heparanase
induction by 5-Aza-dC, heparanase expression-related transcription factors were
examined. No detected transcription factors (EGR1, Ets1, GABPa and Sp1) were
found to be induced either by 5-Aza-dC or TSA. Furthermore, we found that
5-Aza-dC increased acetylation of histone H3 and di-methylation of histone H3
lysine K4 (H3K4me2) in LN229 and T98G cells. The increased histone acetylation
and H3K4me2 were also observed in heparanase-expressing tumor tissues by
immunohistochemistry staining. Additionally, we found that nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
(NF<U+03BA>B) p65 but not NF<U+03BA>B p50 was correlated with heparanase expression, which
could be expressed both by neoplastic cells and angiogenesis-related neovessel
cells. However, we did not observe any regulatory mechanism between heparanase
and NF<U+03BA>B p65 via transient transfection of their cDNA in T98G and U251n cells. We
concluded that heparanase expression is associated with histone modifications and
promoter DNA methylation plays a role in the control of gene silencing.
Overexpression of both heparanase and NF<U+03BA>B p65 may be the result of excessive
histone modifications.

PMID: 22001963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Development. 2011 Nov;138(21):4709-19. doi: 10.1242/dev.067710.

Analysis of gene networks in white adipose tissue development reveals a role for 
ETS2 in adipogenesis.

Birsoy K(1), Berry R, Wang T, Ceyhan O, Tavazoie S, Friedman JM, Rodeheffer MS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Obesity is characterized by an expansion of white adipose tissue mass that
results from an increase in the size and the number of adipocytes. However, the
mechanisms responsible for the formation of adipocytes during development and the
molecular mechanisms regulating their increase and maintenance in adulthood are
poorly understood. Here, we report the use of leptin-luciferase BAC transgenic
mice to track white adipose tissue (WAT) development and guide the isolation and 
molecular characterization of adipocytes during development using DNA
microarrays. These data reveal distinct transcriptional programs that are
regulated during murine WAT development in vivo. By using a de novo
cis-regulatory motif discovery tool (FIRE), we identify two early gene clusters
whose promoters show significant enrichment for NRF2/ETS transcription factor
binding sites. We further demonstrate that Ets transcription factors, but not
Nrf2, are regulated during early adipogenesis and that Ets2 is essential for the 
normal progression of the adipocyte differentiation program in vitro. These data 
identify ETS2 as a functionally important transcription factor in adipogenesis
and its possible role in regulating adipose tissue mass in adults can now be
tested. Our approach also provides the basis for elucidating the function of
other gene networks during WAT development in vivo. Finally these data confirm
that although gene expression during adipogenesis in vitro recapitulates many of 
the patterns of gene expression in vivo, there are additional developmental
transitions in pre and post-natal adipose tissue that are not evident in cell
culture systems.

PMCID: PMC3190384
PMID: 21989915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Oncogene. 2012 Jun 7;31(23):2888-98. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.460. Epub 2011 Oct 10.

A positive feedback loop between HER2 and ADAM12 in human head and neck cancer
cells increases migration and invasion.

Rao VH(1), Kandel A, Lynch D, Pena Z, Marwaha N, Deng C, Watson P, Hansen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton University School of Medicine,
Omaha, NE 68178, USA.

Increased activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family members
such as HER2/Erbb2 can result in more aggressive disease, resistance to
chemotherapy and reduced survival of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) patients. In order to identify mechanisms through which these receptor
tyrosine kinases accelerate tumor progression, the regulation of metalloprotease 
expression by EGFR family members was investigated in 11 squamous cell carcinoma 
(SCC) cell lines. HER2 expression was significantly correlated with ADAM12 (A
Disintegrin And Metalloprotease 12) expression in these cell lines and was
co-expressed in human head and neck cancers. Inhibition of HER2 or EGFR decreased
ADAM12 transcripts whereas HER2 transfection upregulated ADAM12 expression. To
understand the molecular mechanisms underlying HER2 regulation of ADAM12, we
investigated the signaling pathways directing ADAM12 production in SCC cells.
Inhibition of phosphatidyl inositol-3-kinase or mammalian target of rapamycin
decreased ADAM12 transcripts in HER2-expressing SCC cells, whereas transfection
with AKT increased ADAM12 mRNA. Experiments utilizing ADAM12 transfection or
siRNA targeting of ADAM12 revealed that the protease increased both the migration
and invasiveness of oral SCC cells. Surprisingly, ADAM12 also increased HER2
message, protein levels and activity through an Ets1-dependent mechanism.
Collectively, these results reveal a novel positive activation loop between
ADAM12 and HER2 that may contribute to HNSCC progression.

PMCID: PMC3302945
PMID: 21986939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Pathol Res Pract. 2011 Oct 15;207(10):628-33. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.07.010.
Epub 2011 Sep 21.

ETS-1 proto-oncogene as a key newcomer molecule to predict invasiveness in
laryngeal carcinoma.

Calli AO(1), Sari A, Cakalagaoglu F, Altinboga AA, Oncel S.

Author information: 
(1)Izmir Training and Research Hospital, Department of Pathology, Yesilyurt,
Turkey. calliaylin@gmail.com

ETS-1 protein is one of the key regulators in tumor invasion and progression. We 
aimed to evaluate the role of ETS-1 in the invasiveness and progression of
laryngeal squamous carcinoma, as well as to determine the correlations between
clinicopathological characteristics and expression of this molecule. We assessed 
the levels of ETS-1 in a total of 96 laryngeal specimens of varying degrees of
dysplasia, microinvasive squamous carcinoma (8), and invasive squamous carcinoma 
(60), using normal mucosal epithelium (10) as a positive control. The
relationship between ETS-1 expression and clinicopathological parameters of
laryngeal carcinoma was also analyzed. We found a significantly higher ETS-1
expression in invasive laryngeal squamous cell carcinomas than in dysplasia
(P<0.001). A correlation between ETS-1 expression scores and grade was detected -
T factor, stage, cartilage invasion, lymph node metastasis, as well as depth of
invasion in laryngeal tumors. Our study is the first to demonstrate that ETS-1
expression is significantly increased in invasive carcinoma, but it is absent in 
low-moderate grade laryngeal dysplasia and non-neoplastic laryngeal mucosa. This 
data suggest that ETS-1 expression may play an important role in tumor invasion, 
and may function in the initiation of the invasive process in laryngeal squamous 
cell carcinoma.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21940109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Dermatol Sci. 2011 Dec;64(3):210-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2011.08.005. Epub
2011 Aug 30.

Caveolin-1 is a negative regulator of MMP-1 gene expression in human dermal
fibroblasts via inhibition of Erk1/2/Ets1 signaling pathway.

Haines P(1), Samuel GH, Cohen H, Trojanowska M, Bujor AM.

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Arthritis Center, Boston, MA USA.

BACKGROUND: Caveolar raft domains, also termed caveolae, are flask shaped
invaginations that require the expression of the structural protein caveolin-1
(cav-1). Matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1) is a collagenase capable of degrading
insoluble triple helical collagens. Deregulation of MMP-1 contributes to various 
pathological processes, including tissue fibrosis and impaired wound healing.
OBJECTIVE: In this study we investigated the role of cav-1 in MMP-1 gene
regulation in human dermal fibroblasts.
METHODS: Fibroblasts were isolated from healthy subjects. Western blot was used
to analyze protein levels and quantitative real time RT-PCR was used to measure
mRNA expression. Cells were transiently transfected with siRNA oligos against
acid sphingomyelinase (ASMase) and cav-1, or transduced with adenoviruses
overexpressing ASMase and cav-1. The specific pharmacological inhibitors UO126
and SP600125 were used to block Erk1/2 and JNK activity.
RESULTS: This study shows that siRNA-mediated depletion of ASMase or cav-1,
results in upregulation of MMP-1 gene expression. Similarly, MMP-1 expression was
decreased after overexpresssion of cav-1 via an adenoviral vector. Depletion of
cav-1 had no effect on JNK phosphorylation, while it resulted in an increase in
Erk1/2 and Ets1 phosphorylation levels. Furthermore, in cav-1 depleted cells
treated with the Erk inhibitor UO126, there was no increase in the levels of
phospho-Erk1/2, phospho-Ets1, and MMP-1, suggesting that cav-1 mediated effects
on MMP-1 and phospho-Ets1 are Erk1/2 dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this study has revealed an important role for cav-1
as a negative regulator of MMP-1 gene expression via inhibition of Erk1/2/Ets1
signaling. Cav-1 could potentially be a therapeutic target in diseases with
deregulated extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover.

Copyright Â© 2011 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3826600
PMID: 21925842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Allergy. 2012 Jan;67(1):33-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2011.02707.x. Epub 2011
Sep 15.

Increased expression of IRF4 and ETS1 in CD4+ cells from patients with
intermittent allergic rhinitis.

Bruhn S(1), Barrenäs F, Mobini R, Andersson BA, Chavali S, Egan BS, Hovig E,
Sandve GK, Langston MA, Rogers G, Wang H, Benson M.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Individualized Medication, Linköping University Hospital,
Linköping, Sweden.

BACKGROUND:   The transcription factor (TF) IRF4 is involved in the regulation of
Th1, Th2, Th9, and Th17 cells, and animal studies have indicated an important
role in allergy. However, IRF4 and its target genes have not been examined in
human allergy.
METHODS:   IRF4 and its target genes were examined in allergen-challenged CD4(+) 
cells from patients with IAR, using combined gene expression microarrays and
chromatin immunoprecipitation chips (ChIP-chips), computational target
prediction, and RNAi knockdowns.
RESULTS:   IRF4 increased in allergen-challenged CD4(+) cells from patients with 
IAR, and functional studies supported its role in Th2 cell activation. IRF4
ChIP-chip showed that IRF4 regulated a large number of genes relevant to Th cell 
differentiation. However, neither Th1 nor Th2 cytokines were the direct targets
of IRF4. To examine whether IRF4 induced Th2 cytokines via one or more downstream
TFs, we combined gene expression microarrays, ChIP-chips, and computational
target prediction and found a putative intermediary TF, namely ETS1 in
allergen-challenged CD4(+) cells from allergic patients. ETS1 increased
significantly in allergen-challenged CD4(+) cells from patients compared to
controls. Gene expression microarrays before and after ETS1 RNAi knockdown showed
that ETS1 induced Th2 cytokines as well as disease-related pathways.
CONCLUSIONS:   Increased expression of IRF4 in allergen-challenged CD4(+) cells
from patients with intermittent allergic rhinitis leads to activation of a
complex transcriptional program, including Th2 cytokines.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3237963
PMID: 21919915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Endocrinology. 2011 Nov;152(11):4368-76. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1140. Epub 2011 Sep
13.

Critical role for TWIST1 in the induction of human uterine decidualization.

Schroeder JK(1), Kessler CA, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati and Division of
Endocrinology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The importance of the transcription factor TWIST1 for uterine decidualization was
examined in human uterine fibroblast (HUF) cells decidualized in vitro with
medroxyprogesterone, estradiol (E2), and prostaglandin E2. TWIST1 mRNA levels
increased by 6.0- to 6.8-fold during the first 1-2 d of decidualization and
remained above predecidualization levels for up to 15 d. Pretreatment of HUF
cells with a TWIST1 small interfering RNA (siRNA) for 3 d before the induction of
decidualization resulted in less morphologic differentiation than HUF cells
pretreated with a nonsilencing control RNA. In addition, the cells pretreated
with TWIST1 siRNA expressed 75-95% less IGF binding protein 1, LEFTY2,
fibromodulin, laminin, and several other mRNA during decidualization, including
the mRNA for the transcription factors forkhead box protein O1 and
v-ets-erythroblastosis virus E26, both of which were previously shown to be
critical for the induction of decidualization. The HUF cells pretreated with the 
TWIST1 siRNA also underwent less apoptosis during decidualization than the
control cells, as evidenced by a 20% decrease in DNA fragmentation (terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase 2'-deoxyuridine, 5'-triphosphate nick end labeling
assay) and a 43-48% decrease in caspase 3, BCL2-associated X protein, and TNF
receptor superfamily member 6 mRNA levels. Although the knockdown of TWIST1
expression markedly attenuated the induction of decidualization, overexpression
of TWIST1 alone was insufficient to induce the decidualization of HUF cells.
Taken together, these findings strongly implicate an essential role for TWIST1 in
the initiation of human decidualization and uterine stromal cell apoptosis that
occurs upstream of the induction of forkhead box protein O1 and
v-ets-erythroblastosis virus E26 mRNA.

PMCID: PMC3199000
PMID: 21914771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jan 20;21(2):167-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0194. Epub 2011
Oct 18.

Snail promotes the cell-autonomous generation of Flk1(+) endothelial cells
through the repression of the microRNA-200 family.

Gill JG(1), Langer EM, Lindsley RC, Cai M, Murphy TL, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Expression of the transcription factor Snail is required for normal
vasculogenesis in the developing mouse embryo. In addition, tumors expressing
Snail have been associated with a more malignant phenotype, with both increased
invasive properties and angiogenesis. Although the relationship between Snail and
vasculogenesis has been noted, no mechanistic analysis has been elucidated. Here,
we show that in addition to inducing an epithelial mesenchymal transition, Snail 
promotes the cell-autonomous induction of Flk1(+) endothelial cells in an early
subset of differentiating mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. Cells that become
Flk1+ in response to Snail have a transcriptional profile specific to
Gata6+primitive endoderm, but not the early Nanog+epiblast. We further show that 
Snail's ability to promote Flk1(+) endothelium depends on fibroblast growth
factor signaling as well as the repression of the microRNA-200 (miR-200) family, 
which directly targets the 3' UTRs of Flk1 and Ets1. Together, our results show
that Snail is capable of inducing Flk1+ lineage commitment in a subset of
differentiating ES cells through the down-regulation of the miR-200 family. We
hypothesize that this mechanism of Snail-induced vasculogenesis may be conserved 
in both the early developing embryo and malignant cancers.

PMCID: PMC3636466
PMID: 21861700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 2;412(3):500-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.07.130. Epub 2011 Aug 6.

All-trans retinoic acid induces cellular senescence by up-regulating levels of
p16 and p21 via promoter hypomethylation.

Lim JS(1), Park SH, Jang KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induces cellular senescence via up-regulation of
p16 and p21; however, the action mechanism of ATRA is unknown. Here, we show that
ATRA induces promoter hypomethylation of p16 and p21 via down-regulation of DNA
methyltransferases 1, 3a, and 3b to facilitate binding of Ets1/2 to the p16
promoter and p53 to the p21 promoter, resulting in up-regulation of their
expression and subsequent induction of cellular senescence in HepG2 cells. These 
effects were mediated by retinoic acid receptor ß2 whose promoter was also
hypomethylated in the presence of ATRA. Therefore, ATRA can be considered as an
epi-drug in cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21843507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2011 Sep;32(9):1159-64. doi: 10.1038/aps.2011.41. Epub 2011
Aug 15.

Negative regulation of cyclin D3 expression by transcription factor c-Ets1 in
umbilical cord hematopoietic cells.

Meng FK(1), Sun HY, Tan XY, Li CR, Zhou JF, Liu WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

AIM: To investigate the role of transcription factor c-Ets1 in cyclin D3
expression and its effects on the proliferation of umbilical cord hematopoietic
cells.
METHODS: Cyclin D3 promoter deletion constructs were generated and transfected
into CD34(+) cells. Dual luciferase reporter assays and TFSEARCH software were
used to identify negative regulatory domains and to predict putative
transcription factors involved in cyclin D3 downregulation. Expression of c-Ets1 
in CD34(+) cells was detected using electrophoretic mobility shift and super
shift assays. Point mutants of c-Ets1 binding sites were constructed. The
wild-type c-Ets1 and the mutant promoter constructs were co-transfected into
CD34(+) cells to determine the promoter activity. The impact of c-Ets1 expression
on the proliferation of CD34(+) cells was assessed using MTT assay.
RESULTS: Nine cyclin D3 promoter deletion constructs were generated. A negative
regulatory domain containing c-Ets1 binding sites was identified between -439 bp 
and -362 bp. Transfection of the promoter deletion constructs containing mutant
c-Ets1 binding sites enhanced cyclin D3 promoter activity. However, the opposite 
results were observed when CD34(+) cells were co-transfected with wildtype c-Ets1
and its promoter deletion constructs. The overexpression of c-Ets1 could suppress
cyclin D3 mRNA and protein levels. In addition, it inhibits the proliferation of 
CD34(+) cells.
CONCLUSION: c-Ets1 functions as a negative transcription factor, down-regulating 
the expression of cyclin D3, which leads to inhibition of CD34(+) cell
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4003296
PMID: 21841808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 16;108(33):13510-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1106106108. Epub 2011 Aug 8.

Hypoxia-induced methylation of a pontin chromatin remodeling factor.

Lee JS(1), Kim Y, Bhin J, Shin HJ, Nam HJ, Lee SH, Yoon JB, Binda O, Gozani O,
Hwang D, Baek SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Creative Research Initiative Center for
Chromatin Dynamics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea.

Pontin is a chromatin remodeling factor that possesses both ATPase and DNA
helicase activities. Although Pontin is frequently overexpressed in human cancers
of various types and implicated in oncogenic functions, the upstream signaling
network leading to the regulation of Pontin that in turn affects transcription of
downstream target genes has not been extensively studied. Here, we identify
Pontin is methylated by G9a/GLP methyltransferases in hypoxic condition and
potentiates HIF-1a-mediated activation by increasing the recruitment of p300
coactivator to a subset of HIF-1a target promoters. Intriguingly, Pontin
methylation results in the increased invasive and migratory properties by
activating downstream target gene, Ets1. In contrast, inhibition of Pontin
methylation results in the suppression of tumorigenic and metastatic properties. 
Together, our data provide new approaches by targeting Pontin methylation and its
downstream targets for the development of therapeutic agents for human cancers.

PMCID: PMC3158161
PMID: 21825155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Cell Sci. 2011 Aug 15;124(Pt 16):2753-62. doi: 10.1242/jcs.083998.

Ets family members induce lymphangiogenesis through physical and functional
interaction with Prox1.

Yoshimatsu Y(1), Yamazaki T, Mihira H, Itoh T, Suehiro J, Yuki K, Harada K,
Morikawa M, Iwata C, Minami T, Morishita Y, Kodama T, Miyazono K, Watabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Prox1 plays pivotal roles during embryonic lymphatic development and maintenance 
of adult lymphatic systems by modulating the expression of various lymphatic
endothelial cell (LEC) markers, such as vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 3 (VEGFR3). However, the molecular mechanisms by which Prox1
transactivates its target genes remain largely unknown. Here, we identified Ets-2
as a candidate molecule that regulates the functions of Prox1. Whereas Ets-2 has 
been implicated in angiogenesis, its roles during lymphangiogenesis have not yet 
been elucidated. We found that endogenous Ets-2 interacts with Prox1 in LECs.
Using an in vivo model of chronic aseptic peritonitis, we found that Ets-2
enhanced inflammatory lymphangiogenesis, whereas a dominant-negative mutant of
Ets-1 suppressed it. Ets-2 also enhanced endothelial migration towards VEGF-C
through induction of expression of VEGFR3 in collaboration with Prox1.
Furthermore, we found that both Prox1 and Ets-2 bind to the VEGFR3 promoter in
intact chromatin. These findings suggest that Ets family members function as
transcriptional cofactors that enhance Prox1-induced lymphangiogenesis.

© 2011. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd

PMID: 21807940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32483-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.267765. Epub
2011 Jul 20.

Effects of simulated microgravity on expression profile of microRNA in human
lymphoblastoid cells.

Mangala LS(1), Zhang Y, He Z, Emami K, Ramesh GT, Story M, Rohde LH, Wu H.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Biophysics Laboratory, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058,
USA. lingegowda.s.mangala@nasa.gov

This study explores the changes in expression of microRNA (miRNA) and related
genes under simulated microgravity conditions. In comparison with static 1 × g,
microgravity has been shown to alter global gene expression patterns and protein 
levels in cultured cells or animals. miRNA has recently emerged as an important
regulator of gene expression, possibly regulating as many as one-third of all
human genes. However, very little is known about the effect of altered gravity on
miRNA expression. To test the hypothesis that the miRNA expression profile would 
be altered in zero gravity resulting in altered regulation of gene expression
leading to metabolic or functional changes in cells, we cultured TK6 human
lymphoblastoid cells in a high aspect ratio vessel (bioreactor) for 72 h either
in the rotating condition to model microgravity in space or in the static
condition as a control. Expression of several miRNAs was changed significantly in
the simulated microgravity condition including miR-150, miR-34a, miR-423-5p,
miR-22, miR-141, miR-618, and miR-222. To confirm whether this altered miRNA
expression correlates with gene expression and functional changes of the cells,
we performed DNA microarray and validated the related genes using quantitative
RT-PCR. Expression of several transcription factors including EGR2, ETS1, and
c-REL was altered in simulated microgravity conditions. Taken together, the
results reported here indicate that simulated microgravity alters the expression 
of miRNAs and genes in TK6 cells. To our knowledge, this study is the first to
report the effects of simulated microgravity on the expression of miRNA and
related genes.

PMCID: PMC3173213
PMID: 21775437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Development. 2011 Sep;138(17):3689-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.057836. Epub 2011 Jul 20.

A Sox10 enhancer element common to the otic placode and neural crest is activated
by tissue-specific paralogs.

Betancur P(1), Sauka-Spengler T, Bronner M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

The otic placode, a specialized region of ectoderm, gives rise to components of
the inner ear and shares many characteristics with the neural crest, including
expression of the key transcription factor Sox10. Here, we show that in avian
embryos, a highly conserved cranial neural crest enhancer, Sox10E2, also controls
the onset of Sox10 expression in the otic placode. Interestingly, we show that
different combinations of paralogous transcription factors (Sox8, Pea3 and cMyb
versus Sox9, Ets1 and cMyb) are required to mediate Sox10E2 activity in the ear
and neural crest, respectively. Mutating their binding motifs within Sox10E2
greatly reduces enhancer activity in the ear. Moreover, simultaneous knockdown of
Sox8, Pea3 and cMyb eliminates not only the enhancer-driven reporter expression, 
but also the onset of endogenous Sox10 expression in the ear. Rescue experiments 
confirm that the specific combination of Myb together with Sox8 and Pea3 is
responsible for the onset of Sox10 expression in the otic placode, as opposed to 
Myb plus Sox9 and Ets1 for neural crest Sox10 expression. Whereas SUMOylation of 
Sox8 is not required for the initial onset of Sox10 expression, it is necessary
for later otic vesicle formation. This new role of Sox8, Pea3 and cMyb in
controlling Sox10 expression via a common otic/neural crest enhancer suggests an 
evolutionarily conserved function for the combination of paralogous transcription
factors in these tissues of distinct embryological origin.

PMCID: PMC3152925
PMID: 21775416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Oct;1813(10):1767-76. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.06.004. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Comparative role of acetylation along c-SRC/ETS1 signaling pathway in bone
metastatic and invasive mammary cell phenotypes.

Bendinelli P(1), Maroni P, Matteucci E, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Morfologia Umana e Scienze Biomediche, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Milano, Italy.

Metastatic cells switch between different modes of migration through
supramolecular plasticity mechanism(s) still largely unknown. The aim of the
present paper was to clarify some molecular aspects of the epigenetic control of 
migration of 1833-bone metastatic cells compared to MDA-MB231-parental mammary
carcinoma cells. Active c-Src overexpression enhanced 1833-cell spontaneous
migration and CXCR4-mediated chemoinvasion toward CXCL12 ligand. Only in
metastatic cells, in fact, c-Src seemed to stabilize nuclear CXCR4-protein
receptor possibly due to tyrosine phosphorylation, by impairing
protein-degradative smear and causing instead an electrophoretic-mobility shift; 
the cytosolic steady-state level of CXCR4 was enhanced, and the protein appeared 
also phosphorylated. These findings suggested the triggering of unique signaling 
pathways in metastasis for homing of breast-cancer cells to congenial environment
of specific organs. Microenvironmental stimuli activating c-Src might influence
Ets1 binding to CXCR4 promoter and consequent transactivation, as well as CXCR4
post-translational regulatory mechanisms such as phosphorylation. Enhancement of 
Ets1 activity and CXCR4 induction by c-Src overexpression were prevented by
histone deacetylase (HDAC) blockade. In contrast, HDAC inhibition with
trichostatin A increased cytosolic phosphorylated CXCR4 expression in MDA-MB231
cells, but Ets1 involvement was practically unneeded. c-Src might be suggested as
a bio-marker predicting metastasis sensitivity patterns to HDAC inhibitors.
Rationally designed and individualized therapy may become possible as more is
learned about the target molecules of HDAC's inhibitory agents and their roles,
as undertaken for CXCR4 that is likely to be crucial for homing, angiogenesis and
survival in a c-Src-dependent manner in bone-metastatic mammary cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21741415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002128. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002128. Epub 2011 
Jun 30.

A functional variant in microRNA-146a promoter modulates its expression and
confers disease risk for systemic lupus erythematosus.

Luo X(1), Yang W, Ye DQ, Cui H, Zhang Y, Hirankarn N, Qian X, Tang Y, Lau YL, de 
Vries N, Tak PP, Tsao BP, Shen N.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Molecular Rheumatology Laboratory of the Institute of Health Sciences
and Shanghai Renji Hospital, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease with a strong 
genetic predisposition, characterized by an upregulated type I interferon
pathway. MicroRNAs are important regulators of immune homeostasis, and aberrant
microRNA expression has been demonstrated in patients with autoimmune diseases.
We recently identified miR-146a as a negative regulator of the interferon pathway
and linked the abnormal activation of this pathway to the underexpression of
miR-146a in SLE patients. To explore why the expression of miR-146a is reduced in
SLE patients, we conducted short parallel sequencing of potentially regulatory
regions of miR-146a and identified a novel genetic variant (rs57095329) in the
promoter region exhibiting evidence for association with SLE that was replicated 
independently in 7,182 Asians (P(meta)<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.74×10(-8), odds ratio<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.29
[1.18-1.40]). The risk-associated G allele was linked to reduced expression of
miR-146a in the peripheral blood leukocytes of the controls. Combined functional 
assays showed that the risk-associated G allele reduced the protein-binding
affinity and activity of the promoter compared with those of the promoter
containing the protective A allele. Transcription factor Ets-1, encoded by the
lupus-susceptibility gene ETS1, identified in recent genome-wide association
studies, binds near this variant. The manipulation of Ets-1 levels strongly
affected miR-146a promoter activity in vitro; and the knockdown of Ets-1,
mimicking its reduced expression in SLE, directly impaired the induction of
miR-146a. We also observed additive effects of the risk alleles of miR-146a and
ETS1. Our data identified and confirmed an association between a functional
promoter variant of miR-146a and SLE. This risk allele had decreased binding to
transcription factor Ets-1, contributing to reduced levels of miR-146a in SLE
patients.

PMCID: PMC3128113
PMID: 21738483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Jul 7;12:277. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-277.

An integrated ChIP-seq analysis platform with customizable workflows.

Giannopoulou EG(1), Elemento O.

Author information: 
(1)HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational
Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1305 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by next generation sequencing 
(ChIP-seq), enables unbiased and genome-wide mapping of protein-DNA interactions 
and epigenetic marks. The first step in ChIP-seq data analysis involves the
identification of peaks (i.e., genomic locations with high density of mapped
sequence reads). The next step consists of interpreting the biological meaning of
the peaks through their association with known genes, pathways, regulatory
elements, and integration with other experiments. Although several programs have 
been published for the analysis of ChIP-seq data, they often focus on the peak
detection step and are usually not well suited for thorough, integrative analysis
of the detected peaks.
RESULTS: To address the peak interpretation challenge, we have developed
ChIPseeqer, an integrative, comprehensive, fast and user-friendly computational
framework for in-depth analysis of ChIP-seq datasets. The novelty of our approach
is the capability to combine several computational tools in order to create
easily customized workflows that can be adapted to the user's needs and
objectives. In this paper, we describe the main components of the ChIPseeqer
framework, and also demonstrate the utility and diversity of the analyses
offered, by analyzing a published ChIP-seq dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: ChIPseeqer facilitates ChIP-seq data analysis by offering a flexible
and powerful set of computational tools that can be used in combination with one 
another. The framework is freely available as a user-friendly GUI application,
but all programs are also executable from the command line, thus providing
flexibility and automatability for advanced users.

PMCID: PMC3145611
PMID: 21736739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Int J Cancer. 2012 Jun 15;130(12):2801-11. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26277. Epub 2011 Aug 
12.

ETS-1/RhoC signaling regulates the transcription factor c-Jun in melanoma.

Spangler B(1), Kappelmann M, Schittek B, Meierjohann S, Vardimon L, Bosserhoff
AK, Kuphal S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.

Recently, we discovered that the loss of E-cadherin induces c-Jun protein
expression, which is a member of the AP-1 transcription factor family and a key
player in the processes of cell proliferation and tumor development and also
found in elevated levels in melanomas. Notably, the mRNA level of c-Jun was not
affected, suggesting that c-Jun is regulated at post-transcriptional level. Here,
we present data that suggest that the dynamic cytoskeletal network, linked to
E-cadherin, is involved in the regulation of the c-Jun protein and
transcriptional activity. In a signaling cascade, the loss of E-cadherin
activates the transcriptional regulator ETS-1 and consequently leads to the
induction of RhoC expression that stabilizes c-Jun in melanoma. The link between 
RhoC and c-Jun seems to be indirect via the cytoskeleton. We conclude that the
loss of E-cadherin mediated cell-adhesion induces c-Jun protein expression in a
multistep process, offering several possibilities for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21732343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 15;357(2):505-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.016. Epub 2011 
Jun 30.

Precise cis-regulatory control of spatial and temporal expression of the alx-1
gene in the skeletogenic lineage of s. purpuratus.

Damle S(1), Davidson EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

Deployment of the gene-regulatory network (GRN) responsible for skeletogenesis in
the embryo of the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus is restricted to the
large micromere lineage by a double negative regulatory gate. The gate consists
of a GRN subcircuit composed of the pmar1 and hesC genes, which encode repressors
and are wired in tandem, plus a set of target regulatory genes under hesC
control. The skeletogenic cell state is specified initially by micromere-specific
expression of these regulatory genes, viz. alx1, ets1, tbrain and tel, plus the
gene encoding the Notch ligand Delta. Here we use a recently developed high
throughput methodology for experimental cis-regulatory analysis to elucidate the 
genomic regulatory system controlling alx1 expression in time and embryonic
space. The results entirely confirm the double negative gate control system at
the cis-regulatory level, including definition of the functional HesC target
sites, and add the crucial new information that the drivers of alx1 expression
are initially Ets1, and then Alx1 itself plus Ets1. Cis-regulatory analysis
demonstrates that these inputs quantitatively account for the magnitude of alx1
expression. Furthermore, the Alx1 gene product not only performs an
auto-regulatory role, promoting a fast rise in alx1 expression, but also, when at
high levels, it behaves as an auto-repressor. A synthetic experiment indicates
that this behavior is probably due to dimerization. In summary, the results we
report provide the sequence level basis for control of alx1 spatial expression by
the double negative gate GRN architecture, and explain the rising, then falling
temporal expression profile of the alx1 gene in terms of its auto-regulatory
genetic wiring.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3164750
PMID: 21723273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2896-905. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-330589. Epub 2011 
Jun 28.

The manipulation of miRNA-gene regulatory networks by KSHV induces endothelial
cell motility.

Wu YH(1), Hu TF, Chen YC, Tsai YN, Tsai YH, Cheng CC, Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

miRNAs have emerged as master regulators of cancer-related events. miRNA
dysregulation also occurs in Kaposi sarcoma (KS). Exploring the roles of
KS-associated miRNAs should help to identify novel angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis pathways. In the present study, we show that Kaposi
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), the etiological agent of KS, induces
global miRNA changes in lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs). Specifically, the
miR-221/miR-222 cluster is down-regulated, whereas miR-31 is up-regulated. Both
latent nuclear antigen (LANA) and Kaposin B repress the expression of the
miR-221/miR-222 cluster, which results in an increase of endothelial cell (EC)
migration. In contrast, miR-31 stimulates EC migration, so depletion of miR-31 in
KSHV-transformed ECs reduces cell motility. Analysis of the putative miRNA
targets among KSHV-affected genes showed that ETS2 and ETS1 are the downstream
targets of miR-221 and miR-222, respectively. FAT4 is one of the direct targets
of miR-31. Overexpression of ETS1 or ETS2 alone is sufficient to induce EC
migration, whereas a reduction in FAT4 enhances EC motility. Our results show
that KSHV regulates multiple miRNA-mRNA networks to enhance EC motility, which
eventually contributes to KS progression by promoting the spread of malignant KS 
progenitor cells. Targeting KSHV-regulated miRNAs or genes might allow the
development of novel therapeutic strategies that induce angiogenesis or allow the
treatment of pathogenic (lymph)angiogenesis.

PMID: 21715310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2011 Oct;24(5):953-65. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2011.00881.x.

Constitutive activation of the ETS-1-miR-222 circuitry in metastatic melanoma.

Mattia G(1), Errico MC, Felicetti F, Petrini M, Bottero L, Tomasello L, Romania
P, Boe A, Segnalini P, Di Virgilio A, Colombo MP, Carè A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
Sanità, Rome, Italy.

MicroRNAs-221 and -222 are highly upregulated in several solid tumors, including 
melanomas. We demonstrate that the proto-oncogene ETS-1, involved in the
pathogenesis of cancers of different origin, is a transcriptional regulator of
miR-222 by direct binding to its promoter region. Differently from 293FT cells or
early stage melanomas, where unphosphorylated ETS-1 represses miR-222
transcription, in metastatic melanoma the constitutively Thr-38 phosphorylated
fraction of ETS-1 induces miR-222. Despite its stepwise decreased expression
along with melanoma progression, the oncogenic activity of ETS-1 relies on its
RAS/RAF/ERK-dependent phosphorylation status more than on its total amount. To
close the loop, we demonstrate ETS-1 as a direct target of miR-222, but not
miR-221, showing the novel option of their uncoupled functions. In addition, a
spatial redistribution of ETS-1 protein from the nucleus to the cytoplasm is also
evidenced in advanced melanoma cells. Finally, in vivo studies confirmed the
contribution of miR-222 to the increased invasive potential obtained by ETS-
silencing.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3272348
PMID: 21711453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2012 Mar;20(2):153-8. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e31821ba035.

Immunohistochemical determination of ETS-1 oncoprotein expression in urothelial
carcinomas of the urinary bladder.

Sari A(1), Calli A, Gorgel SN, Altinboga AA, Kara C, Dincel C, Cakalagaoglu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Izmir Ataturk Research and Training Hospital, Izmir, 
Turkey. aysegulakder@gmail.com

ETS-1 protooncogene is an important transcription factor that plays a role in the
regulation of physiological processes, such as cell proliferation and
differentiation. ETS-1 is thought to be related to the growth of carcinoma cells 
by its regulation of the transcription of matrix metalloproteinases and
urokinase-type plasminogen activator. In this study, we aimed to investigate the 
expression pattern of ETS-1 oncoprotein in urothelial carcinomas of the urinary
bladder and determine its relationship with histopathologic parameters, including
tumor grade and stage. One hundred six specimens of urothelial carcinoma and a
total of 14 normal urothelium were analyzed immunohistochemically with anti-ETS-1
monoclonal antibody. The normal urothelium showed positive ETS-1 immunostaining. 
ETS-1 expression remained high in low-grade and noninvasive tumors, whereas it
frequently decreased in high-grade or invasive carcinomas. Interestingly, ETS-1
was highly expressed in the basal cell layer of the noninvasive urothelial
carcinomas. ETS-1 expression showed a strong negative correlation with the tumor 
grade (P<0.001; r, -0.67) and stage (P<0.001; r, -0.75). The nonmuscle-invasive
tumors (pTa+pT1) and noninvasive tumors (pTa) had significantly higher ETS-1
expression than the muscle-invasive tumors (pT2; P<0.001) and invasive tumors
(pT1+pT2; P<0.001), respectively. Results of our study show that decreased ETS-1 
expression is significantly associated with high grade and advanced stage in
urothelial carcinomas of the urinary bladder, and that the downregulation of
ETS-1 expression may be a marker of the aggressiveness of such malignancies.

PMID: 21623185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 31;108(22):9220-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1100667108. Epub 2011 May 16.

Regulation of type 17 helper T-cell function by nitric oxide during inflammation.

Niedbala W(1), Alves-Filho JC, Fukada SY, Vieira SM, Mitani A, Sonego F,
Mirchandani A, Nascimento DC, Cunha FQ, Liew FY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity, and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow G12 8TA, Scotland.

Type 17 helper T (Th17) cells are implicated in the pathogenesis many of human
autoimmune diseases. Development of Th17 can be enhanced by the activation of
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) whose ligands include the environmental pollutant
dioxin, potentially linking environmental factors to the increased prevalence of 
autoimmune disease. We report here that nitric oxide (NO) can suppress the
proliferation and function of polarized murine and human Th17 cells. NO also
inhibits AHR expression in Th17 cells and the downstream events of AHR
activation, including IL-22, IL-23 receptor, and Cyp1a1. Conversely, NO did not
affect the polarization of Th17 cells from mice deficient in AHR. Furthermore,
mice lacking inducible nitric oxide synthase (Nos2(-/-)) developed more severe
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis than WT mice, with elevated AHR
expression, increased IL-17A, and IL-22 synthesis. NO may therefore represent an 
important endogenous regulator to prevent overexpansion of Th17 cells and control
of autoimmune diseases caused by environmental pollutants.

PMCID: PMC3107290
PMID: 21576463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Clin Breast Cancer. 2011 Apr;11(2):129-34. doi: 10.1016/j.clbc.2011.03.002. Epub 
2011 Apr 11.

Survivin as a predictive biomarker of complete pathologic response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy in patients with stage II and stage III breast cancer.

Petrarca CR(1), Brunetto AT, Duval V, Brondani A, Carvalho GP, Garicochea B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Hospital São Lucas, Pontifícia
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre-RS, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Predictive biomarkers of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in
patients with breast cancer are needed to better characterize tumors and enable
more tailored therapies.
METHODS: The expression levels of survivin, BCL-2, cyclin D1, ETS1, and PDEF in
tumor samples obtained in the diagnostic biopsies of patients undergoing
neoadjuvant chemotherapy for stage II and stage III disease were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). The mean expression score (range, 0-15) obtained by 3
different pathologists was used for analysis and correlated with complete
pathologic response (pCR) and survival by standard univariate and multivariate
methods.
RESULTS: Forty-five female patients were included in this study and received
preoperative standard anthracycline/taxane-based chemotherapy. The median age at 
diagnosis was 49 years (range, 25-70 years). Three patients (7.1%) achieved pCR. 
The mean expression score of survivin in the diagnostic biopsies was
significantly higher (P = .01) in patients with pCR (9.3) than in those without
(3.4). There was no significant association with pCR for the other biologic
markers analyzed nor was there correlation with prognosis. Survivin levels were
not associated with age, tumor grade, clinical stage, or receptor status.
CONCLUSION: High expression levels of survivin in the primary tumor may be used
as a potential predictive biomarker of pCR to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in
patients with stage II and stage III breast cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21569999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 24;286(25):21961-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.238238. Epub
2011 Apr 22.

c-ETS1 facilitates G1/S-phase transition by up-regulating cyclin E and CDK2 genes
and cooperates with hepatitis B virus X protein for their deregulation.

Singh AK(1), Swarnalatha M, Kumar V.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.

Recent studies on the molecular mechanisms responsible for cell cycle
deregulation in cancer have puzzled out the role of oncogenes in mediating
unscheduled cellular proliferation. This is reminiscence of their activity as
proto-oncogenes that drives scheduled cell cycle progression under physiological 
conditions. Working on the cell cycle regulatory activity of proto-oncogene, we
observed that c-ETS1 transcriptionally up-regulated both cyclin E and CDK2 genes,
the master regulators of G(1)/S-phase transition. The process was mediated by
kinetic coherence of c-ETS1 expression and its recruitment to both promoters
during G(1)/S-phase transition. Furthermore, enforced expression of c-ETS1 helped
G(0)-arrested cells to progress into G(1)/S-phases apparently due to the
activation of cyclin E/CDK2 genes. Physiological induction of c-ETS1 by EGF
showed the remodeling of mononucleosomes bound to the c-ETS1 binding site on both
promoters during their activation. The exchange of HDAC1 with histone
acetyltransferase-p300 was contemporaneous to the chromatin remodeling with
consequent increase in histone H3K9 acetylation. Furthermore, the ATP-dependent
chromatin remodeler hBRM1 recruitment was also associated with nucleosome
remodeling and promoter occupancy of phospho-Ser5 RNA polymerase II.
Intriguingly, the activity of the HBx viral oncoprotein was dependent on c-ETS1
in a hepatotropic manner, which led to the activation of cyclin E/CDK2 genes.
Thus, cyclin E and CDK2 genes are key physiological effectors of the c-ETS1
proto-oncogene. Furthermore, c-ETS1 is indispensable for the hepatotropic action 
of HBx in cell cycle deregulation.

PMCID: PMC3121341
PMID: 21515670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. DNA Cell Biol. 2011 Nov;30(11):865-73. doi: 10.1089/dna.2010.1139. Epub 2011 Apr 
21.

Analysis of gene expression profile of periodontal ligament cells subjected to
cyclic compressive force.

Wu J(1), Li Y, Fan X, Zhang C, Wang Y, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China College of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Cyclic compressive force is an important mechanical stimulus on periodontal
ligament (PDL). The differential expression of genes in PDL cells is thought to
be involved in the remodeling of periodontal tissues subjected to mechanical
stress. However, little is known about differentially expressed genes in PDL
cells under cyclic compressive force. In our study, human PDL cells were
subjected to 4000 µ strain compressive stress loading at 0.5 Hz for 2 h. The
effect of mechanical stress on PDL cells proliferation was observed by flow
cytometry. Microarray analysis was used to investigate the mechano-induced
differential gene profile in PDL cells. Differential expression was confirmed by 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis on genes of
interest and explored at two more force loading times (6 h, 12 h). After
mechanical loading, cell proliferation was repressed. The microarray data showed 
that 217 out of 35,000 genes were differentially expressed; among the 217 genes, 
207 were up-regulated whereas 10 were down-regulated (p < 0.05). Gene ontology
analysis suggested that majority of differentially expressed genes were located
in the nucleus and functioned as transcription factors involved in a variety of
biological processes. Five genes of interest (IL6, IL8, ETS1, KLF10, and DLC1)
were found to be closely related to negative regulation of cell proliferation.
The PCR results showed increased expression after 2 h loading, then a decline
with extended loading time. The signaling pathways involved were also identified.
These findings expand understanding of molecular regulation in the
mechano-response of PDL cells.

PMID: 21510798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Eur Urol. 2011 Jul;60(1):183-4. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2011.03.028. Epub 2011 Mar 
29.

Confirmation of the association of TMPRSS2(exon 0):ERG expression and a favorable
prognosis of primary prostate cancer.

Boormans JL, Porkka K, Visakorpi T, Trapman J.

PMID: 21474234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Development. 2011 May;138(9):1827-38. doi: 10.1242/dev.053645. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

p53 coordinates cranial neural crest cell growth and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition/delamination processes.

Rinon A(1), Molchadsky A, Nathan E, Yovel G, Rotter V, Sarig R, Tzahor E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Neural crest development involves epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), during
which epithelial cells are converted into individual migratory cells. Notably,
the same signaling pathways regulate EMT function during both development and
tumor metastasis. p53 plays multiple roles in the prevention of tumor
development; however, its precise roles during embryogenesis are less clear. We
have investigated the role of p53 in early cranial neural crest (CNC) development
in chick and mouse embryos. In the mouse, p53 knockout embryos displayed broad
craniofacial defects in skeletal, neuronal and muscle tissues. In the chick, p53 
is expressed in CNC progenitors and its expression decreases with their
delamination from the neural tube. Stabilization of p53 protein using a
pharmacological inhibitor of its negative regulator, MDM2, resulted in reduced
SNAIL2 (SLUG) and ETS1 expression, fewer migrating CNC cells and in craniofacial 
defects. By contrast, electroporation of a dominant-negative p53 construct
increased PAX7(+) SOX9(+) CNC progenitors and EMT/delamination of CNC from the
neural tube, although the migration of these cells to the periphery was impaired.
Investigating the underlying molecular mechanisms revealed that p53 coordinates
CNC cell growth and EMT/delamination processes by affecting cell cycle gene
expression and proliferation at discrete developmental stages; disruption of
these processes can lead to craniofacial defects.

PMID: 21447558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 22;6(3):e17979. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017979.

ETS1 mediates MEK1/2-dependent overexpression of cancerous inhibitor of protein
phosphatase 2A (CIP2A) in human cancer cells.

Khanna A(1), Okkeri J, Bilgen T, Tiirikka T, Vihinen M, Visakorpi T, Westermarck 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere University 
Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

EGFR-MEK-ERK signaling pathway has an established role in promoting malignant
growth and disease progression in human cancers. Therefore identification of
transcriptional targets mediating the oncogenic effects of the EGFR-MEK-ERK
pathway would be highly relevant. Cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A
(CIP2A) is a recently characterized human oncoprotein. CIP2A promotes malignant
cell growth and is over expressed at high frequency (40-80%) in most of the human
cancer types. However, the mechanisms inducing its expression in cancer still
remain largely unexplored. Here we present systematic analysis of contribution of
potential gene regulatory mechanisms for high CIP2A expression in cancer. Our
data shows that evolutionary conserved CpG islands at the proximal CIP2A promoter
are not methylated both in normal and cancer cells. Furthermore, sequencing of
the active CIP2A promoter region from altogether seven normal and malignant cell 
types did not reveal any sequence alterations that would increase CIP2A
expression specifically in cancer cells. However, treatment of cancer cells with 
various signaling pathway inhibitors revealed that CIP2A mRNA expression was
sensitive to inhibition of EGFR activity as well as inhibition or activation of
MEK-ERK pathway. Moreover, MEK1/2-specific siRNAs decreased CIP2A protein
expression. Series of CIP2A promoter-luciferase constructs were created to
identify proximal -27 to -107 promoter region responsible for MEK-dependent
stimulation of CIP2A expression. Additional mutagenesis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments revealed ETS1 as the transcription factor
mediating stimulation of CIP2A expression through EGFR-MEK pathway. Thus, ETS1 is
probably mediating high CIP2A expression in human cancers with increased
EGFR-MEK1/2-ERK pathway activity. These results also suggest that in addition to 
its established role in invasion and angiogenesis, ETS1 may support malignant
cellular growth via regulation of CIP2A expression and protein phosphatase 2A
inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3062549
PMID: 21445343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cancer Res. 2011 May 15;71(10):3552-62. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2435. Epub 
2011 Mar 28.

miR-125b is methylated and functions as a tumor suppressor by regulating the ETS1
proto-oncogene in human invasive breast cancer.

Zhang Y(1), Yan LX, Wu QN, Du ZM, Chen J, Liao DZ, Huang MY, Hou JH, Wu QL, Zeng 
MS, Huang WL, Zeng YX, Shao JY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China, and Department of
Pathology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, PR China.

The microRNA miR-125b is dysregulated in various human cancers but its underlying
mechanisms of action are poorly understood. Here, we report that miR-125b is
downregulated in invasive breast cancers where it predicts poor patient survival.
Hypermethylation of the miR-125b promoter partially accounted for reduction of
miR-125b expression in human breast cancer. Ectopic restoration of miR-125b
expression in breast cancer cells suppressed proliferation, induced G(1)
cell-cycle arrest in vitro, and inhibited tumorigenesis in vivo. We identified
the ETS1 gene as a novel direct target of miR-125b. siRNA-mediated ETS1 knockdown
phenocopied the effect of miR-125b in breast cell lines and ETS1 overexpression
in invasive breast cancer tissues also correlated with poor patient prognosis.
Taken together, our findings point to an important role for miR-125b in the
molecular etiology of invasive breast cancer, and they suggest miR-125b as a
potential theranostic tool in this disease.

©2011 AACR

PMID: 21444677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 25;30:31. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-30-31.

Expression of Ets-1, Ang-2 and maspin in ovarian cancer and their role in tumor
angiogenesis.

Lin Z(1), Liu Y, Sun Y, He X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 1st affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Various angiogenic regulators are involved in angiogenesis cascade.
Transcription factor Ets-1 plays important role in angiogenesis, remodeling of
extracellular matrix, and tumor metastasis. Ets-1 target genes involved in
various stages of new blood vessel formation include angiopoietin, matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the protease inhibitor maspin.
METHODS: We used immunohistochemistry (IHC) to detect the expression of Ets-1,
angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) and maspin in ovarian tumor and analyzed the relationship 
between the expression of these proteins and the clinical manifestation of
ovarian cancer.
RESULTS: Ets-1 expression was much stronger in ovarian cancer compared to benign 
tumors, but had no significant correlation with other pathological parameters of 
ovarian cancer. However, Ang-2 and maspin expression had no obvious correlation
with pathological parameters of ovarian cancer. Ets-1 had a positive correlation 
with Ang-2 which showed their close relationship in angiogenesis. Although
microvessel density (MVD) value had no significant correlation with the
expression of Ets-1, Ang-2 or maspin, strong nuclear expression of maspin
appeared to be correlated with high grade and MVD.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of Ets-1, Ang2 and maspin showed close relationship
with angiogenesis in ovarian cancer and expression of maspin appeared to be
correlated with high grade and MVD. The mechanisms underlying the cross-talk of
the three factors need further investigations.

PMCID: PMC3071330
PMID: 21439064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2011 Aug;108(8):1776-87. doi: 10.1002/bit.23141. Epub 2011 Apr
3.

Construction of Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains with enhanced ethanol tolerance 
by mutagenesis of the TATA-binding protein gene and identification of novel genes
associated with ethanol tolerance.

Yang J(1), Bae JY, Lee YM, Kwon H, Moon HY, Kang HA, Yee SB, Kim W, Choi W.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Resources Research Center, College of Natural Sciences, Ewha
Womans,University, Seoul, Korea.

Since elevated ethanol is a major stress during ethanol fermentation, yeast
strains tolerant to ethanol are highly desirable for the industrial scale ethanol
production. A technology called global transcriptional machinery engineering
(gTME), which exploits a mutant library of SPT15 encoding the TATA-binding
protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Alper et al., 2006; Science 314: 1565-1568),
seems to a powerful tool for creating ethanol-tolerant strains. However, the
ability of created strains to tolerate high ethanol on rich media remains
unproven. In this study, a similar strategy was used to obtain five strains with 
enhanced ethanol tolerance (ETS1-5) of S. cerevisiae. Comparing global
transcriptional profiles of two selected strains ETS2 and ETS3 with that of the
control identified 42 genes that were commonly regulated with twofold change. Out
of 34 deletion mutants available from a gene knockout library, 18 were ethanol
sensitive, suggesting that these genes were closely associated with ethanol
tolerance. Eight of them were novel with most being functionally unknown. To
establish a basis for future industrial applications, strains iETS2 and iETS3
were created by integrating the SPT15 mutant alleles of ETS2 and ETS3 into the
chromosomes, which also exhibited enhanced ethanol tolerance and survival upon
ethanol shock on a rich medium. Fermentation with 20% glucose for 24 h in a
bioreactor revealed that iETS2 and iETS3 grew better and produced approximately
25% more ethanol than a control strain. The ethanol yield and productivity were
also substantially enhanced: 0.31 g/g and 2.6 g/L/h, respectively, for control
and 0.39 g/g and 3.2 g/L/h, respectively, for iETS2 and iETS3. Thus, our study
demonstrates the utility of gTME in generating strains with enhanced ethanol
tolerance that resulted in increase of ethanol production. Strains with enhanced 
tolerance to other stresses such as heat, fermentation inhibitors, osmotic
pressure, and so on, may be further created by using gTME.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21437883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int J Oncol. 2011 Jun;38(6):1645-52. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.981. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Identification of ETS-1 target genes in human fibroblasts.

Hahne JC(1), Okuducu AF, Fuchs T, Florin A, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsfrauenklinik Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany.

The transcription factor Ets-1 plays several distinct critical roles in tumour
development and progression by acting both in neoplastic cells and in the tumour 
stroma. Increased expression of Ets-1 in tumours is often associated with a worse
prognosis. Stromal fibroblasts attribute an important part to the behaviour of
malignant tumours. In this study we investigated the role of Ets-1 in the tumour 
stroma. It is well known that ets-1 expression in fibroblasts--one of the main
components of the tumour stroma--can be induced by basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF). We applied suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) to identify genes 
that are differentially expressed between bFGF stimulated wild-type fibroblasts
and fibroblasts with reduced Ets-1 expression. We selected clones up- or
down-regulated in bFGF stimulated wild-type fibroblasts using SSH and
functionally characterized them by reference to public databases using NCBI BLAST
tools. Expression levels of genes corresponding to subtracted clones were
analyzed using RT-PCR. Known genes were associated with diverse functions; novel 
Ets-1 regulated genes identified by SSH not only encoded components involved in
matrix degradation (as cathepsin and PAI-2) but also constituents of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) including a-2-Type I collagen, TGF-ß induced protein, 
lumican and decorin. Our findings identify several potential novel target genes
of Ets-1, and they provide potentially important insights into the role of Ets-1 
in stromal fibroblasts for both remodelling and different functionalities of the 
ECM.

PMID: 21424123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Jun;27(6):811-9. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.652. Epub 2011 Mar
21.

Comprehensive gene expression microarray analysis of Ets-1 blockade in PC3
prostate cancer cells and correlations with prostate cancer tissues: Insights
into genes involved in the metastatic cascade.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Lindstrot A, Langer B, Buettner R, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25,
Bonn, Germany.

Ets-1 is the prototype of the ETS family of transcription factors and is
suggested to play an important role in the malignant progression of prostatic
carcinomas. Therefore, in this study we investigated the effect of blocking Ets-1
in PC3 prostate cancer cells on genes involved in the metastatic cascade, and
correlated these findings with prostate cancer tissues. Two stable PC3 cell
cultures were established by transfection with either an Ets-1 inverse antisense 
expression vector or a mock control vector. The effect of blocking Ets-1 on genes
involved in the metastatic cascade was assessed by a comprehensive gene
expression microarray analysis of Ets-1 inverse and mock control cells.
Correlating the sets of genes found in the PC3 microarray data with prostate
cancer tissues was performed by verifying the genes in a comprehensive gene
expression microarray analysis of RNA extracted from laser microdissected normal 
prostate glands and from carcinoma glands taken from prostate cancer patients.
Western blot analysis confirmed the presence of Ets-1 in mock cells and its
absence in Ets-1 inverse cells. In the Ets-1 blockade microarray, many
differentially expressed genes were found; however, only genes with a greater
than 10-fold up- or down-regulation between the Ets-1 blockade and mock control
were considered significant. The genes were placed into four groups that play a
role in the so-called metastatic cascade based on their known functions in
proliferation, apoptosis, migration and angiogenesis. The genes found in the
Ets-1 blockade microarray analysis were verified for their presence in the
microarray analysis of prostate cancer tissues. Genes found in the microarray
analysis of prostate cancer tissues with an >2-fold change and a p-value <0.01
were considered significant. We identified sets of genes that are involved in the
metastatic cascade and are known to be implicated in prostate cancer to show
changes in the expression patterns due to the Ets-1 blockade in PC3 cells.
Correlating these sets of genes with the findings in prostate cancer tissues, we 
identified 16 genes that are up- or down-regulated in healthy compared to tumor
prostate glands. Further investigation revealed that 4 out of the 16 genes have
been reported to be regulated by members of the ETS family. These findings
provide in vitro and in vivo evidence for the importance of Ets-1 in the
development and progression of prostate cancer.

PMID: 21424114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Oncogene. 2011 Aug 25;30(34):3716-26. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.87. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Ets-1 mediates upregulation of Mcl-1 downstream of XBP-1 in human melanoma cells 
upon ER stress.

Dong L(1), Jiang CC, Thorne RF, Croft A, Yang F, Liu H, de Bock CE, Hersey P,
Zhang XD.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Oncology Unit, Calvary Mater Newcastle Hospital, Newcastle, New
South Wales, Australia.

Past studies have shown that upregulation of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family
protein Mcl-1 is a major adaptive mechanism of melanoma cells to endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, and has an important role in resistance of the cells to
apoptosis. In this study, we show that the increase in transcription of Mcl-1 in 
melanoma cells triggered by pharmacological ER stress inducers is mediated by the
transcription factor Ets-1. By incremental deletion analysis of the Mcl-1
promoter, we identified a DNA fragment containing an Ets-1 binding site that is
transcriptionally responsive to ER stress. Mutations in the Ets-1 binding site or
knockdown of Ets-1 inhibited the increase in Mcl-1, indicating that Ets-1 has a
critical role in transcriptional upregulation of Mcl-1. Similar to Mcl-1, Ets-1
was transcriptionally upregulated by ER stress. This was mediated by the
IRE1a/XBP-1 branch of the unfolded protein response, as upregulation of Ets-1 was
inhibited in melanoma cell lines deficient in IRE1a or XBP-1 established by short
hairpin RNA knockdown. Activation of the PI3k/Akt pathway downstream of XBP-1 was
also involved, in that inhibition of the pathway blocked upregulation of Ets-1.
Inhibition of Ets-1 enhanced ER stress-induced apoptosis in melanoma cell lines
and in fresh melanoma isolates, recapitulating the effect of inhibition of Mcl-1.
These results reveal a key mechanism by which Mcl-1 is transcriptionally
upregulated in melanoma cells by ER stress, and identify Ets-1 as a potential
target for inhibition to sensitize melanoma cells to apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3163261
PMID: 21423203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011 Mar;1221:98-102. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05944.x.

Isolation, characterization, and function of EBAF/LEFTY B: role in infertility.

Tabibzadeh S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, 
New York, USA. fbs@bioscience.org

Human endometrium exhibits cyclic stromal and glandular remodeling in preparation
of embryo implantation. We identified EBAF/LEFTY B as a soluble cytokine of the
TGF-ß superfamily that is expressed at a low level in human endometrium during
the receptivity period, while it is maximally expressed during perimenstrual and 
menstrual phases. Transfection of cells with EBAF/LEFTY B resulted in expression 
of a 42 kD protein that was proteolytically processed to release two polypeptides
of 34 and 28 kD. EBAF/LEFTY B causes tissue remodeling by induction of
collagenolysis by matrix metalloproteases. In a subset of infertile patients, the
expression EBAF/LEFTY B was prematurely increased during the implantation window.
We showed that induced overexpression of EBAF/LEFTY B in transgenic mice impairs 
implantation. EBAF/LEFTY B inhibits the expression of key decidual proteins,
IGFBP-1 and PRL, through regulation of transcription factors FOXO1 and ETS1.
Together, these findings show that during embryonic development, EBAF/LEFTY B
plays important roles in decidualization and embryo implantation.

© 2011 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 21401636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 6;286(18):16332-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.216986. Epub 2011
Mar 10.

Interorgan coordination of the murine adaptive response to fasting.

Hakvoort TB(1), Moerland PD, Frijters R, Sokolovic A, Labruyère WT, Vermeulen JL,
Ver Loren van Themaat E, Breit TM, Wittink FR, van Kampen AH, Verhoeven AJ,
Lamers WH, Sokolovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research (formerly AMC Liver
Center), Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Starvation elicits a complex adaptive response in an organism. No information on 
transcriptional regulation of metabolic adaptations is available. We, therefore, 
studied the gene expression profiles of brain, small intestine, kidney, liver,
and skeletal muscle in mice that were subjected to 0-72 h of fasting.
Functional-category enrichment, text mining, and network analyses were employed
to scrutinize the overall adaptation, aiming to identify responsive pathways,
processes, and networks, and their regulation. The observed transcriptomics
response did not follow the accepted "carbohydrate-lipid-protein" succession of
expenditure of energy substrates. Instead, these processes were activated
simultaneously in different organs during the entire period. The most prominent
changes occurred in lipid and steroid metabolism, especially in the liver and
kidney. They were accompanied by suppression of the immune response and cell
turnover, particularly in the small intestine, and by increased proteolysis in
the muscle. The brain was extremely well protected from the sequels of
starvation. 60% of the identified overconnected transcription factors were
organ-specific, 6% were common for 4 organs, with nuclear receptors as
protagonists, accounting for almost 40% of all transcriptional regulators during 
fasting. The common transcription factors were PPARa, HNF4a, GCRa, AR (androgen
receptor), SREBP1 and -2, FOXOs, EGR1, c-JUN, c-MYC, SP1, YY1, and ETS1. Our data
strongly suggest that the control of metabolism in four metabolically active
organs is exerted by transcription factors that are activated by nutrient signals
and serves, at least partly, to prevent irreversible brain damage.

PMCID: PMC3091239
PMID: 21393243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Development. 2011 Apr;138(7):1421-32. doi: 10.1242/dev.057323.

FGF/MAPK/Ets signaling renders pigment cell precursors competent to respond to
Wnt signal by directly controlling Ci-Tcf transcription.

Squarzoni P(1), Parveen F, Zanetti L, Ristoratore F, Spagnuolo A.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Biology Laboratory, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn,
Villa Comunale, 80121 Napoli, Italy.

FGF and Wnt pathways constitute two fundamental signaling cascades, which appear 
to crosstalk in cooperative or antagonistic fashions in several developmental
processes. In vertebrates, both cascades are involved in pigment cell
development, but the possible interplay between FGF and Wnt remains to be
elucidated. In this study, we have investigated the role of FGF and Wnt signaling
in development of the pigment cells in the sensory organs of C. intestinalis.
This species possesses the basic features of an ancestral chordate, thus sharing 
conserved molecular developmental mechanisms with vertebrates. Chemical and
targeted perturbation approaches revealed that a FGF signal, spreading in time
from early gastrulation to neural tube closure, is responsible for pigment cell
precursor induction. This signal is transmitted via the MAPK pathway, which
activates the Ci-Ets1/2 transcription factor. Targeted perturbation of Ci-TCF, a 
downstream factor of the canonical Wnt pathway, indicated its contribution to
pigment cell differentiation Furthermore, analyses of the Ci-Tcf regulatory
region revealed the involvement of the FGF effector, Ci-Ets1/2, in Ci-Tcf
transcriptional regulation in pigment cell precursors. Our results indicate that 
both FGF and the canonical Wnt pathways are involved in C. intestinalis pigment
cell induction and differentiation. Moreover, we present a case of direct
transcriptional regulation exerted by the FGF signaling cascade, via the
MAPK-ERK-Ets1/2, on the Wnt downstream gene Ci-Tcf. Several examples of FGF/Wnt
signaling crosstalk have been described in different developmental processes;
however, to our knowledge, FGF-Wnt cross-interaction at the transcriptional level
has never been previously reported. These findings further contribute to
clarifying the multitude of FGF-Wnt pathway interactions.

PMID: 21385767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19816-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.231647. Epub 2011
Mar 7.

Characterizing the N- and C-terminal Small ubiquitin-like modifier
(SUMO)-interacting motifs of the scaffold protein DAXX.

Escobar-Cabrera E(1), Okon M, Lau DK, Dart CF, Bonvin AM, McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

DAXX is a scaffold protein with diverse roles that often depend upon binding SUMO
via its N- and/or C-terminal SUMO-interacting motifs (SIM-N and SIM-C). Using NMR
spectroscopy, we characterized the in vitro binding properties of peptide models 
of SIM-N and SIM-C to SUMO-1 and SUMO-2. In each case, binding was mediated by
hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions and weakened with increasing ionic
strength. Neither isolated SIM showed any significant paralog specificity, and
the measured µM range K(D) values of SIM-N toward both SUMO-1 and SUMO-2 were
~4-fold lower than those of SIM-C. Furthermore, SIM-N bound SUMO-1 predominantly 
in a parallel orientation, whereas SIM-C interconverted between parallel and
antiparallel binding modes on an ms to µs time scale. The differences in
affinities and binding modes are attributed to the differences in charged
residues that flank the otherwise identical hydrophobic core sequences of the two
SIMs. In addition, within its native context, SIM-N bound intramolecularly to the
adjacent N-terminal helical bundle domain of DAXX, thus reducing its apparent
affinity for SUMO. This behavior suggests a possible autoregulatory mechanism for
DAXX. The interaction of a C-terminal fragment of DAXX with an N-terminal
fragment of the sumoylated Ets1 transcription factor was mediated by SIM-C.
Importantly, this interaction did not involve any direct contacts between DAXX
and Ets1, but rather was derived from the non-covalent binding of SIM-C to
SUMO-1, which in turn was covalently linked to the unstructured N-terminal
segment of Ets1. These results provide insights into the binding mechanisms and
hence biological roles of the DAXX SUMO-interacting motifs.

PMCID: PMC3103359
PMID: 21383010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 May;31(5):1084-92. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.221804. Epub 2011 Mar 3.

Early inflammatory reactions in atherosclerosis are induced by proline-rich
tyrosine kinase/reactive oxygen species-mediated release of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha and subsequent activation of the p21Cip1/Ets-1/p300 system.

Katsume A(1), Okigaki M, Matsui A, Che J, Adachi Y, Kishita E, Yamaguchi S, Ikeda
K, Ueyama T, Matoba S, Yamada H, Matsubara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, 602-8566, Japan.

Retraction in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Apr;34(4):e6.

OBJECTIVE: Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are involved in the initial process of
atherosclerosis, whereas it remains to be determined how atherogenic stimulus
causes ROS-mediated proinflammatory reactions. Here, we focused on proline-rich
tyrosine kinase (PYK2)-mediated ROS generation and examined how atherogenic
stimulus causes early proinflammatory reactions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: PYK2-deficient (knockout [KO]) (PYK2-KO) mice were crossbred
with apolipoprotein E (ApoE)-deficient (PYK2-KO/ApoE-KO) mice. PYK2-KO/ApoE-KO
mice and endothelial cells (EC) were used for the study. Aortic atherogenic
lesions in PYK2-KO/ApoE-KO mice were markedly decreased (55% versus ApoE-KO)
after 8 weeks of a Western diet. Aortic PYK2 was activated as early as 7 days
after the Western diet, when inflammatory cells were not yet activated. Addition 
of the proatherogenic oxidized phospholipid lysophosphatidylcholine caused
activation of endothelial PYK2. Lysophosphatidylcholine-activated PYK2 induced
NADPH oxidase-mediated ROS generation and ROS-mediated synthesis of tumor
necrosis factor-a (TNFa), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), and p21Cip1/Ets-1. Neutralizing anti-TNFa antibody
or knockdown of p21Cip1/Ets-1 system blocked the induction of VCAM-1 and MCP-1.
PYK2 deficiency abolished these ROS-mediated proinflammatory reactions. Further
analysis revealed that PYK2/ROS-mediated p21Cip1/Ets-1 activation upregulated the
transcription of the MCP-1 gene in collaboration with p300 transcription
coactivator.
CONCLUSIONS: PYK2 is a key tyrosine kinase activated by high cholesterol
exposure, which causes ROS-mediated TNFa release and induces TNFa-dependent
expression of proinflammatory molecules via the p21Cip1/Ets-1/p300 transcription 
system.

PMID: 21372295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Immunol Lett. 2011 Jun 30;137(1-2):70-7. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.02.020. Epub
2011 Feb 24.

Oxygen tension regulates NK cells differentiation from hematopoietic stem cells
in vitro.

Yun S(1), Lee SH, Yoon SR, Myung PK, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Therapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Natural killer (NK) cells are differentiated from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
which are located at the lowest end of an oxygen gradient within the bone marrow 
(BM). In this report, we investigated whether oxygen tension could affect NK cell
differentiation from hematopoietic cells in vitro. We found that hypoxia led to
an inhibition of differentiation in NK cells, and increased oxygen supply
alleviated this inhibition and restored NK cell differentiation under hypoxic
condition. Hypoxia-treated cells demonstrated reduced mRNA expression of
transcription factors (TFs) that have important roles in NK cell differentiation,
such as EOMES, T-bet, GATA-3 and ETS-1. Moreover, hypoxia-pretreated cells
recovered mRNA expression of TFs when the oxygen tension was changed to normoxia.
Our findings suggest that oxygen tension modulates in vitro differentiation of NK
cells through the regulation of TF expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21354208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Br J Cancer. 2011 Mar 15;104(6):1007-12. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.33. Epub 2011 Feb 
22.

Expression of osteopontin coregulators in primary colorectal cancer and
associated liver metastases.

Mole DJ(1), O'Neill C, Hamilton P, Olabi B, Robinson V, Williams L, Diamond T,
El-Tanani M, Campbell FC.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Surgical Sciences (Surgery), The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH8 9YL, Scotland, UK.

BACKGROUND: A transcription regulatory complex (TRC) that includes Ets1, Ets2,
PEA3 and ß-catenin/T-cell factors regulates osteopontin (OPN) that is implicated 
in colorectal cancer (CRC) dissemination. The consistency of OPN transcriptional 
control between primary CRC and metastases is unclear. This study investigates
expression and prognostic significance of the OPN-TRC in primary human CRC and
associated colorectal liver metastases (CRLM).
METHODS: Osteopontin-TRC factors were assayed by digital microscopy in 38 primary
CRCs and matched CRLM specimens and assessed against clinical prognosis.
RESULTS: In primary CRC, OPN expression intensity correlated with that of its
co-activators, PEA3 (r=0.600; P<0.01), Ets1 (r=0.552; P<0.01), Ets2 (r=0.521;
P<0.01) and had prognostic significance. Osteopontin intensity in primary CRC
inversely correlated with the interval between diagnosis and resection of CRLM.
Overall OPN intensity was lower in CRLM than primary CRC and correlations with
co-activators were weaker, for example, Ets1 (P=0.047), PEA3 (P=0.022) or
nonsignificant (Ets2). The ratio of OPN expression in CRLM vs primary CRC had
prognostic significance.
CONCLUSION: This study supports transcriptional control of OPN by known
coregulators in both primary and secondary CRC. Weaker associations in CRLM
suggest involvement of other unknown factors possibly from the liver
microenvironment or resulting from additional genetic or epigenetic changes that 
drive tumour metastatic capability in OPN transcriptional control.

PMCID: PMC3065273
PMID: 21343932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Hum Pathol. 2011 Sep;42(9):1319-28. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.11.022. Epub 2011
Feb 16.

Transcription factors engaged in development of NK cells are commonly expressed
in nasal NK/T-cell lymphomas.

Zhang S(1), Li T, Zhang B, Nong L, Aozasa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034,
China.

Extranodal natural killer/T (NK/T)-cell lymphoma, nasal type, is a prevailing
tumor in Asia with distinct clinical, pathologic, and immunophenotypic features. 
Previous study revealed amplification and overexpression of T-bet in extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type. As a transcription factor, T-bet functionally
cooperates with its family member eomesodermin (EOMES) or ETS family members
(ETS-1 and MEF) and positively regulates the development and cytotoxic function
of natural killer (NK) cells. To evaluate their role in extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type, the expression status and clinical relevance of these genes
were analyzed in 40 cases of this tumor by in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. Tumor cells in all 40 cases expressed cytotoxic granule
proteins, of which 39 contained the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome. Two (8.7%)
of 23 cases showed T-cell receptor (TCR) <U+03B3> gene clonal rearrangement, confirming 
cytotoxic T lineage of cell derivation. The expression level of T-bet as revealed
by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry was high in extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, (82.5% and 100%) and peripheral T-cell lymphomas 
(94.4% and 72.2%) but not in mature B-cell lymphomas in our control group (0% and
0%). By in situ hybridization, high expression of EOMES (80.0%), ETS-1 (82.5%),
and MEF (62.5%) was observed in cases of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal
type, but none of the control groups and cases expressed these molecules.
Coexpression of T-bet and EOMES, ETS-1, or MEF was found in 30 (75%), 25 (62.5%),
and 21 cases (52.5%), respectively. The frequency of coexpression of T-bet and
EOMES was significantly higher than that of other genes. Transcription factors
engaged in NK-cell development are highly expressed in extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type, suggesting a role in the biologic behavior of this tumor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21329961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):12049-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.159756. Epub 2011
Feb 14.

Overexpression of IL-32alpha increases natural killer cell-mediated killing
through up-regulation of Fas and UL16-binding protein 2 (ULBP2) expression in
human chronic myeloid leukemia cells.

Cheon S(1), Lee JH, Park S, Bang SI, Lee WJ, Yoon DY, Yoon SS, Kim T, Min H, Cho 
BJ, Lee HJ, Lee KW, Jeong SH, Park H, Cho D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sookmyung Women's University, and Konkuk
University Hospital, Seoul 140-742, Republic of Korea.

IL-32 was recently identified as a proinflammatory cytokine that is induced by
IL-18 in natural killer (NK) cells and is highly correlated with inflammatory
disorders. However, the relationship between IL-32 and tumor progression is still
unknown. In this study, we investigated whether overexpression of IL-32 affects
susceptibility of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells to NK cells.
Interestingly, IL-32a-overexpressing CML cell lines, K562, Kcl22, and BV173,
showed higher NK cell-mediated killing. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that
overexpression of IL-32a induced increased expression of Fas and UL16-binding
protein 2 (ULBP2) in CML cells. The direct relationship between overexpression of
surface molecules by IL-32a and increased NK cell-mediated killing was confirmed 
by Fas or ULBP2 siRNA transfection. IL-32a-induced Fas and ULBP2 expression are
regulated p38 MAPK. In addition, the transcription factor Ets1 plays a key role
in ULBP2 specific expression by IL-32a overexpression in ULBP family members.
Taken together, these data show that IL-32a stimulates Fas and ULBP2 expression
via activation of p38 MAPK, which increases NK susceptibility of CML cells.
Enhanced NK cell susceptibility of CML cells by IL-32a overexpression may improve
the efficiency of NK cell-based immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3069408
PMID: 21321117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Virchows Arch. 2011 Apr;458(4):421-30. doi: 10.1007/s00428-011-1053-6. Epub 2011 
Feb 12.

Analysis of select members of the E26 (ETS) transcription factors family in
colorectal cancer.

Deves C(1), Renck D, Garicochea B, da Silva VD, Giulianni Lopes T, Fillman H,
Fillman L, Lunardini S, Basso LA, Santos DS, Batista EL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Molecular and Functional Biology (CP-BMF), Pontificia
Universidade Catolica do Rio Grande do Sul, Av. Ipiranga 6681 Bld. 92A, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil.

The E-twenty-six (ETS) family of transcription factors is known to act as
positive or negative regulators of the expression of genes that are involved in
diverse biological processes, including those that control cellular
proliferation, differentiation, hematopoiesis, apoptosis, metastasis, tissue
remodeling, and angiogenesis. Identification of target gene promoters of normal
and oncogenic transcription factors provides new insights into the regulation of 
genes that are involved in the control of normal cell growth and differentiation.
The aim of the present investigation was to analyze the differential expression
of 11 ETS (ELF-3, ESE3, ETS1, ETV3, ETV4, ETV6, NERF, PDEF, PU1, Spi-B, and
Spi-C) as potential markers for prognostic of colorectal cancer. A series of
paired tissue biopsies consisting of a tumor and a non-affected control sample
were harvested from 28 individuals suffering from diagnosed colorectal lesions.
Total RNA was isolated from the samples, and after reverse transcription,
differential expression of the select ETS was carried out through real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Tumor staging as determined by histopathology was
carried out to correlate the degree of tumor invasiveness with the expression of 
the ETS genes. The results demonstrated a different quantitative profile of
expression in tumors and normal tissues. ETV4 was significantly upregulated with 
further increase in the event of lymph node involvement. PDEF and Spi-B presented
downregulation, which was more significant when lymph node involvement was
present. These findings were supported by immunohistochemistry of tumoral
tissues. The results suggest that select ETS may serve as potential markers of
colorectal cancer invasiveness and metastasis.

PMID: 21318373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):12024-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.168625. Epub 2011
Feb 12.

Functional cooperation between Snail1 and twist in the regulation of ZEB1
expression during epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Dave N(1), Guaita-Esteruelas S, Gutarra S, Frias À, Beltran M, Peiró S, de
Herreros AG.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Recerca en Càncer, IMIM-Hospital del Mar, and Department de
Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, 
Spain.

Snail1 and Zeb1 are E-cadherin-transcriptional repressors induced during
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). In this article we have analyzed the
factors controlling Zeb1 expression during EMT. In NMuMG cells treated with
TGF-ß, Snail1 RNA and protein are induced 1 h after addition of the cytokine
preceding Zeb1 up-regulation that requires 6-8 h. Zeb1 gene expression is caused 
by increased RNA levels but also by enhanced protein stability and is markedly
dependent on Snail1 because depletion of this protein prevents Zeb1 protein and
RNA up-regulation. In addition to Snail1, depletion of the Twist transcriptional 
factor retards Zeb1 stimulation by TGF-ß or decreases Zeb1 expression in other
cellular models indicating that this factor is also required for Zeb1 expression.
Accordingly, Snail1 and Twist cooperate in the induction of Zeb1: co-transfection
of both cDNAs is required for the maximal expression of ZEB1 mRNA. Unexpectedly, 
the expression of Snail1 and Twist shows a mutual dependence although to a
different extent; whereas Twist depletion retards Snail1 up-regulation by TGF-ß, 
Snail1 is necessary for the rapid increase in Twist protein and later
up-regulation of Twist1 mRNA induced by the cytokine. Besides this effect on
Twist, Snail1 also induces the nuclear translocation of Ets1, another factor
required for Zeb1 expression. Both Twist and Ets1 bind to the ZEB1 promoter
although to different elements: whereas Ets1 interacts with the proximal
promoter, Twist does it with a 700-bp sequence upstream of the transcription
start site. These results indicate that Snail1 controls Zeb1 expression at
multiple levels and acts cooperatively with Twist in the ZEB1 gene transcription 
induction.

PMCID: PMC3069405
PMID: 21317430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Apr;215(2):286-93. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.12.024. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

Endothelial enriched microRNAs regulate angiotensin II-induced endothelial
inflammation and migration.

Zhu N(1), Zhang D, Chen S, Liu X, Lin L, Huang X, Guo Z, Liu J, Wang Y, Yuan W,
Qin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, 168 Changhai Road, Shanghai 200433, PR China.

Inflammation is observed at all stages of atherosclerosis. The initial stage of
atherosclerosis is characterized by recruitment of leukocytes to activated
endothelial cells (ECs). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of 19-25 nucleotides,
non-protein-coding RNAs that repress target gene expression by translational
inhibition or mRNA degradation. The link between miRNA and endothelial functions 
is largely unknown. Northern blot showed that miR-155 and miR-221 were highly
expressed in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and vascular smooth 
muscle cells (VSMCs). Bioinformatics analysis proposed Ets-1, a key endothelial
transcription factor for inflammation and tube formation, as a candidate target
for miR-155 and miR-221/222 cluster. The effect was demonstrated by luciferase
reporter assay and Western blot. By using Western blot, we also confirmed that
angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) is a target of miR-155 in HUVECs.
Quantitative PCR showed that Ets-1 and its downstream genes, including VCAM1,
MCP1 and FLT1, were upregulated in angiotensin II-stimulated HUVECs, and this
effect was partially reversed by overexpression of miR-155 and miR-221/222. In
addition, cell adhesion assay revealed overexpression of miR-155 and miR-221/222 
effectively decreased the adhesion of Jurkat T cells to Ang II-stimulated HUVECs.
Besides, by targeting AT1R, miR-155 can also decrease the HUVECs migration in
response to Ang II. In summary, HUVECs highly expressed miR-155 may co-target
AT1R and Ets-1 while miR-221/222 targets Ets-1, which indirectly regulate the
expression of several inflammatory molecules of ECs, and therefore attenuate the 
adhesion of Jurkat T cells to activated HUVECs and reduce HUVECs migration. These
findings present possible therapeutic targets in atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21310411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Development. 2011 Mar;138(5):937-45. doi: 10.1242/dev.058396.

The control of foxN2/3 expression in sea urchin embryos and its function in the
skeletogenic gene regulatory network.

Rho HK(1), McClay DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708 USA.

Early development requires well-organized temporal and spatial regulation of
transcription factors that are assembled into gene regulatory networks (GRNs). In
the sea urchin, an endomesoderm GRN model explains much of the specification in
the endoderm and mesoderm prior to gastrulation, yet some GRN connections remain 
incomplete. Here, we characterize FoxN2/3 in the primary mesenchyme cell (PMC)
GRN state. Expression of foxN2/3 mRNA begins in micromeres at the hatched
blastula stage and then is lost from micromeres at the mesenchyme blastula stage.
foxN2/3 expression then shifts to the non-skeletogenic mesoderm and, later, to
the endoderm. Here, we show that Pmar1, Ets1 and Tbr are necessary for activation
of foxN2/3 in micromeres. The later endomesoderm expression of foxN2/3 is
independent of the earlier expression of foxN2/3 in micromeres and is independent
of signals from PMCs. FoxN2/3 is necessary for several steps in the formation of 
the larval skeleton. Early expression of genes for the skeletal matrix is
dependent on FoxN2/3, but only until the mesenchyme blastula stage as foxN2/3
mRNA disappears from PMCs at that time and we assume that the protein is not
abnormally long-lived. Knockdown of FoxN2/3 inhibits normal PMC ingression and
foxN2/3 morphant PMCs do not organize in the blastocoel and fail to join the PMC 
syncytium. In addition, without FoxN2/3, the PMCs fail to repress the transfating
of other mesodermal cells into the skeletogenic lineage. Thus, FoxN2/3 is
necessary for normal ingression, for expression of several skeletal matrix genes,
for preventing transfating and for fusion of the PMC syncytium.

PMCID: PMC3035096
PMID: 21303847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Autoimmun Rev. 2011 Jun;10(8):439-43. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2011.01.007. Epub
2011 Feb 4.

The dual nature of Ets-1: focus to the pathogenesis of systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Leng RX(1), Pan HF, Chen GM, Feng CC, Fan YG, Ye DQ, Li XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, 230032, PR China.

E26 transformation-specific-1 (Ets-1) belongs to the Ets family of transcription 
factors which share a common 85-amino-acid DNA-binding domain. Ets-1 is essential
to regulation of the immune system including immune cell proliferation and
differentiation. Past data demonstrated Ets-1 play a role in negative regulation 
of Th17 cells and B cells differentiation. Recently, association of genetic
variation in Ets-1 with susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have
been independently identified by two Genome-wide association studies (GWAS), and 
decreased Ets-1mRNA level in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of SLE
patients has been reported. All these findings suggest that the transcription
factor is broadly linked to the pathogenesis of this disease. However, aberrant
control of other immune cells and effector molecules illuminated the complexities
of Ets-1 biology. In this review article, we will focus on the dual nature of
Ets-1 and discuss its regulatory capability. Hopefully the information obtained
will lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis and development of novel 
therapeutic strategies for SLE.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21296190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Oncol Rep. 2011 Apr;25(4):1125-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1156. Epub 2011 Jan 21.

Ets-1 is implicated in the regulation of androgen co-regulator FHL2 and reveals
specificity for migration, but not invasion, of PC3 prostate cancer cells.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Langer B, Lindstrot A, Florin A, Bosserhoff A, Buettner R,
Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

Different members of the Ets-family of transcription factors are involved in
TMPRSS-2-Ets translocations frequently found in human prostate cancers. We
previously reported that Ets-1, which is the prototype of Ets-family members,
promotes both migration and invasion of melanoma, Hela and glioma cells. Here, we
examined whether Ets-1 has a similar effect upon migration and invasion of PC3
prostate cancer cells, and whether it is implicated in the regulation of the
androgen co-regulator four and a half LIM only protein-2 (FHL2). Two stable PC3
cell cultures were established by transfection with either an Ets-1 inverse
antisense expression vector or a mock control vector. Western blot analysis
confirmed presence of Ets-1 in mock and absence in Ets-1 inverse cells.
Microarray and qRT-PCR revealed an up-regulation of FHL2 in Ets-1 blocked cells, 
compared to mock. To examine the effects of Ets-1 upon cell migration, a wound
assay was performed, and demonstrated that wounds were completely colonized by
mock compared to Ets-1 blocked cells after 55 h. Evaluation of the effect upon
invasion was examined using the Boyden chamber, which revealed no significant
difference between mock and Ets-1 blocked cells. In conclusion, our study
demonstrated for the first time that Ets-1 is implicated in the regulation of the
androgen co-regulator FHL2, and reveals specificity of action for migration, but 
not invasion of PC3 prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 21258770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jan 19;12:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-43.

MMP1 bimodal expression and differential response to inflammatory mediators is
linked to promoter polymorphisms.

Affara M(1), Dunmore BJ, Sanders DA, Johnson N, Print CG, Charnock-Jones DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QP, UK.

BACKGROUND: Identifying the functional importance of the millions of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome is a difficult challenge.
Therefore, a reverse strategy, which identifies functionally important SNPs by
virtue of the bimodal abundance across the human population of the SNP-related
mRNAs will be useful. Those mRNA transcripts that are expressed at two distinct
abundances in proportion to SNP allele frequency may warrant further study.
Matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) is important in both normal development and in 
numerous pathologies. Although much research has been conducted to investigate
the expression of MMP1 in many different cell types and conditions, the
regulation of its expression is still not fully understood.
RESULTS: In this study, we used a novel but straightforward method based on
agglomerative hierarchical clustering to identify bimodally expressed transcripts
in human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) microarray data from 15
individuals. We found that MMP1 mRNA abundance was bimodally distributed in
un-treated HUVECs and showed a bimodal response to inflammatory mediator
treatment. RT-PCR and MMP1 activity assays confirmed the bimodal regulation and
DNA sequencing of 69 individuals identified an MMP1 gene promoter polymorphism
that segregated precisely with the MMP1 bimodal expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments indicated that the transcription factors
(TFs) ETS1, ETS2 and GATA3, bind to the MMP1 promoter in the region of this
polymorphism and may contribute to the bimodal expression.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a simple method to identify putative bimodally expressed
RNAs from transcriptome data that is effective yet easy for non-statisticians to 
understand and use. This method identified bimodal endothelial cell expression of
MMP1, which appears to be biologically significant with implications for
inflammatory disease. (271 Words).

PMCID: PMC3040839
PMID: 21244711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2011 Mar;16(1):101-13. doi: 10.2478/s11658-010-0043-z. Epub
2010 Dec 27.

Ets-1 expression and gemcitabine chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer cells.

Khanna A(1), Mahalingam K, Chakrabarti D, Periyasamy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of High Throughput Screening and Biotechnology, Piramal Life
Sciences Ltd., 1A, Nirlon Complex, Goregaon-E, Mumbai, 400063, Maharashtra,
India.

Gemcitabine, a novel pyrimidine nucleoside analog, has become the standard
chemotherapeutic agent for pancreatic cancer patients. The clinical impact of
gemcitabine remains modest owing to the high degree of inherent and acquired
resistance. There are various lines of evidence that confirm the role of Ets-1, a
proto-oncoprotein, in tumor invasion, progression, and chemoresistance. This
study examines a hypothesis that implicates Ets-1 in the development of
gemcitabine-resistance in pancreatic cancer cells. Ets-1 protein expression was
assessed in parental pancreatic cancer cells and their gemcitabine-resistant
clones. Western blot analysis revealed elevated levels of Ets-1 protein
expression in gemcitabine-resistant PANC1(GemRes) (4.8-fold increase; P < 0.05), 
MIA PaCa2(GemRes) (3.2-fold increase; P < 0.05), and Capan2(GemRes) (2.1-fold
increase; P < 0.05) cells as compared to their parental counterparts. A time
course analysis was conducted to determine the change in Ets-1 expression in the 
parental cells after incubation with gemcitabine. Reverse transcriptase
quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) and Western blot analysis revealed a
significant increase in Ets-1 expression. All the three parental cells incubated 
with gemcitabine showed elevated Ets-1 protein expression at 6 h. By 24 h, the
expression level had decreased. Using small interfering RNA (siRNA) against Ets-1
in gemcitabine-resistant cells, we demonstrated a reversal in gemcitabine
chemosensitivity and also detected a marked reduction in the expression of the
Ets-1 target genes MMP1 and uPA. Our novel finding demonstrates the significance 
of Ets-1 in the development of gemcitabine chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer
cells. Based on these results, a new siRNA-based therapeutic strategy targeting
the Ets-1 genes can be designed to overcome chemoresistance.

PMID: 21225469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Oncol. 2011 Feb;5(1):61-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.004. Epub 2010 Nov 
25.

Methylation profiling with a panel of cancer related genes: association with
estrogen receptor, TP53 mutation status and expression subtypes in sporadic
breast cancer.

Rønneberg JA(1), Fleischer T, Solvang HK, Nordgard SH, Edvardsen H, Potapenko I, 
Nebdal D, Daviaud C, Gut I, Bukholm I, Naume B, Børresen-Dale AL, Tost J,
Kristensen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University
Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be divided in subtypes based on
histology, gene expression profiles as well as differences in genomic
aberrations. Distinct global DNA methylation profiles have been reported in
normal breast epithelial cells as well as in breast tumors. However, the
influence of the tumor methylome on the previously described subgroups of breast 
cancer is not fully understood. Here we report the DNA methylation profiles of 80
breast tumors using a panel of 807 cancer related genes interrogating 1505 CpG
sites. We identified three major clusters based on the methylation profiles; one 
consisting of mainly tumors of myoepithelial origin and two other clusters with
tumors of predominantly luminal epithelial origin. The clusters were different
with respect to estrogen receptor status, TP53 status, ErbB2 status and grade.
The most significantly differentially methylated genes including HDAC1, TFF1,
OGG1, BMP3, FZD9 and HOXA11 were confirmed by pyrosequencing. Gene Ontology
analysis revealed enrichment for genes involved in developmental processes
including homeobox domain genes (HOXA9, HOXA11, PAX6, MYBL2, ISL1 and IPF1) and
(ETS1, HDAC1, CREBBP, GAS7, SPI1 and TBX1). Extensive correlation to mRNA
expression was observed. Pathway analyses identified a significant association
with canonical (curated) pathways such as hepatic fibrosis including genes like
EGF, NGFR and TNF, dendritic cell maturation and the NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway. Our
results show that breast tumor expression subtypes harbor major epigenetic
differences and tumors with similar gene expression profiles might belong to
epigenetically different subtypes. Some of the transcription factors identified, 
with key roles in differentiation and development might play a role in inducing
and maintaining the different phenotypes.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21212030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 11;108(2):626-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1006886108. Epub 2010 Dec 27.

Protease activated receptor-1 inhibits the Maspin tumor-suppressor gene to
determine the melanoma metastatic phenotype.

Villares GJ(1), Zigler M, Dobroff AS, Wang H, Song R, Melnikova VO, Huang L,
Braeuer RR, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The thrombin receptor protease activated receptor-1 (PAR-1) is overexpressed in
metastatic melanoma cell lines and tumor specimens. Previously, we demonstrated a
significant reduction in tumor growth and experimental lung metastasis after
PAR-1 silencing via systemic delivery of siRNA encapsulated into nanoliposomes.
Gene expression profiling identified a 40-fold increase in expression of Maspin
in PAR-1-silenced metastatic melanoma cell lines. Maspin promoter activity was
significantly increased after PAR-1 silencing, suggesting that PAR1 negatively
regulates Maspin at the transcriptional level. ChIP analyses revealed that PAR-1 
decreases binding of Ets-1 and c-Jun transcription factors to the Maspin
promoter, both known to activate Maspin transcription. PAR-1 silencing did not
affect Ets-1 or c-Jun expression; rather it resulted in increased expression of
the chromatin remodeling complex CBP/p300, as well as decreased activity of the
CBP/p300 inhibitor p38, resulting in increased binding of Ets-1 and c-Jun to the 
Maspin promoter and higher Maspin expression. Functionally, Maspin expression
reduced the invasive capability of melanoma cells after PAR-1 silencing, which
was abrogated after rescuing with PAR-1. Furthermore, tumor growth and
experimental lung metastasis was significantly decreased after expressing Maspin 
in a metastatic melanoma cell line. Moreover, silencing Maspin in PAR-1-silenced 
cells reverted the inhibition of tumor growth and experimental lung metastasis.
Herein, we demonstrate a mechanism by which PAR-1 negatively regulates the
expression of the Maspin tumor-suppressor gene in the acquisition of the
metastatic melanoma phenotype, thus attributing an alternative function to PAR-1 
other than coagulation.

PMCID: PMC3021062
PMID: 21187389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. EMBO J. 2011 Feb 2;30(3):494-509. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.342. Epub 2010 Dec 21.

Differential genomic targeting of the transcription factor TAL1 in alternate
haematopoietic lineages.

Palii CG(1), Perez-Iratxeta C, Yao Z, Cao Y, Dai F, Davison J, Atkins H, Allan D,
Dilworth FJ, Gentleman R, Tapscott SJ, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Department of Regenerative Medicine,
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

TAL1/SCL is a master regulator of haematopoiesis whose expression promotes
opposite outcomes depending on the cell type: differentiation in the erythroid
lineage or oncogenesis in the T-cell lineage. Here, we used a combination of ChIP
sequencing and gene expression profiling to compare the function of TAL1 in
normal erythroid and leukaemic T cells. Analysis of the genome-wide binding
properties of TAL1 in these two haematopoietic lineages revealed new insight into
the mechanism by which transcription factors select their binding sites in
alternate lineages. Our study shows limited overlap in the TAL1-binding profile
between the two cell types with an unexpected preference for ETS and RUNX motifs 
adjacent to E-boxes in the T-cell lineage. Furthermore, we show that TAL1
interacts with RUNX1 and ETS1, and that these transcription factors are
critically required for TAL1 binding to genes that modulate T-cell
differentiation. Thus, our findings highlight a critical role of the cellular
environment in modulating transcription factor binding, and provide insight into 
the mechanism by which TAL1 inhibits differentiation leading to oncogenesis in
the T-cell lineage.

PMCID: PMC3034015
PMID: 21179004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Blood. 2011 Feb 10;117(6):1880-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-309468. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Differential requirements for the Ets transcription factor Elf-1 in the
development of NKT cells and NK cells.

Choi HJ(1), Geng Y, Cho H, Li S, Giri PK, Felio K, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA.

E26 Transformation specific (Ets) family transcription factors control the
expression of a large number of genes regulating hematopoietic cell development
and function. Two such transcription factors, Ets-1 and myeloid Elf-1-like factor
(MEF), have been shown to play critical roles in both natural killer (NK)- and
NKT-cell development, but not in the development of conventional T cells. In this
study, we address the role of E74-like factor 1 (Elf-1), another Ets family
transcription factor that is closely related to MEF but divergent from Ets-1, in 
NK- and NKT-cell development using Elf-1-deficient (Elf-1(-/-)) mice. Whereas the
proportion of NK cells in Elf-1(-/-) mice was normal, the proportion of NKT cells
was significantly reduced in the thymus and periphery of Elf-1(-/-) mice compared
with wild-type (WT) mice. Although Ets-1-deficient mice lack NKT cells
altogether, Elf-1(-/-) mice exhibited only a partial block in NKT-cell
development caused by a cell-intrinsic defect in the selection, survival, and
maturation of NKT cells. In addition, residual NKT cells found in Elf-1(-/-) mice
produced less cytokine upon antigen stimulation compared with WT NKT cells. Our
data demonstrate that Elf-1 plays an important and nonredundant role in the
development and function of NKT cells, but is not involved in NK-cell
development.

PMCID: PMC3056637
PMID: 21148815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):969-76. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002099. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Ets-1 maintains IL-7 receptor expression in peripheral T cells.

Grenningloh R(1), Tai TS, Frahm N, Hongo TC, Chicoine AT, Brander C, Kaufmann DE,
Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The expression of CD127, the IL-7-binding subunit of the IL-7 R, is tightly
regulated during the development and activation of T cells and is reduced during 
chronic viral infection. However, the molecular mechanism regulating the dynamic 
expression of CD127 is still poorly understood. In this study, we report that the
transcription factor Ets-1 is required for maintaining the expression of CD127 in
murine peripheral T cells. Ets-1 binds to and activates the CD127 promoter, and
its absence leads to reduced CD127 expression, attenuated IL-7 signaling, and
impaired IL-7-dependent homeostatic proliferation of T cells. The expression of
CD127 and Ets-1 is strongly correlated in human T cells. Both CD127 and Ets-1
expression are decreased in CD8(+) T cells during HIV infection. In addition,
HIV-associated loss of CD127 is only observed in Ets-1(low) effector memory and
central memory but not in Ets-1(high) naive CD8(+) T cells. Taken together, our
data identify Ets-1 as a critical regulator of CD127 expression in T cells.

PMCID: PMC3074256
PMID: 21148801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 21;286(3):2047-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.158790. Epub 2010 
Nov 16.

miR-200b targets Ets-1 and is down-regulated by hypoxia to induce angiogenic
response of endothelial cells.

Chan YC(1), Khanna S, Roy S, Sen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State
University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The miR-200 family plays a crucial role in epithelial to mesenchymal transition
via controlling cell migration and polarity. We hypothesized that miR-200b, one
miR-200 family member, could regulate angiogenic responses via modulating
endothelial cell migration. Delivery of the miR-200b mimic in human microvascular
endothelial cells (HMECs) suppressed the angiogenic response, whereas
miR-200b-depleted HMECs exhibited elevated angiogenesis in vitro, as evidenced by
Matrigel® tube formation and cell migration. Using in silico studies, miR target 
reporter assay, and Western blot analysis revealed that v-ets erythroblastosis
virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (Ets-1), a crucial angiogenesis-related
transcription factor, serves as a novel direct target of miR-200b. Knocking down 
endogenous Ets-1 simulated an anti-angiogenic response of the miR-200b
mimic-transfected cells. Certain Ets-1-associated genes, namely matrix
metalloproteinase 1 and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, were
negatively regulated by miR-200b. Overexpression of Ets-1 rescued
miR-200b-dependent impairment in angiogenic response and suppression of
Ets-1-associated gene expression. Both hypoxia as well as HIF-1a stabilization
inhibited miR-200b expression and elevated Ets-1 expression. Experiments to
identify how miR-200b modulates angiogenesis under a low oxygen environment
illustrated that hypoxia-induced miR-200b down-regulation de-repressed Ets-1
expression to promote angiogenesis. This study provides the first evidence that
hypoxia-sensitive miR-200b is involved in induction of angiogenesis via directly 
targeting Ets-1 in HMECs.

PMCID: PMC3023502
PMID: 21081489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Am J Hypertens. 2010 Dec;23(12):1252. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2010.190.

Epithelium-specific ETS-1: a counter-regulatory factor against vascular
dysfunction and inflammation.

Chen CC(1), Ferreri NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.
andy_chen@nymc.edu

Comment on
    Am J Hypertens. 2010 Dec;23(12):1312-7.

PMCID: PMC3004754
PMID: 21079584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Feb 22;52(2):1055-63. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5777.

Quercetin induces the expression of peroxiredoxins 3 and 5 via the Nrf2/NRF1
transcription pathway.

Miyamoto N(1), Izumi H, Miyamoto R, Kondo H, Tawara A, Sasaguri Y, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Fukuoka, Japan.

PURPOSE: The flavonoids have potent antioxidant and free-radical scavenging
properties and are beneficial in the prevention and treatment of ocular diseases 
including glaucoma. The authors have previously reported that antiglaucoma agents
could transcriptionally activate the antioxidant protein peroxiredoxin (PRDX)2.
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether quercetin can activate
transcription factors and induce the expression of the PRDX family.
METHODS: To demonstrate whether quercetin can transcriptionally induce the
expression of the PRDX family, trabecular meshwork cells were treated with
quercetin, and PRDX expression and transcription factors were both investigated
by Western blot analysis, reporter assays, and siRNA strategies. Subsequently,
cellular sensitivity to oxidative stress was determined.
RESULTS: Expression of the PRDX3 and PRDX5 genes was induced by quercetin in a
time- and dose-dependent manner. NRF1 transactivates the promoter activity of
both PRDX3 and PRDX5 but not PRDX2 and PRDX4. Quercetin can also induce the
expression of Nrf2 and NRF1 but not of Ets1, Ets2, or Foxo3a. Knockdown of NRF1
expression significantly reduced the expression of both PRDX3 and PRDX5. Reporter
assays showed that NRF1 transactivated the promoter activity of both PRDX3 and
PRDX5 and that the downregulation of NRF1 with siRNA repressed the promoter
activity of both PRDX3 and PRDX5. Furthermore, the downregulation of NRF1, PRDX3,
and PRDX5 renders trabecular meshwork cells sensitive to hydrogen peroxide.
Finally, NRF1 activation by quercetin was completely abolished by the knockdown
of Nrf2.
CONCLUSIONS: Quercetin upregulates the antioxidant peroxiredoxins through the
activation of the Nrf2/NRF1 transcription pathway and protects against oxidative 
stress-induced ocular disease.

PMID: 21051700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Dev Dyn. 2010 Dec;239(12):3391-403. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22476.

Conserved early expression patterns of micromere specification genes in two
echinoid species belonging to the orders clypeasteroida and echinoida.

Yamazaki A(1), Furuzawa Y, Yamaguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa, Japan.

The micromere gene regulatory network (GRN) has been extensively examined using
sea urchins belonging to the order Echinoida. To examine whether the network of
Echinoida species is conserved in Scaphechinus mirabilis, an irregular echinoid
of the order Clypeasteroida, the genes micro1, hesC, alx1, ets1, and delta were
isolated from S. mirabilis and their expression patterns were compared with those
from Hemicentrotus pulcherrimus, a species belonging to the order Echinoida. Data
from this study suggest that the early GRN architecture had been largely
established in a common ancestor of these two species. On the other hand, we
found vegetal shifts in expression domains of some GRN members in H. pulcherrimus
embryos compared to S. mirabilis embryos.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21046631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 22;5(10):e13565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013565.

Ets-1 regulates energy metabolism in cancer cells.

Verschoor ML(1), Wilson LA, Verschoor CP, Singh G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Juravinski Cancer Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Cancer cells predominantly utilize glycolysis for ATP production even in the
presence of abundant oxygen, an environment that would normally result in energy 
production through oxidative phosphorylation. Although the molecular mechanism
for this metabolic switch to aerobic glycolysis has not been fully elucidated, it
is likely that mitochondrial damage to the electron transport chain and the
resulting increased production of reactive oxygen species are significant driving
forces. In this study, we have investigated the role of the transcription factor 
Ets-1 in the regulation of mitochondrial function and metabolism. Ets-1 was
over-expressed using a stably-incorporated tetracycline-inducible expression
vector in the ovarian cancer cell line 2008, which does not express detectable
basal levels of Ets-1 protein. Microarray analysis of the effects of Ets-1
over-expression in these ovarian cancer cells shows that Ets-1 up-regulates key
enzymes involved in glycolysis and associated feeder pathways, fatty acid
metabolism, and antioxidant defense. In contrast, Ets-1 down-regulates genes
involved in the citric acid cycle, electron transport chain, and mitochondrial
proteins. At the functional level, we have found that Ets-1 expression is
directly correlated with cellular oxygen consumption whereby increased expression
causes decreased oxygen consumption. Ets-1 over-expression also caused increased 
sensitivity to glycolytic inhibitors, as well as growth inhibition in a
glucose-depleted culture environment. Collectively our findings demonstrate that 
Ets-1 is involved in the regulation of cellular metabolism and response to
oxidative stress in ovarian cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2962648
PMID: 21042593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Nutr Biochem. 2011 Jun;22(6):595-604. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.05.003. Epub 
2010 Oct 20.

Exogenous nucleosides modulate expression and activity of transcription factors
in Caco-2 cells.

Ortega Á(1), Gil Á, Sánchez-Pozo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemical Engineering, University Pablo 
de Olavide - Andalusian Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine Centre
(CABIMER), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), 41092 Seville, Spain. maortega@upo.es

Dietary nucleotides (NTs) have an important role in cellular and humoral
immunity, intestinal growth, differentiation and recovery from tissue damage.
Nucleosides (NSs) are the best-absorbed chemical form of NTs in the intestinal
epithelium. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of NSs on the
activity and expression of multiple transcription factors (TFs) in Caco-2 cells, 
as a possible molecular mechanism by which NSs modulate gene expression in human 
intestinal cells. The effects of NS-supplemented media on human Caco-2 cell
proliferation, viability, protein and RNA concentration were determined, and the 
activity and expression profiles of multiple TFs were analyzed by using an
array-based technology. Exogenous NSs did not affect Caco-2 cell proliferation or
viability but increased the protein content in cytoplasm and nucleus and the
nuclear protein/RNA ratio. The addition of NSs to the media increased the
expression and activity of the TFs CCAAT displacement protein (CUX1), v-ets avian
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS1) and SMAD family member 2. In
contrast, NS addition decreased the expression and activity of the general
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1), glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1), NFKB and
tumor protein p53. In conclusion, our results suggest that exogenous NSs affect
the expression and activity of several TFs involved in cell growth,
differentiation, apoptosis, immune response and inflammation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20970311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Lupus. 2010 Oct;19(12):1374-83. doi: 10.1177/0961203310376639.

Current advances in lupus genetic and genomic studies in Asia.

Yuan YJ(1), Luo XB, Shen N.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Molecular Rheumatology Laboratory of the Institute of Health Sciences
and Shanghai Renji Hospital, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, and Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

The genetic components in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have long been
established, however, it has been unclear for many years whether the same genetic
risk factors for SLE are shared across different ethnic groups. Over the past few
years, a number of genetic and genomic studies have been conducted in Asian
populations to address this question. These studies have demonstrated that
genetic heterogeneity does exist in SLE across different ethnic groups. With
these studies, it has been established that a number of genes associated with SLE
in Caucasians are also risk factors in Asians: HLA class II genes, STAT4, BANK1, 
BLK, IRF5, TNFSF4, ITGAM, etc., while there are also novel genetic risk factors
identified by these studies in Asians, for instance, the ETS1 and WDFY4 in
Chinese. For the genomic studies, the interferon signature has been confirmed as 
a major lupus molecular phenotype in Asians the same as in Caucasians; microRNA
expression profiling and its novel role in regulating the interferon pathway has 
been first revealed in Asians. Further understanding of the function of lupus
disease genes and delineating the key molecular pathway(s) will enhance the
development of novel therapeutic targets and biomarkers for individualized
clinical management for lupus patients.

PMID: 20947545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Vasc Res. 2011;48(2):163-70. doi: 10.1159/000318806. Epub 2010 Oct 8.

Hypoxia in abdominal aortic aneurysm supports a role for HIF-1a and Ets-1 as
drivers of matrix metalloproteinase upregulation in human aortic smooth muscle
cells.

Erdozain OJ(1), Pegrum S, Winrow VR, Horrocks M, Stevens CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath, UK.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: We sought to determine whether hypoxia is an initiating factor
in the matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) up-regulation observed in abdominal
aortic aneurysm (AAA) and whether hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) or Ets-1
are mediating factors.
METHODS: Human AAA and normal aorta were analysed for MMP-2, HIF-1a and Ets-1 by 
immunohistochemistry. Human aortic smooth muscle cell (HASMC) cultures exposed to
experimental hypoxia were analysed for hypoxia-induced proteins using gelatin
zymography and immunoblotting. Multiplex PCR was used to detect MMP-1,
membrane-type (MT)-MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-7 and MMP-9.
RESULTS: AAA tissues expressed HIF-1a, MMP-2 and Ets-1 strongly within smooth
muscle cells and inflammatory infiltrate of the tunica media. Up-regulated MMP-2 
was detected in hypoxia-exposed HASMC (p < 0.05), with MMP-9 elevations after
exposure to sequential O(2) decreases (p < 0.05). Immunoblotting confirmed
HIF-1a, Ets-1, VEGF and MMP-2 are up-regulated in HASMC exposed to hypoxia (p <
0.05), while transcription for MMP-1, MT-MMP-1, MMP-9, MMP-2 and MMP-7 (p < 0.05)
increased in hypoxic HASMCs.
CONCLUSION: Hypoxia facilitates HIF-1a, Ets-1 and VEGF up-regulation in addition 
to driving enhanced secretion of MMP-2 and MMP-9 by HASMC. Enhanced transcription
of factors relevant to aneurysmal disease in hypoxia indicates possible roles in 
disease progression and potential targets for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20938207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Arch Oral Biol. 2011 Feb;56(2):177-86. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2010.09.009.

Early proliferation alteration and differential gene expression in human
periodontal ligament cells subjected to cyclic tensile stress.

Wang Y(1), Li Y, Fan X, Zhang Y, Wu J, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China 
Stomatology Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: The study was aimed to provide insights into genes governing the early
stages of cell proliferation ability alteration and mechano-response in human
periodontal ligament cells (PDLCs) induced by short-term cyclic tensile stress.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Primary human PDLCs were subjected to cyclic tensile
stress (0.5 Hz, 5000 µstrain) for 2h through a four-point bending strain system. 
After that, cell viability and proliferation ability were examined by MTT
[3(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assay and flow
cytometry. Furthermore, the gene expression profile was investigated by
microarray analysis, and the reliability of which was verified by quantitative
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: MTT assay and flow cytometry demonstrated that mechanical stress
inhibited functional expression and slowed down proliferation of cells.
Microarray analysis showed that 110 genes related to cyclic tensile stress were
identified in total. Amongst them, ninety-seven were up-regulated, whilst 13 were
down-regulated. Eleven genes (KLF10, ETS1, CKS2, DUSP6, KIF23, MAPK6, SERTAD1,
IRF1, MAPRE1, CCNB1 and BCAR3) regarding cell cycle arrest were identified. Seven
up-regulated genes (PTGS2, KLF10, CDC42EP2, BHLHB2, SPRY2, IER3 and CCL2) were
verified by quantitative RT-PCR, which supported the microarray results.
CONCLUSION: Cell cycle arrest and the slow-down proliferation can benefit PDLCs
to have more time to respond to mechanical stimuli, and the differential gene
expression reflects the behaviour of cells. Those genes in response to cyclic
tensile stress were identified in human PDLCs, some of which are related with the
mechano-induced cell cycle arrest.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20934684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Cell Sci. 2010 Oct 15;123(Pt 20):3566-75. doi: 10.1242/jcs.062240.

Ets1 blocks terminal differentiation of keratinocytes and induces expression of
matrix metalloproteases and innate immune mediators.

Nagarajan P(1), Chin SS, Wang D, Liu S, Sinha S, Garrett-Sinha LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Developmental Genomics Focus Group, Center of
Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, State University of New York at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.

The transcription factor Ets1 is normally expressed in the proliferative layer of
stratified epithelium, but expression of Ets1 is significantly upregulated in
squamous cell carcinomas. How elevated levels of Ets1 impact tumor initiation and
progression is not well understood. To determine the biological consequences of
overexpression of Ets1, we developed a transgenic mouse model that allows
induction of Ets1 expression in keratinocytes of stratified epithelium in a
regulatable fashion. Induction of Ets1 during embryonic development results in a 
dramatic alteration in epidermal structure and function by suppressing the
expression of multiple stratum corneum constituents, while at the same time
inducing expression of EGF ligands, AP1 transcription factors and matrix
metalloproteases. Interestingly, expression of certain immune-related genes,
including defensins, chemokines and cytokines was increased as well, suggesting a
possible role for immune dysregulation in the promotion of squamous dysplasia.
Experiments using cultured mouse keratinocytes indicate that Ets1 can induce
expression of some of these mediators in a cell-intrinsic fashion. Collectively, 
our data reveal that elevated expression of Ets1 has a much broader array of
pro-tumorigenic effects on epithelial cells than previously appreciated.

PMCID: PMC2959112
PMID: 20930145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Hepatol Res. 2010 Oct;40(10):1022-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2010.00712.x.

Hepatitis B virus/hepatitis C virus upregulate angiopoietin-2 expression through 
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

Li Y(1), Chen J, Wu C, Wang L, Lu M, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Wuhan, China Institute of Virology, University Hospital of Essen,
Essen, Germany.

AIM:   To explore the molecular mechanism of hepatitis B virus (HBV)/hepatitis C 
virus (HCV) upregulate angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) expression.
METHODS:   Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), quantitative
real-time (qRT)-PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) analysis were
used to measure the Ang-2 transcription and expression level. Reporter gene
assays were used to determine the cis-element of the Ang-2 promoter. The specific
inhibitors assay, immunofluorescence and western blot analysis were conducted to 
verify the signal pathway involved in the upregulation of Ang-2 expression.
RESULTS:   The level of transcription and expression of Ang-2 increased in the
HepG2.2.15 and Con-1 cells. Reporter gene assays in HepG2.2.15 and Con-1 cells
revealed that HBV/HCV could enhance Ang-2 promoter expression by activating AP-1 
and Ets1. Analysis with specific inhibitors indicated that HBV/HCV upregulated
the expression of Ang-2 through mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways.
CONCLUSION:   This study illustrates a distinct mechanism by which a tumor virus 
modulates vasculature to promote tumorigenesis.

© 2010 The Japan Society of Hepatology.

PMID: 20887338  [PubMed]


390. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 26;285(48):37521-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.132795. Epub
2010 Sep 23.

Interactive roles of Ets-1, Sp1, and acetylated histones in the retinoic
acid-dependent activation of guanylyl cyclase/atrial natriuretic peptide
receptor-A gene transcription.

Kumar P(1), Garg R, Bolden G, Pandey KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Tulane University Health Sciences Center and School 
of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

Cardiac hormones atrial and brain natriuretic peptides activate guanylyl
cyclase/natriuretic peptide receptor-A (GC-A/NPRA), which plays a critical role
in reduction of blood pressure and blood volume. Currently, the mechanisms
responsible for regulating the Npr1 gene (coding for GC-A/NPRA) transcription are
not well understood. The present study was conducted to examine the interactive
roles of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), Ets-1, Sp1, and histone acetylation on
the transcriptional regulation and function of the Npr1 gene. Deletion analysis
of the Npr1 promoter and luciferase assays showed that ATRA enhanced a 16-fold
Npr1 promoter activity and greatly stimulated guanylyl cyclase (GC) activity of
the receptor protein in both atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)-dependent and
-independent manner. As confirmed by gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays, ATRA enhanced the binding of both Ets-1 and Sp1 to the Npr1 promoter. The
retinoic acid receptor a (RARa) was recruited by Ets-1 and Sp1 to form a
transcriptional activator complex with their binding sites in the Npr1 promoter. 
Interestingly, ATRA also increased the acetylation of histones H3 and H4 and
enhanced their recruitment to Ets-1 and Sp1 binding sites within the Npr1
promoter. Collectively, the present results demonstrate that ATRA regulates Npr1 
gene transcription and GC activity of the receptor by involving the interactive
actions of Ets-1, Sp1, and histone acetylation.

PMCID: PMC2988357
PMID: 20864529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Prostate. 2011 Mar 1;71(4):403-14. doi: 10.1002/pros.21254. Epub 2010 Sep 14.

ETS1 regulates NKX3.1 5' promoter activity and expression in prostate cancer
cells.

Preece DM(1), Harvey JM, Bentel JM, Thomas MA.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomical Pathology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine, Royal Perth Hospital,
Perth, Western Australia, Australia.

BACKGROUND: NKX3.1 controls the differentiation and proliferation of prostatic
epithelial cells both during development and in the adult, while its expression
is frequently downregulated in prostate cancers. Transcriptional control of
NKX3.1 expression and in particular, factors that function via the NKX3.1 5'
proximal promoter are poorly characterized.
METHODS: Deletion reporter analyses, bioinformatics, electromobility shift assays
(EMSA), chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and Western blotting were performed 
to identify and functionally characterize sites of transcription factor binding
within the initial 2,062<U+2009>bp of the NKX3.1 5' promoter.
RESULTS: Deletion reporter studies of the 2,062<U+2009>bp NKX3.1 5' promoter sequence
localized positive transcriptional activity between -1069 and -993. Bioinformatic
analyses identified the presence of two overlapping ETS1 binding sites within
this region, designated EBS1 and EBS2, which exhibited 82% and 74% homology,
respectively, to the ETS consensus binding sequence. EMSA and supershift assays
indicated binding of both endogenous ETS1 and a recombinant GST-ETS1 protein
solely to EBS1, a result that was confirmed in vivo by ChIP analysis. ETS1
overexpression transactivated NKX3.1 promoter reporter activity and upregulated
endogenous NKX3.1 mRNA and protein levels in the LNCaP prostate cancer cell line,
demonstrating a functional role for ETS1 in the regulation of NKX3.1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: ETS1 upregulation of NKX3.1 expression in LNCaP cells is mediated in
part via its interaction with an EBS located in the NKX3.1 5' proximal promoter. 
ETS1 may regulate NKX3.1 during prostate development, with the aberrant ETS1
expression and cellular localization frequently observed in human prostate tumors
potentially contributing to the abnormal expression of NKX3.1.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20842667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Br J Cancer. 2010 Oct 12;103(8):1255-62. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605878. Epub 2010
Sep 14.

Wilms' tumour 1 can suppress hTERT gene expression and telomerase activity in
clear cell renal cell carcinoma via multiple pathways.

Sitaram RT(1), Degerman S, Ljungberg B, Andersson E, Oji Y, Sugiyama H, Roos G,
Li A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences and Pathology, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Wilms' tumour 1 (WT1) gene was discovered as a tumour suppressor
gene. Later findings have suggested that WT1 also can be oncogenic. This
complexity is partly explained by the fact that WT1 has a number of target genes.
METHOD: WT1 and its target gene human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT)
were analysed in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). In vitro experiments
were performed to examine the functional link between WT1 and hTERT by
overexpression of WT1 isoforms in the ccRCC cell line, TK-10.
RESULTS: WT1 demonstrated lower RNA expression in ccRCC compared with renal
cortical tissue, whereas hTERT was increased, showing a negative correlation
between WT1 and hTERT (P=0.005). These findings were experimentally confirmed in 
vitro. The WT1 generated effect on hTERT promoter activity seemed complex, as
several negative regulators of hTERT transcription, such as SMAD3, JUN (AP-1) and
ETS1, were activated by WT1 overexpression. Downregulation of potential positive 
hTERT regulators, such as cMyc, AP-2a, AP-2<U+03B3>, IRF1, NFX1 and GM-CSF, were also
observed. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis verified WT1 binding to the
hTERT, cMyc and SMAD3 promoters.
CONCLUSION: The collected data strongly indicate multiple pathways for hTERT
regulation by WT1 in ccRCC.

PMCID: PMC2967054
PMID: 20842112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. FASEB J. 2011 Jan;25(1):182-91. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-164277. Epub 2010 Sep 8.

Physiological loading of joints prevents cartilage degradation through CITED2.

Leong DJ(1), Li YH, Gu XI, Sun L, Zhou Z, Nasser P, Laudier DM, Iqbal J, Majeska 
RJ, Schaffler MB, Goldring MB, Cardoso L, Zaidi M, Sun HB.

Author information: 
(1)Leni and Peter W. May Department of Orthopedics, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Pl., New York, NY 10029, USA.

Both overuse and disuse of joints up-regulate matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in
articular cartilage and cause tissue degradation; however, moderate
(physiological) loading maintains cartilage integrity. Here, we test whether
CBP/p300-interacting transactivator with ED-rich tail 2 (CITED2), a
mechanosensitive transcriptional coregulator, mediates this chondroprotective
effect of moderate mechanical loading. In vivo, hind-limb immobilization of
Sprague-Dawley rats up-regulates MMP-1 and causes rapid, histologically
detectable articular cartilage degradation. One hour of daily passive joint
motion prevents these changes and up-regulates articular cartilage CITED2. In
vitro, moderate (2.5 MPa, 1 Hz) intermittent hydrostatic pressure (IHP) treatment
suppresses basal MMP-1 expression and up-regulates CITED2 in human chondrocytes, 
whereas high IHP (10 MPa) down-regulates CITED2 and increases MMP-1. Competitive 
binding and transcription assays demonstrate that CITED2 suppresses MMP-1
expression by competing with MMP transactivator, Ets-1 for its coactivator p300. 
Furthermore, CITED2 up-regulation in vitro requires the p38d isoform, which is
specifically phosphorylated by moderate IHP. Together, these studies identify a
novel regulatory pathway involving CITED2 and p38d, which may be critical for the
maintenance of articular cartilage integrity under normal physical activity
levels.

PMCID: PMC3005439
PMID: 20826544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Aug;123(16):2287-8.

Expression analysis of ETS1 gene in peripheral blood mononuclear cells with
systemic lupus erythematosus by real-time reverse transcription PCR.

Li Y, Sun LD, Lu WS, Hu WL, Gao JP, Cheng YL, Yu ZY, Yao S, He CF, Liu JL, Cui Y,
Yang S.

PMID: 20819682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Int J Oral Sci. 2009 Sep;1(3):143-50. doi: 10.4248/IJOS.09021.

Expression of bone-related genes in bone marrow MSCs after cyclic mechanical
strain: implications for distraction osteogenesis.

Qi MC(1), Zou SJ, Han LC, Zhou HX, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

AIM: Understanding the response of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to mechanical
strain and their consequent gene expression patterns will broaden our knowledge
of the mechanobiology of distraction osteogenesis.
METHODOLOGY: In this study, a single period of cyclic mechanical stretch (0.5 Hz,
2,000 microepsilon) was performed on rat bone marrow MSCs. Cellular proliferation
and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was examined. The mRNA expression of six 
bone-related genes (Ets-1, bFGF, IGF-II, TGF-beta, Cbfa1 and ALP) was detected
using real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The results showed that mechanical strain can promote MSCs
proliferation, increase ALP activity, and up-regulate the expression of these
genes. A significant increase in Ets-1 expression was detected immediately after 
mechanical stimulation, but Cbfa1 expression became elevated later. The temporal 
expression pattern of ALP coincided perfectly with Cbfa1.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggest that mechanical strain may act as a
stimulator to induce differentiation of MSCs into osteoblasts, and that these
bone-related genes may play different roles in the response of MSCs to mechanical
stimulation.

PMCID: PMC3475587
PMID: 20695079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Cell Cycle. 2010 Aug 1;9(15):3054-62. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Structural basis of Ets1 cooperative binding to palindromic sequences on
stromelysin-1 promoter DNA.

Babayeva ND(1), Wilder PJ, Shiina M, Mino K, Desler M, Ogata K, Rizzino A,
Tahirov TH.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Ets1 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors. Ets1 is
autoinhibited and its activation requires heterodimerization with a partner
protein or DNA-mediated homodimerization for cooperative DNA binding. In the
latter case, Ets1 molecules bind to palindromic sequences in which two
Ets-binding sites (EBS) are separated by four base pairs, for example in the
promoters of stromelysin-1 and p53. Interestingly, counteraction of
autoinhibition requires the autoinhibitory region encoded by exon VII of the
gene. The structural basis for the requirement of autoinhibitory sequences for
Ets1 binding to palindromic EBS still remains unresolved. Here we report the
crystal structure of two Ets1 molecules bound to an EBS palindrome of the
stromelysin-1 promoter DNA, providing a plausible explanation for the requirement
of exon VII-encoded sequences for Ets1 cooperative DNA binding. The proposed
mechanism was verified both in vitro by surface plasmon resonance and in vivo by 
transcription-based assays.

PMCID: PMC2928650
PMID: 20686355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Dev Genes Evol. 2010 Sep;220(3-4):107-15. doi: 10.1007/s00427-010-0333-5. Epub
2010 Aug 3.

Functional evolution of Ets in echinoderms with focus on the evolution of
echinoderm larval skeletons.

Koga H(1), Matsubara M, Fujitani H, Miyamoto N, Komatsu M, Kiyomoto M, Akasaka K,
Wada H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, 305-8572, Japan.

Convergent evolution of echinoderm pluteus larva was examined from the standpoint
of functional evolution of a transcription factor Ets1/2. In sea urchins, Ets1/2 
plays a central role in the differentiation of larval skeletogenic mesenchyme
cells. In addition, Ets1/2 is suggested to be involved in adult skeletogenesis.
Conversely, in starfish, although no skeletogenic cells differentiate during
larval development, Ets1/2 is also expressed in the larval mesoderm. Here, we
confirmed that the starfish Ets1/2 is indispensable for the differentiation of
the larval mesoderm. This result led us to assume that, in the common ancestors
of echinoderms, Ets1/2 activates the transcription of distinct gene sets, one for
the differentiation of the larval mesoderm and the other for the development of
the adult skeleton. Thus, the acquisition of the larval skeleton involved target 
switching of Ets1/2. Specifically, in the sea urchin lineage, Ets1/2 activated a 
downstream target gene set for skeletogenesis during larval development in
addition to a mesoderm target set. We examined whether this heterochronic
activation of the skeletogenic target set was achieved by the molecular evolution
of the Ets1/2 transcription factor itself. We tested whether starfish Ets1/2
induced skeletogenesis when injected into sea urchin eggs. We found that, in
addition to ectopic induction of mesenchyme cells, starfish Ets1/2 can activate
some parts of the skeletogenic pathway in these mesenchyme cells. Thus, we
suggest that the nature of the transcription factor Ets1/2 did not change, but
rather that some unidentified co-factor(s) for Ets1/2 may distinguish between
targets for the larval mesoderm and for skeletogenesis. Identification of the
co-factor(s) will be key to understanding the molecular evolution underlying the 
evolution of the pluteus larvae.

PMID: 20680330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Oct;30(10):1990-7. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.211706. Epub 2010 Jul 29.

Ets-1 and Ets-2 regulate the expression of microRNA-126 in endothelial cells.

Harris TA(1), Yamakuchi M, Kondo M, Oettgen P, Lowenstein CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Medicine Program, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: MicroRNA plays important roles in vascular biology, but the regulation
of endothelial-specific microRNA is not well characterized. MicroRNA-126
(miR-126) is highly expressed in endothelial cells, and it regulates angiogenesis
and vascular inflammation. Here we show that the transcription factors Ets-1 and 
Ets-2 regulate miR-126 expression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A genomic region between -71 and -100 bp upstream of the
miR-126 transcriptional start site is critical for transactivation of the gene
containing miR-126. This genomic region contains a potential Ets binding site.
Mutations within the Ets binding site block transactivation, and Ets-1 and Ets-2 
interact with this critical genomic region. Knockdown of endogenous Ets-1 and
Ets-2 decreases miR-126 expression. Finally, knockdown of miR-126 alters
regulation of an Ets-1 target gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data show that the transcription factors Ets-1
and Ets-2 play a key role in controlling the expression of miR-126 and suggest
that miR-126 may mediate some of their vascular effects.

PMCID: PMC3121560
PMID: 20671229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Eur J Cancer. 2010 Oct;46(15):2828-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.06.127. Epub 2010
Jul 23.

MicroRNA-193b regulates proliferation, migration and invasion in human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Xu C(1), Liu S, Fu H, Li S, Tie Y, Zhu J, Xing R, Jin Y, Sun Z, Zheng X.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, 27 Taiping Road, Beijing 100850,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Recently, some miRNAs have been reported to be connected
closely with the development of human hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the
functions of these miRNAs in HCC remain largely undefined.
METHODS: The expression profiles of miR-193b were compared between HCC tissues
and adjacent normal liver tissues using qRT-PCR method. This method was also be
used to screen the potential target genes of miR-193b. A luciferase reporter
assay was conducted to confirm target association. Finally, the functional effect
of miR-193b in hepatoma cells was examined further.
RESULTS: miR-193b was significantly down-regulated in most of the HCC tissues
compared to the matching non-tumoural liver tissues. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of miR-193b dramatically suppressed the ability of hepatoma cells to
form colonies in vitro and to develop tumours in nude mice. CCND1 and ETS1 were
revealed to be regulated by miR-193b directly. By regulating the expressions of
these oncogenes, miR-193b induced cell cycle arrest and inhibited the invasion
and migration of hepatoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-193b may function as a tumour suppressor in the development of
HCC by acting on multiple tumourigenic pathways.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20655737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Pharm Biol. 2010 Feb;48(2):161-5. doi: 10.3109/13880200903062630.

Effect of bFGF on invasion of ovarian cancer cells through the regulation of
Ets-1 and urokinase-type plasminogen activator.

Li T(1), Jiang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant
Hospital Affiliated to Tongji University, Shanghai, China. lixiaote@hotmail.com

The aim of the study was to explore the role of basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF) in ovarian cancer progression. This was done by investigating the effects 
of bFGF on both the secretion of urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and
the invasion of tumor cells in SKOV(3) ovarian cancer cells. Human ovarian cancer
cell line SKOV(3) was cultured in vitro. The expression of uPA gene and protein
was induced in SKOV(3) cells; the impact of bFGF on the expression of uPA gene in
SKOV(3) cells was studied by RT-PCR, and the impact of bFGF on the expression of 
uPA protein was tested by ELISA. Ets-1 antisense oligonucleotides were
transfected into SKOV(3) cells by liposome protocol. The effects of bFGF on Ets-1
expression and the invasion ability of SKOV(3) cells were determined both before 
and after exposure to different concentrations of bFGF for 24 h. The expression
of both uPA gene and protein was induced in SKOV(3) cells, p < 0.05. The
expression of uPA was suppressed by Ets-1 antisense oligonucleotides in SKOV(3)
cells, p < 0.05. The invasion ability of SKOV(3) cells was increased by 2.3-fold,
and this effect was also suppressed by Ets-1 antisense oligonucleotides. bFGF can
enhance the invasion ability of ovarian cancer cells in vitro by inducing the
expression of uPA, and this effect is also regulated by the transcription factor 
Ets-1.

PMID: 20645833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;163(4):523-9. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0245. Epub 2010 Jul 
8.

Upregulation of CDKN2A and suppression of cyclin D1 gene expressions in
ACTH-secreting pituitary adenomas.

Tani Y(1), Inoshita N, Sugiyama T, Kato M, Yamada S, Shichiri M, Hirata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Endocrinology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University Graduate School, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Cushing's disease (CD) is usually caused by ACTH-secreting pituitary
microadenomas, while silent corticotroph adenomas (SCA) are macroadenomas without
Cushingoid features. However, the molecular mechanism(s) underlying their
different tumor growth remains unknown. The aim of the current study was to
evaluate and compare the gene expression profile of cell cycle regulators and
cell growth-related transcription factors in CD, SCA, and non-functioning
adenomas (NFA).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Tumor tissue specimens resected from 43 pituitary tumors were
studied: CD (n=10), SCA (n=11), and NFA (n=22). The absolute transcript numbers
of the following genes were quantified with real-time quantitative PCR assays:
CDKN2A (or p16(INK4a)), cyclin family (A1, B1, D1, and E1), E2F1, RB1, BUB1,
BUBR1, ETS1, and ETS2. Protein expressions of p16 and cyclin D1 were
semi-quantitatively evaluated by immunohistochemical study.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: CDKN2A gene expression was about fourfold greater in CD
than in SCA and NFA. The gene expressions of cyclins D1, E1, and B1, but not of
A1, in CD were significantly suppressed than those in NFA. Cyclin D1 gene
expression positively correlated with cyclins B1 and E1. The gene expressions of 
E2F1, RB1, BUB1, BUBR1, ETS1, and ETS2 did not differ between each group.
Positive immunostaining for p16 and negative immunostaining for cyclin D1 were
more frequent in CD than in NFA; there were positive correlations between mRNA
and protein expressions of p16 and cyclin D1. Thus, it is suggested that
upregulated CDKN2A with the concomitant downregulated cyclin gene family is
partly involved in the small size of ACTH-secreting adenoma.

PMID: 20616110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Acta Histochem. 2011 Sep;113(5):527-33. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2010.05.006. Epub
2010 Jul 2.

Renal expression of proto-oncogene Ets-1 on matrix remodeling in experimental
diabetic nephropathy.

Liu DX(1), Liu XM, Su Y, Zhang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Nangang District, Heilongjiang Province, China.

The molecular mechanisms of glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis in
diabetic nephropathy (DN) have received scant attention. Ets-1 proto-oncogene
plays a role in matrix remodeling by regulating matrix-degrading enzymes. We
investigated the possible role of Ets-1 in the pathogenesis of DN. 6-week-old
male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into two experimental groups as follows:
control group (n=30) and a Diabetes mellitus group (n=40) induced by injection of
streptozotozin (STZ). The rats were investigated at 1, 4, 8, 12 and 16 weeks
after STZ-treatment. By means of immunohistochemistry, the expression of Ets-1 in
glomeruli was significantly increased in STZ-treated rat kidneys from week 1
(P<0.05) and reached the peak at week 4 (P<0.05), followed by a downward trend at
subsequent time points. Similarly, the expression of Ets-1 in the
tubulointerstitium was also markedly increased from week 1 (P<0.05) and reached a
maximum at week 8 (P<0.05). By double immunostaining, Ets-1-positive cells were
frequently found to co-express matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) in STZ-treated 
rat kidneys. Increased expression of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2
(TIMP-2) coincided with increased expression of a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) in 
STZ-induced DN. A positive relationship was observed between the expression of
Ets-1 in glomeruli or tubulointerstitium and the expression of MMP-2 (P<0.01;
P<0.01, respectively) in STZ-treated rat kidneys. The ratio of MMP-2 and TIMP-2
in glomeruli or tubulointerstitium was negatively correlated with deposition of
type IV collagen (P<0.01; P<0.01, respectively). These findings suggest that
Ets-1 may play a critical role in fine-tuning matrix remodeling of STZ-induced
DN.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20598359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 17;285(38):29469-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.142018. Epub
2010 Jul 1.

Transcriptional profiling identifies functional interactions of TGF ß and PPAR
ß/d signaling: synergistic induction of ANGPTL4 transcription.

Kaddatz K(1), Adhikary T, Finkernagel F, Meissner W, Müller-Brüsselbach S, Müller
R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, Philipps-University,
Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, 35032 Marburg, Germany.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) not only play a key role in
regulating metabolic pathways but also modulate inflammatory processes, pointing 
to a functional interaction between PPAR and cytokine signaling pathways. In this
study, we show by genome-wide transcriptional profiling that PPARß/d and
transforming growth factor-ß (TGFß) pathways functionally interact in human
myofibroblasts and that a subset of these genes is cooperatively activated by
TGFß and PPARß/d. Using the angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) gene as a model, we
demonstrate that two enhancer regions cooperate to mediate the observed
synergistic response. A TGFß-responsive enhancer located ~8 kb upstream of the
transcriptional start site is regulated by a mechanism involving SMAD3, ETS1,
RUNX, and AP-1 transcription factors that interact with multiple contiguous
binding sites. A second enhancer (PPAR-E) consisting of three juxtaposed PPAR
response elements is located in the third intron ~3.5 kb downstream of the
transcriptional start site. The PPAR-E is strongly activated by all three PPAR
subtypes, with a novel type of PPAR response element motif playing a central
role. Although the PPAR-E is not regulated by TGFß, it interacts with SMAD3,
ETS1, RUNX2, and AP-1 in vivo, providing a possible mechanistic explanation for
the observed synergism.

PMCID: PMC2937979
PMID: 20595396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 3;285(36):27745-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.105080. Epub 2010
Jun 24.

MicroRNA-208 modulates BMP-2-stimulated mouse preosteoblast differentiation by
directly targeting V-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1.

Itoh T(1), Takeda S, Akao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Gifu International Institute of Biotechnology, 1-1 Naka-Fudogaoka,
Kakamigahara, Gifu 504-0838, Japan. titoh@giib.or.jp

MicroRNAs (miRs) represent a class of endogenous approximately 18-25 nucleotide
RNAs that regulate gene expression through translational repression by binding to
a target mRNA. These miRs regulate several biological functions, such as cell
growth, cell differentiation, carcinogenesis, and so on. In a previous report, we
have indicated that miR-141 and -200a act as preosteoblast differentiation
modulators. In the present study, using microRNA array and in silico analyses, we
found that miR-208 is closely involved in preosteoblast differentiation by
partially regulating the expression of Ets1 (V-ets erythroblastosis virus E26
oncogene homolog 1), which transactivates osteopontin, runt-related transcription
factor 2, parathyroid hormone-related protein, and type I procollagen.
Furthermore, the enforced expression of mature miR-208 in murine preosteoblast in
MC3T3-E1 cells or primary osteoblast cells remarkably attenuated BMP-2-induced
preosteoblast differentiation. In addition, we determined that Ets1 is a target
gene of miR-208 by using a sensor luciferase reporter assay. Taken together,
these results suggest that the down-regulation of miR-208 in BMP-2-stimulated
osteoblast differentiation is an important part of the regulatory machinery
involved in early osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2934642
PMID: 20576608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Mol Med (Berl). 2010 Oct;88(10):1029-40. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0642-1. Epub
2010 Jun 24.

Methylation matters: binding of Ets-1 to the demethylated Foxp3 gene contributes 
to the stabilization of Foxp3 expression in regulatory T cells.

Polansky JK(1), Schreiber L, Thelemann C, Ludwig L, Krüger M, Baumgrass R,
Cording S, Floess S, Hamann A, Huehn J.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Inhoffenstr.
7, 38124, Braunschweig, Germany.

The forkhead-box protein P3 (Foxp3) is a key transcription factor for the
development and suppressive activity of regulatory T cells (Tregs), a T cell
subset critically involved in the maintenance of self-tolerance and prevention of
over-shooting immune responses. However, the transcriptional regulation of Foxp3 
expression remains incompletely understood. We have previously shown that
epigenetic modifications in the CpG-rich Treg-specific demethylated region (TSDR)
in the Foxp3 locus are associated with stable Foxp3 expression. We now
demonstrate that the methylation state of the CpG motifs within the TSDR controls
its transcriptional activity rather than a Treg-specific transcription factor
network. By systematically mutating every CpG motif within the TSDR, we could
identify four CpG motifs, which are critically determining the transcriptional
activity of the TSDR and which serve as binding sites for essential transcription
factors, such as CREB/ATF and NF-<U+03BA>B, which have previously been shown to bind to 
this element. The transcription factor Ets-1 was here identified as an additional
molecular player that specifically binds to the TSDR in a demethylation-dependent
manner in vitro. Disruption of the Ets-1 binding sites within the TSDR
drastically reduced its transcriptional enhancer activity. In addition, we found 
Ets-1 bound to the demethylated TSDR in ex vivo isolated Tregs, but not to the
methylated TSDR in conventional CD4(+) T cells. We therefore propose that Ets-1
is part of a larger protein complex, which binds to the TSDR only in its
demethylated state, thereby restricting stable Foxp3 expression to the Treg
lineage.

PMCID: PMC2943068
PMID: 20574810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Jul 15;10(2):172-9. Epub 2010 Jul 26.

Gene expression alterations in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded Barrett
esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma tissues.

Botelho NK(1), Schneiders FI, Lord SJ, Freeman AK, Tyagi S, Nancarrow DJ, Hayward
NK, Whiteman DC, Lord RV.

Author information: 
(1)St. Vincent's Centre for Applied Medical Research, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Widespread applicability of tissue-based mRNA expression
screening for Barrett esophagus (BE) is likely to require (1) accurate methods
for assaying archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) histopathology
specimens taken at endoscopy, and (2) validation studies of promising biomarkers 
in different patient cohorts.
RESULTS: 30 genes were significantly differentially expressed by histopathology
tissue type. The direction and magnitude of the differences were very similar to 
those found in previous studies using fresh frozen tissues. Novel upregulated
genes were TSPAN8 (also known as CO-029), TSPAN24 (CD151), EGR1 and TCIRG1. Novel
downregulated genes were DPYD, TSPAN29 (CD9) and Ets1. Strong associations
between histopathology type and gene expression were observed with the
overexpressed genes: cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2), for which histopathology type
explained 77.7% of the variation in expression, TSPAN1 (73.5%), TSPAN8 (62.9%),
SPARC (62.1%), MMP7 (50.8%); and the under-expressed genes ADH7 (53.7%), APC
(58.2%), RAR-gamma (51.3%).
METHODS: mRNA was isolated from 54 FFPE small endoscopic biopsies from patients
with Barrett intestinal metaplasia (BE), esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC), or
control patients with a normal squamous-lined esophagus. Multiplexed tandem PCR
(MT-PCR) was used to quantitate 50 selected candidate genes for BE and control
genes in duplicate. Principal component analysis (PCA) was conducted to explore
the presence of global differences in gene expression profiles. One-way analysis 
of variance (ANOVA) of the transformed data was used to identify genes that were 
differentially expressed between different histological subtypes. Differentially 
expressed genes with a fold change of =2 (upregulated) or =-2 (downregulated) are
reported with the p value for each comparison (EAC vs. normal, EAC vs. BE and BE 
vs. normal). The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to control the false
discovery rate at 0.01 for all comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: Alterations in expression of select genes are strongly associated
with BE or EAC or both. This study's findings for many highly differentially
expressed genes are very similar to those previously reported, suggesting that
these genes should be tested further in longitudinal studies for their potential 
role as biomarkers of progression to more advanced Barrett disease.

PMID: 20543560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 1;107(22):10026-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0915137107. Epub 2010 May 13.

Ras signaling requires dynamic properties of Ets1 for phosphorylation-enhanced
binding to coactivator CBP.

Nelson ML(1), Kang HS, Lee GM, Blaszczak AG, Lau DK, McIntosh LP, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, USA.

Ras/MAPK signaling is often aberrantly activated in human cancers. The downstream
effectors are transcription factors, including those encoded by the ETS gene
family. Using cell-based assays and biophysical measurements, we have determined 
the mechanism by which Ras/MAPK signaling affects the function of Ets1 via
phosphorylation of Thr38 and Ser41. These ERK2 phosphoacceptors lie within the
unstructured N-terminal region of Ets1, immediately adjacent to the PNT domain.
NMR spectroscopic analyses demonstrated that the PNT domain is a four-helix
bundle (H2-H5), resembling the SAM domain, appended with two additional helices
(H0-H1). Phosphorylation shifted a conformational equilibrium, displacing the
dynamic helix H0 from the core bundle. The affinity of Ets1 for the TAZ1 (or CH1)
domain of the coactivator CBP was enhanced 34-fold by phosphorylation, and this
binding was sensitive to ionic strength. NMR-monitored titration experiments
mapped the interaction surfaces of the TAZ1 domain and Ets1, the latter
encompassing both the phosphoacceptors and PNT domain. Charge complementarity of 
these surfaces indicate that electrostatic forces act in concert with a
conformational equilibrium to mediate phosphorylation effects. We conclude that
the dynamic helical elements of Ets1, appended to a conserved structural core,
constitute a phospho-switch that directs Ras/MAPK signaling to downstream changes
in gene expression. This detailed structural and mechanistic information will
guide strategies for targeting ETS proteins in human disease.

PMCID: PMC2890480
PMID: 20534573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Lupus. 2010 Sep;19(10):1181-6. doi: 10.1177/0961203310367918. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

TNIP1, SLC15A4, ETS1, RasGRP3 and IKZF1 are associated with clinical features of 
systemic lupus erythematosus in a Chinese Han population.

He CF(1), Liu YS, Cheng YL, Gao JP, Pan TM, Han JW, Quan C, Sun LD, Zheng HF, Zuo
XB, Xu SX, Sheng YJ, Yao S, Hu WL, Li Y, Yu ZY, Yin XY, Zhang XJ, Cui Y, Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Anhui, China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with heterogeneous
clinical manifestations influenced by genetic and environmental factors. Five
novel susceptibility genes (TNIP1, SLC15A4, ETS1, RasGRP3 and IKZF1) for SLE have
been identified in a recent genome-wide association study of a Chinese Han
population. This study investigated their relationships with disease
subphenotypes, including renal nephritis, photosensitivity, antinuclear antibody 
(ANA), age at diagnosis, malar rash, discoid rash, immunological disorder, oral
ulcer, hematological disorder, neurological disorder, serositis, arthritis and
vasculitis. Significant associations were found for the single nucleotide
polymorphism rs10036748 of TNIP1 with photosensitivity (odds ratio (OR) = 0.87, p
= 0.01) and vasculitis (OR = 1.18, p = 0.04); rs10847697 of SLC15A4 with discoid 
rash (OR = 1.18, p = 0.02); rs6590330 of ETS1 with SLE of age at diagnosis <20
years (OR = 1.24, p = 8.91 x 10(-5)); rs13385731 of RasGRP3 with malar rash (OR =
1.20, p = 0.01), discoid rash (OR = 0.78, p = 0.02) and ANA (OR = 0.72, p =
0.004); rs4917014 of IKZF1 with renal nephritis (OR = 1.13, p = 0.02) and malar
rash (OR = 0.83, p = 0.00038), respectively. The study suggested that these
susceptibility genes might not only play important roles in the development of
SLE, but also contribute to the complex phenotypes of SLE.

PMID: 20516000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Haematologica. 2010 Oct;95(10):1697-704. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.021428. Epub 
2010 May 29.

Disturbed expression of the T-cell receptor/CD3 complex and associated signaling 
molecules in CD30+ T-cell lymphoproliferations.

Geissinger E(1), Sadler P, Roth S, Grieb T, Puppe B, Müller N, Reimer P,
Vetter-Kauczok CS, Wenzel J, Bonzheim I, Rüdiger T, Müller-Hermelink HK,
Rosenwald A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Wuerzburg, Josef Schneider-Strasse 2,
Wuerzburg, Germany. geissinger@mail.uniwuerzburg.de

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2010 Oct;95(10):1627-30.

BACKGROUND: CD30(+) T-cell lymphoproliferations comprise a spectrum of clinically
heterogeneous entities, including systemic anaplastic large cell lymphomas
(ALK(-) and ALK(+)) and primary cutaneous CD30(+) T-cell lymphoproliferative
disorders. While all these entities are characterized by proliferation of highly 
atypical, anaplastic CD30(+) T cells, the expression of T-cell specific antigens 
in the tumor cells is not consistently detectable.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We evaluated biopsies from 19 patients with primary cutaneous
CD30(+) lymphoproliferative disorders, 38 with ALK(-) and 33 with ALK(+) systemic
anaplastic large cell lymphoma. The biopsies were examined for the expression of 
T-cell receptoraß/CD3 complex (CD3<U+03B3>, d, e, <U+03B6>), transcription factors regulating
T-cell receptor expression (ATF1, ATF2, TCF-1, TCF-1a/LEF-1, Ets1), and molecules
of T-cell receptor-associated signaling cascades (Lck, ZAP-70, LAT, bcl-10,
Carma1, NFATc1, c-Jun, c-Fos, Syk) using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In comparison to the pattern in 20 peripheral T-cell lymphomas, not
otherwise specified, we detected a highly disturbed expression of the T-cell
receptor/CD3 complex, TCF-1, TCF-1a/LEF-1, Lck, ZAP-70, LAT, NFATc1, c-Jun, c-Fos
and Syk in most of the systemic anaplastic large cell lymphomas. In addition,
primary cutaneous CD30(+) lymphoproliferative disorders showed such a similar
expression pattern to that of systemic anaplastic large cell lymphomas, that none
of the markers we investigated can reliably distinguish between these CD30(+)
T-cell lymphoproliferations.
CONCLUSIONS: Severely altered expression of the T-cell receptor/CD3 complex,
T-cell receptor-associated transcription factors and signal transduction
molecules is a common characteristic of systemic and cutaneous CD30(+)
lymphoproliferations, although the clinical behavior of these entities is very
different. Since peripheral T-cell lymphomas, not otherwise specified retain the 
full expression program required for functioning T-cell receptor signaling, the
differential expression of a subset of these markers might be of diagnostic
utility in distinguishing peripheral T-cell lymphomas, not otherwise specified
from the entire group of CD30(+) lymphoproliferations.

PMCID: PMC2948095
PMID: 20511667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 May 20;11:38. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-38.

The leukemia associated ETO nuclear repressor gene is regulated by the GATA-1
transcription factor in erythroid/megakaryocytic cells.

Ajore R(1), Dhanda RS, Gullberg U, Olsson I.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Hematology, C14, BMC, S-221 84 Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The Eight-Twenty-One (ETO) nuclear co-repressor gene belongs to the
ETO homologue family also containing Myeloid Translocation Gene on chromosome 16 
(MTG16) and myeloid translocation Gene-Related protein 1 (MTGR1). By chromosomal 
translocations ETO and MTG16 become parts of fusion proteins characteristic of
morphological variants of acute myeloid leukemia. Normal functions of ETO
homologues have as yet not been examined. The goal of this work was to identify
structural and functional promoter elements upstream of the coding sequence of
the ETO gene in order to explore lineage-specific hematopoietic expression and
get hints to function.
RESULTS: A putative proximal ETO promoter was identified within 411 bp upstream
of the transcription start site. Strong ETO promoter activity was specifically
observed upon transfection of a promoter reporter construct into
erythroid/megakaryocytic cells, which have endogeneous ETO gene activity. An
evolutionary conserved region of 228 bp revealed potential cis-elements involved 
in transcription of ETO. Disruption of the evolutionary conserved GATA -636
consensus binding site repressed transactivation and disruption of the ETS1 -705 
consensus binding site enhanced activity of the ETO promoter. The promoter was
stimulated by overexpression of GATA-1 into erythroid/megakaryocytic cells.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay with erythroid/megakaryocytic cells showed
specific binding of GATA-1 to the GATA -636 site. Furthermore, results from
chromatin immunoprecipitation showed GATA-1 binding in vivo to the conserved
region of the ETO promoter containing the -636 site. The results suggest that the
GATA -636 site may have a role in activation of the ETO gene activity in cells
with erythroid/megakaryocytic potential. Leukemia associated AML1-ETO strongly
suppressed an ETO promoter reporter in erythroid/megakaryocytic cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that the GATA-1 transcription factor binds and
transactivates the ETO proximal promoter in an erythroid/megakaryocytic-specific 
manner. Thus, trans-acting factors that are essential in erythroid/megakaryocytic
differentiation govern ETO expression.

PMCID: PMC2882371
PMID: 20487545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Oct;67(20):3535-48. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0394-7. Epub 
2010 May 18.

MicroRNA miR-196a is a central regulator of HOX-B7 and BMP4 expression in
malignant melanoma.

Braig S(1), Mueller DW, Rothhammer T, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, Regensburg, Germany.

Since bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play an important role in melanoma
progression, we aimed to determine the molecular mechanisms leading to
overexpression of BMP4 in melanoma cells compared to normal melanocytes. With our
experimental approach we revealed that loss of expression of a microRNA
represents the starting point for a signaling cascade finally resulting in
overexpression of BMP4 in melanoma cells. In detail, strongly reduced expression 
of the microRNA miR-196a in melanoma cells compared to healthy melanocytes leads 
to enhanced HOX-B7 mRNA and protein levels, which subsequently raise Ets-1
activity by inducing basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). Ets-1 finally
accounts for induction of BMP4 expression. We were furthermore able to
demonstrate that bFGF-mediated induction of migration is achieved via activation 
of BMP4, thus determining BMP4 as major modulator of migration in melanoma. In
summary, our study provides insights into the early steps of melanoma progression
and might thereby harbor therapeutic relevance.

PMID: 20480203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Haematologica. 2010 Oct;95(10):1633-41. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.023267. Epub
2010 Apr 30.

Transcriptional silencing of the ETS1 oncogene contributes to human granulocytic 
differentiation.

Lulli V(1), Romania P, Riccioni R, Boe A, Lo-Coco F, Testa U, Marziali G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di
Sanità, viale Regina Elena 299, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Ets-1 is a widely expressed transcription factor implicated in
several biological processes including hematopoiesis, where it contributes to the
regulation of cellular differentiation. The functions of Ets-1 are regulated by
transcription factors as well as by phosphorylation events: phosphorylation of
threonine 38 activates Ets-1, whereas phosphorylation of a cluster of serines
within exon VII reduces DNA binding activity. This study focuses on the role of
Ets-1 during granulocytic differentiation of NB4 promyelocytic and HL60
myeloblastic leukemia cell lines induced by all-trans retinoic acid.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Ets-1 expression was measured by real-time reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and western blotting. The role of Ets-1
during all-trans retinoic acid-induced differentiation was analyzed by using a
transdominant negative molecule or small interfering RNA.
RESULTS: NB4 and HL60 cell lines expressed high levels of p51 Ets-1, while the
splice variant isoform that lacks exon VII (p42) was almost undetectable. The
addition of all-trans retinoic acid reduced p51 Ets-1 levels and induced
inhibitory phosphorylation of the remaining protein. Expression of Ets-1 was also
reduced during dimethylsulfoxide-induced differentiation and during granulocytic 
differentiation of human CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells but not in NB4.R2
and HL60R cells resistant to all-trans retinoic acid. In line with these
observations, transduction of a transdominant negative molecule of Ets-1, which
inhibited DNA binding and transcriptional activity of the wild-type Ets-1,
significantly increased chemical-induced differentiation. Consistently, Ets-1
knockdown by small interfering RNA increased the number of mature neutrophils
upon addition of all-trans retinoic acid. Interestingly, p51 Ets-1
over-expression was frequently observed in CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells
derived from patients with acute myeloid leukemia, as compared to its expression 
in normal CD34(+) cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicated that a decreased expression of Ets-1 protein
generalizes to granulocytic differentiation and may represent a crucial event for
granulocytic maturation.

PMCID: PMC2948087
PMID: 20435626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 May;17(5):620-8. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1801. Epub 2010 Apr 
25.

Human RNA polymerase III transcriptomes and relationships to Pol II promoter
chromatin and enhancer-binding factors.

Oler AJ(1), Alla RK, Roberts DN, Wong A, Hollenhorst PC, Chandler KJ, Cassiday
PA, Nelson CA, Hagedorn CH, Graves BJ, Cairns BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

RNA polymerase (Pol) III transcribes many noncoding RNAs (for example, transfer
RNAs) important for translational capacity and other functions. We localized Pol 
III, alternative TFIIIB complexes (BRF1 or BRF2) and TFIIIC in HeLa cells to
determine the Pol III transcriptome, define gene classes and reveal 'TFIIIC-only'
sites. Pol III localization in other transformed and primary cell lines reveals
previously uncharacterized and cell type-specific Pol III loci as well as one
microRNA. Notably, only a fraction of the in silico-predicted Pol III loci are
occupied. Many occupied Pol III genes reside within an annotated Pol II promoter.
Outside of Pol II promoters, occupied Pol III genes overlap with enhancer-like
chromatin and enhancer-binding proteins such as ETS1 and STAT1. Moreover, Pol III
occupancy scales with the levels of nearby Pol II, active chromatin and CpG
content. These results suggest that active chromatin gates Pol III accessibility 
to the genome.

PMCID: PMC2945309
PMID: 20418882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jul;45(1):19-32. doi: 10.1677/JME-10-0017. Epub 2010 Apr
15.

Appearance of the pituitary factor Pit-1 increases chromatin remodeling at
hypersensitive site III in the human GH locus.

Yang X(1), Jin Y, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Expression of pituitary and placental members of the human GH and chorionic
somatomammotropin (CS) gene family is directed by an upstream remote locus
control region (LCR). Pituitary-specific expression of GH requires direct binding
of Pit-1 (listed as POU1F1 in the HUGO database) to sequences marked by a
hypersensitive site (HS) region (HS I/II) 14.6 kb upstream of the GH-N gene
(listed as GH1 in the HUGO database). We used human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293)
cells overexpressing wild-type and mutant Pit-1 proteins as a model system to
gain insight into the mechanism by which Pit-1 gains access to the GH LCR.
Addition of Pit-1 to these cells increased DNA accessibility at HS III, located
28 kb upstream of the human GH-N gene, in a POU homeodomain-dependent manner, as 
reflected by effects on histone hyperacetylation and RNA polymerase II activity. 
Direct binding of Pit-1 to HS III sequences is not supported. However, the
potential for binding of ETS family members to this region has been demonstrated,
and Pit-1 association with this ETS element in HS III sequences requires the POU 
homeodomain. Also, both ETS1 and ELK1 co-precipitate from human pituitary
extracts using two independent sources of Pit-1 antibodies. Finally,
overexpression of ELK1 or Pit-1 expression in HEK293 cells increased GH-N RNA
levels. However, while ELK1 overexpression also stimulated placental CS RNA
levels, the effect of Pit-1 appeared to correlate with ETS factor levels and
target GH-N preferentially. These data are consistent with recruitment and an
early role for Pit-1 in remodeling of the GH LCR at the constitutively open HS
III through protein-protein interaction.

PMID: 20395397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biomed Pharmacother. 2010 Sep;64(7):458-62. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2010.01.008.
Epub 2010 Feb 25.

Drug resistant breast cancer cells overexpress ETS1 gene.

Kars MD(1), Iseri OD, Gündüz U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University, Eskisehir
Yolu, 06531 Ankara, Turkey.

PURPOSE: Multidrug resistance (MDR) is resistance to wide range of structurally
unrelated anticancer agents. MDR is a serious limitation to the effective
chemotherapy. Involvement of ETS1 overexpression in upregulation of MDR1 gene
expression is implicated. In the present study the aim was to assess the
involvement of ETS1 and the genes, which encode the proteins interacting with
ETS1 in drug resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Drug resistant sublines to paclitaxel (MCF-7/Pac), docetaxel (MCF-7Doc),
vincristine (MCF-7/Vinc) and doxorubicin (MCF-7/Dox) that were developed from
sensitive MCF-7 cells (MCF-7/S) were used. cDNA microarray analysis was performed
for the RNA samples of sensitive and resistant cells in duplicate experiments.
GeneSpring GX 7.3.1 Software was used in data analysis. Microarray data was
supported by immunocytochemistry and western blot for drug resistance protein,
P-gp, encoded by MDR1 gene.
RESULTS: According to microarray data MDR1 and ETS1 genes were highly
overexpressed in all of the resistant sublines. Matrix metalloproteinase-1 gene
(MMP-1) was also tremendously upregulated only in vincristine resistant cells.
Immunocytochemistry and western blot results confirmed that P-gp was highly
overexpressed in resistant sublines compared to original MCF-7 cells.
CONCLUSION: High ETS1 expression levels in all resistant MCF-7 sublines may lead 
to the upregulation of the transcription of MDR1 gene. Overexpression of ETS1
gene in resistant cells may have contributed to the development of resistance in 
the cells. Furthermore, the significant upregulation of MMP1 and MMP9 in
MCF-7/Vinc may also be related to an acquired invasive behavior of MCF-7 cell
line due to vincristine treatment.

2010. Published by Elsevier SAS.

PMID: 20392592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Jan;45(1):26-9.

[Transcription factor Ets-1 expression in human fetal membranes and its clinical 
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo X(1), Qi HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of transcription factor Ets-1 involved in
premature rupture of membranes(PROM)by detecting its expression and location in
human fetal membranes.
METHODS: Between Feb. and Nov. 2007, 100 pregnant women who delivered in the
First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University were enrolled in this
study. According to gestational weeks, rupture of amniochorionic membranes and
delivery mode, those women were classified into preterm labor group, preterm
premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) group, term labor group and term premature
rupture of membranes (TPROM) group, matched with elective term cesarean sections 
women as control group. There were 20 pregnant women in every group. The
expression and distribution of Ets-1 protein in fetal membranes were detected by 
immunohistochemical streptravidin-biotin peroxidase (SP) method and histoscore.
In the mean time, 6 cases were chosen from each group randomly and reverse
transcription-PCR was used to measure the Ets-1 mRNA expression.
RESULTS: (1) The expression of Ets-1 mRNA in fetal membranes were 0.342 ± 0.016
in preterm labor group, 0.603 ± 0.027 in PPROM group, 0.325 ± 0.013 in term labor
group, 0.582 ± 0.075 in TPROM group, 0.139 ± 0.012 in control group,
respectively. When compared with that in control group, Ets-1 mRNA expression
were significantly increased in both PPROM and TPROM group (P < 0.05). However,
it did not show remarkably difference between preterm group and term labor group,
as well as between PPROM and TPROM group (P > 0.05). (2) Ets-1 was in stromal
layers of amniochorionic membranes and in both cytoplasm and nuclei of
trophoblast, which were shown with diffuse intracellular positive granularities
(brown-yellow) clearly. No expression of Ets-1 was observed in amniotic
epithelial cells. (3) The expression of Ets-1 protein was 0.552 ± 0.018 in
preterm labor group, 2.853 ± 0.174 in PPROM group, 0.538 ± 0.042 in term labor
group, 2.731 ± 0.090 in TPROM group and 0.214 ± 0.013 in control group,
respectively. Ets-1 protein was significantly increased in the stroma of both
PPROM and TPROM group than that in control group (P < 0.05). However, no
remarkable different expression of Ets-1 was observed between preterm and term
labor group, so was that between PPROM and TPROM group (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Transcription factor Ets-1 is expressed in human amniochorionic
membranes and it could be up-regulated in PROM.

PMID: 20367922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Development. 2010 May;137(9):1543-51. doi: 10.1242/dev.047696. Epub 2010 Mar 31.

Ets1 is required for proper migration and differentiation of the cardiac neural
crest.

Gao Z(1), Kim GH, Mackinnon AC, Flagg AE, Bassett B, Earley JU, Svensson EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Defects in cardiac neural crest lead to congenital heart disease through failure 
of cardiac outflow tract and ventricular septation. In this report, we
demonstrate a previously unappreciated role for the transcription factor Ets1 in 
the regulation of cardiac neural crest development. When bred onto a C57BL/6
genetic background, Ets1(-/-) mice have a nearly complete perinatal lethality.
Histologic examination of Ets1(-/-) embryos revealed a membranous ventricular
septal defect and an abnormal nodule of cartilage within the heart.
Lineage-tracing experiments in Ets1(-/-) mice demonstrated that cells of the
neural crest lineage form this cartilage nodule and do not complete their
migration to the proximal aspects of the outflow tract endocardial cushions,
resulting in the failure of membranous interventricular septum formation. Given
previous studies demonstrating that the MEK/ERK pathway directly regulates Ets1
activity, we cultured embryonic hearts in the presence of the MEK inhibitor U0126
and found that U0126 induced intra-cardiac cartilage formation, suggesting the
involvement of a MEK/ERK/Ets1 pathway in blocking chondrocyte differentiation of 
cardiac neural crest. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Ets1 is
required to direct the proper migration and differentiation of cardiac neural
crest in the formation of the interventricular septum, and therefore could play a
role in the etiology of human congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2853851
PMID: 20356956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2010 Feb;61(1):73-81.

Spironolactone, but not enalapril, potentiates hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha
and Ets-1 expression in newborn rat kidney.

Yim HE(1), Kim JH, Yoo KH, Bae IS, Jang GY, Hong YS, Lee JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.

Hypoxia is regarded as an important physiological factor that controls
nephrogenesis. We investigated whether the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
(RAAS) affects hypoxia-related target genes in developing kidneys. Newborn rat
pups were treated with enalapril (30 mg/kg/d) or spironolactone (200 mg/kg/d) for
7 days. Tissue hypoxia was assessed by the uptake of a hypoxyprobe-1,
pimonidazole (200 mg/kg), and the expression of hypoxia-responsive genes. In the 
enalapril group, hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha, HIF-2alpha, and Ets-1
protein expression were not changed, compared to the control group. In the
spironolactone group, HIF-1alpha and Ets-1 protein expression were significantly 
increased by immunoblots and immunohistochemistry, whereas HIF-2alpha protein
expression was not changed, compared to the control group. In the enalapril
group, the immunoactivity of pimonidazole was not significantly different from
that of the controls. However, in the spironolactone group, pimonidazole staining
demonstrated that the cortex and medulla underwent severe hypoxia. In summary,
our data showed that aldosterone inhibition in the developing kidney augmented
the hypoxic responses, and up-regulated the expression of key mediators of
hypoxia including HIF-1alpha and Ets-1. Angiotensin II inhibition did not affect 
hypoxia-related alterations in the developing kidney. The components of RAAS may 
differentially modulate renal hypoxia and its related target genes in the
developing rat kidney.

PMID: 20228418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Exp Dermatol. 2010 Apr;19(4):347-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2010.01065.x. Epub 
2010 Feb 25.

Akt inhibition up-regulates MMP1 through a CCN2-dependent pathway in human dermal
fibroblasts.

Bujor AM(1), Nakerakanti S, Morris E, Hant FN, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC, USA. andreea@bu.edu

Akt is a key signalling molecule that was found to be down-regulated in chronic
wounds. Akt blockade has dual antifibrotic effects in human dermal fibroblasts,
by up-regulating matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) and down-regulating collagen
gene expression (J Invest Dermatol 2008: 128: 1906). The aim of this study was to
gain additional insights into the mechanism of MMP1 up-regulation following Akt
blockade. As previous studies showed that CCN2 can be a positive regulator of
MMP1, we examined the effects of Akt inhibition on CCN2 expression. Akt blockade 
using a specific pharmacological inhibitor and Akt siRNA resulted in a
significant up-regulation of CCN2, which correlated with the increase in MMP1.
The MMP1 up-regulation following Akt blockade was partially suppressed by CCN2
siRNA, suggesting that CCN2 is contributing to this effect. Additional
experiments showed that CCN2 induces phosphorylation of ERK1/2, Ets1 and c-Jun.
Consistent with the stimulatory role of ERK1/2/Ets1 in the expression of MMP1,
the ERK1/2 inhibitor UO126 prevented the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Ets1 and
completely abrogated the induction of MMP1 after CCN2 overexpression, while
having no effect on c-Jun activation. Taken together these results establish CCN2
as a key regulator of MMP1 induction via activation of the ERK1/2/Ets1 pathway.
Down-regulation of Akt signalling leads to inappropriate activation of the
CCN2/MMP1 pathway that may contribute to the pathogenesis of chronic wounds.
Coordinate expression of CCN2, Akt and MMP1 could be important for normal wound
healing to occur. Thus, targeting these specific proteins may represent a
promising approach to the therapy of dysregulated wound healing.

PMCID: PMC3826663
PMID: 20201953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Nat Genet. 2010 Apr;42(4):295-302. doi: 10.1038/ng.543. Epub 2010 Feb 28.

Multiple common variants for celiac disease influencing immune gene expression.

Dubois PC(1), Trynka G, Franke L, Hunt KA, Romanos J, Curtotti A, Zhernakova A,
Heap GA, Adány R, Aromaa A, Bardella MT, van den Berg LH, Bockett NA, de la
Concha EG, Dema B, Fehrmann RS, Fernández-Arquero M, Fiatal S, Grandone E, Green 
PM, Groen HJ, Gwilliam R, Houwen RH, Hunt SE, Kaukinen K, Kelleher D,
Korponay-Szabo I, Kurppa K, MacMathuna P, Mäki M, Mazzilli MC, McCann OT, Mearin 
ML, Mein CA, Mirza MM, Mistry V, Mora B, Morley KI, Mulder CJ, Murray JA, Núñez
C, Oosterom E, Ophoff RA, Polanco I, Peltonen L, Platteel M, Rybak A, Salomaa V, 
Schweizer JJ, Sperandeo MP, Tack GJ, Turner G, Veldink JH, Verbeek WH, Weersma
RK, Wolters VM, Urcelay E, Cukrowska B, Greco L, Neuhausen SL, McManus R,
Barisani D, Deloukas P, Barrett JC, Saavalainen P, Wijmenga C, van Heel DA.

Author information: 
(1)Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet.2010 May;42(5):465.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Apr;42(4):281-2.

We performed a second-generation genome-wide association study of 4,533
individuals with celiac disease (cases) and 10,750 control subjects. We genotyped
113 selected SNPs with P(GWAS) < 10(-4) and 18 SNPs from 14 known loci in a
further 4,918 cases and 5,684 controls. Variants from 13 new regions reached
genome-wide significance (P(combined) < 5 x 10(-8)); most contain genes with
immune functions (BACH2, CCR4, CD80, CIITA-SOCS1-CLEC16A, ICOSLG and ZMIZ1), with
ETS1, RUNX3, THEMIS and TNFRSF14 having key roles in thymic T-cell selection.
There was evidence to suggest associations for a further 13 regions. In an
expression quantitative trait meta-analysis of 1,469 whole blood samples, 20 of
38 (52.6%) tested loci had celiac risk variants correlated (P < 0.0028, FDR 5%)
with cis gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2847618
PMID: 20190752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Blood. 2010 Jul 1;115(26):5338-46. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-244640. Epub 2010
Feb 25.

Scl isoforms act downstream of etsrp to specify angioblasts and definitive
hematopoietic stem cells.

Ren X(1), Gomez GA, Zhang B, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, Center of
Developmental Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, 
Ministry of Education, China.

Recent lineage studies suggest that hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) may be
derived from endothelial cells. However, the genetic hierarchy governing the
emergence of HSCs remains elusive. We report here that zebrafish ets1-related
protein (etsrp), which is essential for vascular endothelial development, also
plays a critical role in the initiation of definitive hematopoiesis by
controlling the expression of 2 stem cell leukemia (scl) isoforms (scl-alpha and 
scl-beta) in angioblasts. In etsrp morphants, which are deficient in endothelial 
and HSC development, scl-alpha alone partially rescues angioblast specification, 
arterial-venous differentiation, and the expression of HSC markers, runx1 and
c-myb, whereas scl-beta requires angioblast rescue by fli1a to restore runx1
expression. Interestingly, when vascular endothelial growth factor (Vegf)
signaling is inhibited, HSC marker expression can still be restored by scl-alpha 
in etsrp morphants, whereas the rescue of arterial ephrinb2a expression is
blocked. Furthermore, both scl isoforms partially rescue runx1 but not ephrinb2a 
expression in embryos deficient in Vegf signaling. Our data suggest that
downstream of etsrp, scl-alpha and fli1a specify the angioblasts, whereas
scl-beta further initiates HSC specification from this angioblast population, and
that Vegf signaling acts upstream of scl-beta during definitive hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2902133
PMID: 20185582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Development. 2010 Apr;137(7):1149-57. doi: 10.1242/dev.048652. Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Activation of the skeletogenic gene regulatory network in the early sea urchin
embryo.

Sharma T(1), Ettensohn CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 Fifth
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

The gene regulatory network (GRN) that underlies the development of the embryonic
skeleton in sea urchins is an important model for understanding the architecture 
and evolution of developmental GRNs. The initial deployment of the network is
thought to be regulated by a derepression mechanism, which is mediated by the
products of the pmar1 and hesC genes. Here, we show that the activation of the
skeletogenic network occurs by a mechanism that is distinct from the
transcriptional repression of hesC. By means of quantitative, fluorescent
whole-mount in situ hybridization, we find that two pivotal early genes in the
network, alx1 and delta, are activated in prospective skeletogenic cells prior to
the downregulation of hesC expression. An analysis of the upstream regulation of 
alx1 shows that this gene is regulated by MAPK signaling and by the transcription
factor Ets1; however, these inputs influence only the maintenance of alx1
expression and not its activation, which occurs by a distinct mechanism. By
altering normal cleavage patterns, we show that the zygotic activation of alx1
and delta, but not that of pmar1, is dependent upon the unequal division of
vegetal blastomeres. Based on these findings, we conclude that the widely
accepted double-repression model is insufficient to account for the localized
activation of the skeletogenic GRN. We postulate the existence of additional,
unidentified repressors that are controlled by pmar1, and propose that the
ability of pmar1 to derepress alx1 and delta is regulated by the unequal division
of vegetal blastomeres.

PMID: 20181745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. PLoS Genet. 2010 Feb 12;6(2):e1000841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000841.

Genome-wide association study in Asian populations identifies variants in ETS1
and WDFY4 associated with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Yang W(1), Shen N, Ye DQ, Liu Q, Zhang Y, Qian XX, Hirankarn N, Ying D, Pan HF,
Mok CC, Chan TM, Wong RW, Lee KW, Mok MY, Wong SN, Leung AM, Li XP, Avihingsanon 
Y, Wong CM, Lee TL, Ho MH, Lee PP, Chang YK, Li PH, Li RJ, Zhang L, Wong WH, Ng
IO, Lau CS, Sham PC, Lau YL; Asian Lupus Genetics Consortium.

Collaborators: Lau YL, Shen N, Ye DQ, Hirankarn N, Yang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Systemic lupus erythematosus is a complex and potentially fatal autoimmune
disease, characterized by autoantibody production and multi-organ damage. By a
genome-wide association study (320 patients and 1,500 controls) and subsequent
replication altogether involving a total of 3,300 Asian SLE patients from Hong
Kong, Mainland China, and Thailand, as well as 4,200 ethnically and
geographically matched controls, genetic variants in ETS1 and WDFY4 were found to
be associated with SLE (ETS1: rs1128334, P = 2.33x10(-11), OR = 1.29; WDFY4:
rs7097397, P = 8.15x10(-12), OR = 1.30). ETS1 encodes for a transcription factor 
known to be involved in a wide range of immune functions, including Th17 cell
development and terminal differentiation of B lymphocytes. SNP rs1128334 is
located in the 3'-UTR of ETS1, and allelic expression analysis from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells showed significantly lower expression level from the risk
allele. WDFY4 is a conserved protein with unknown function, but is predominantly 
expressed in primary and secondary immune tissues, and rs7097397 in WDFY4 changes
an arginine residue to glutamine (R1816Q) in this protein. Our study also
confirmed association of the HLA locus, STAT4, TNFSF4, BLK, BANK1, IRF5, and
TNFAIP3 with SLE in Asians. These new genetic findings may help us to gain a
better understanding of the disease and the functions of the genes involved.

PMCID: PMC2820522
PMID: 20169177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 23;107(8):3570-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906596107. Epub 2010 Feb 5.

Genomic code for Sox10 activation reveals a key regulatory enhancer for cranial
neural crest.

Betancur P(1), Bronner-Fraser M, Sauka-Spengler T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

The neural crest is a multipotent, stem cell-like population that migrates
extensively in the embryo and forms a wide array of derivatives, ranging from
neurons to melanocytes and cartilage. Analyses of the gene regulatory network
driving neural crest development revealed Sox10 as one of the earliest neural
crest-specifying genes, cell-autonomously driving delamination and directly
regulating numerous downstream effectors and differentiation gene batteries. In
search of direct inputs to the neural crest specifier module, we dissected the
chick Sox10 genomic region and isolated two downstream regulatory regions with
distinct spatiotemporal activity. A unique element, Sox10E2 represents the
earliest-acting neural crest cis-regulatory element, critical for initiating
Sox10 expression in newly formed cranial, but not vagal and trunk neural crest. A
second element, Sox10E1, acts in later migrating vagal and trunk crest cells.
Deep characterization of Sox10E2 reveals Sox9, Ets1, and cMyb as direct inputs
mediating enhancer activity. ChIP, DNA-pull down, and gel-shift assays
demonstrate their direct binding to the Sox10E2 enhancer in vivo, whereas
mutation of their corresponding binding sites, or inactivation of the three
upstream regulators, abolishes both reporter and endogenous Sox10 expression.
Using cis-regulatory analysis as a tool, our study makes critical connections
within the neural crest gene regulatory network, thus being unique in
establishing a direct link of upstream effectors to a key neural crest specifier.

PMCID: PMC2840498
PMID: 20139305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Apr;31(4):577-86. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq020. Epub 2010 Jan 
22.

Dual specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6) is an ETS-regulated negative feedback
mediator of oncogenic ERK signaling in lung cancer cells.

Zhang Z(1), Kobayashi S, Borczuk AC, Leidner RS, Laframboise T, Levine AD, Halmos
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
University Hospitals-Case Medical Center and Ireland Cancer Center, Case
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway signaling plays an important role
in the majority of non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). In a prior microarray
analysis of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibition in NSCLC cell
lines, we noted that several dual specificity phosphatases (DUSPs) were among the
most highly and immediately regulated genes. DUSPs act as natural terminators of 
MAPK signal transduction and therefore, we hypothesized a tumor suppressive role 
via feedback mechanisms. In the current study, we focus on the assessment of
DUSP6, a cytoplasmic DUSP with high specificity for extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK). We demonstrate that DUSP6 expression tracks in
tandem with ERK inhibition and that regulation of DUSP6 is mediated at the
promoter level by ETS1, a well-known nuclear target of activated ERK. Small
interfering RNA knockdown in DUSP6-high H441 lung cancer cells significantly
increased ERK activation and cellular proliferation, whereas plasmid-driven
overexpression in DUSP6-low H1975 lung cancer cells significantly reduced ERK
activation and cellular proliferation and promoted apoptosis. Also, DUSP6
overexpression synergized with EGFR inhibitor treatment in EGFR-mutant HCC827
cells. Our results indicate that DUSP6 expression is regulated by ERK signaling
and that DUSP6 exerts antitumor effects via negative feedback regulation,
pointing to an important feedback loop in NSCLC. Further studies assessing the
tumor suppressive role of DUSP6 and strategies aimed at modulation of its
activity are warranted.

PMCID: PMC2847094
PMID: 20097731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mech Dev. 2010 Apr;127(3-4):169-82. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.01.002. Epub 2010 Jan
18.

Roles of Ets-1 and p70S6 kinase in chondrogenic and gliogenic specification of
mouse mesencephalic neural crest cells.

Sugiura K(1), Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, 1-1 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) have been shown to promote the chondrogenic and 
gliogenic specification of mouse mesencephalic neural crest cells through Notch
signaling [Nakanishi, K., Chan, S.Y., Ito, K., 2007. Notch signaling is required 
for the chondrogenic specification of mouse mesencephalic neural crest cells.
Mech. Dev. 124, 190-203; Ijuin, K., Nakanishi, K., Ito, K., 2008. Different
downstream pathways for Notch signaling are required for gliogenic and
chondrogenic specification of mouse mesencephalic neural crest cells. Mech. Dev. 
125, 462-474]. In the present study, we analyzed FGF signaling pathways in
chondrogenic and gliogenic specification. The promotion of chondrogenesis by
FGF-2 was significantly suppressed by U0126, an inhibitor of the extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase (Erk) pathway, and by Erk-1 siRNA. Chondrogenesis
was also prevented by the dominant negative Ets-1 expression vector. In contrast,
Ets-1 was irrelevant to gliogenesis. The promotion of gliogenesis by FGF-2 was
not only inhibited by U0126 but also by LY294002 and rapamycin, inhibitors of the
Akt pathway, and by Akt-1 siRNA. Furthermore, gliogenesis was dramatically
prevented by blocking the expression of p70S6 kinase (p70S6k), which is activated
by both the Erk and Akt pathways, with p70S6k siRNA. These results suggest that
Ets-1 activated by the Erk pathway promotes chondrogenic specification and p70S6k
activated by both the Erk and Akt pathways plays an important role in gliogenic
specification.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20085809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Genome Res. 2010 Mar;20(3):381-92. doi: 10.1101/gr.098657.109. Epub 2010 Jan 14.

Genome-wide discovery of human heart enhancers.

Narlikar L(1), Sakabe NJ, Blanski AA, Arimura FE, Westlund JM, Nobrega MA,
Ovcharenko I.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda,
Maryland 20894, USA.

The various organogenic programs deployed during embryonic development rely on
the precise expression of a multitude of genes in time and space. Identifying the
cis-regulatory elements responsible for this tightly orchestrated regulation of
gene expression is an essential step in understanding the genetic pathways
involved in development. We describe a strategy to systematically identify
tissue-specific cis-regulatory elements that share combinations of sequence
motifs. Using heart development as an experimental framework, we employed a
combination of Gibbs sampling and linear regression to build a classifier that
identifies heart enhancers based on the presence and/or absence of various
sequence features, including known and putative transcription factor (TF) binding
specificities. In distinguishing heart enhancers from a large pool of random
noncoding sequences, the performance of our classifier is vastly superior to four
commonly used methods, with an accuracy reaching 92% in cross-validation.
Furthermore, most of the binding specificities learned by our method resemble the
specificities of TFs widely recognized as key players in heart development and
differentiation, such as SRF, MEF2, ETS1, SMAD, and GATA. Using our classifier as
a predictor, a genome-wide scan identified over 40,000 novel human heart
enhancers. Although the classifier used no gene expression information, these
novel enhancers are strongly associated with genes expressed in the heart.
Finally, in vivo tests of our predictions in mouse and zebrafish achieved a
validation rate of 62%, significantly higher than what is expected by chance.
These results support the existence of underlying cis-regulatory codes dictating 
tissue-specific transcription in mammalian genomes and validate our enhancer
classifier strategy as a method to uncover these regulatory codes.

PMCID: PMC2840982
PMID: 20075146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):730-40. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2090. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

ETS-1 oncogenic activity mediated by transforming growth factor alpha.

Holterman CE(1), Franovic A, Payette J, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5.

Inappropriate expression of Ets-1 is observed in a variety of human cancers, and 
its forced expression in cultured cells results in transformation, autonomous
proliferation, and tumor formation. The basis by which Ets-1 confers autonomous
growth, one of the primary hallmarks of cancer cells and a critical component of 
persistent proliferation, has yet to be fully explained. Using a variety of
cancer cell lines, we show that inhibition of Ets-1 blocks tumor formation and
cell proliferation in vivo and autonomous growth in culture. A screen of multiple
diffusible growth factors revealed that inhibition of Ets-1 results in the
specific downregulation of transforming growth factor alpha (TGFalpha), the
proximal promoter region of which contains multiple ETS family DNA binding sites 
that can be directly bound and regulated by Ets-1. Notably, rescuing TGFalpha
expression in Ets-1-silenced cells was sufficient to restore tumor cell
proliferation in vivo and autonomous growth in culture. These results reveal a
previously unrecognized mechanism by which Ets-1 oncogenic activity can be
explained in human cancer through its ability to regulate the important cellular 
mitogen TGFalpha.

PMID: 20068146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):1320-30. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1081. Epub 2010 Jan 
7.

LEFTY, a member of the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily, inhibits
uterine stromal cell differentiation: a novel autocrine role.

Tang M(1), Naidu D, Hearing P, Handwerger S, Tabibzadeh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stony Brook University, Nicols Road, 
Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA.

LEFTY is expressed in normal endometrium in cells that decidualize. To understand
the importance of this expression, we have studied the effect of LEFTY on
decidualization in vitro and in vivo. Exposure of human uterine fibroblast (HuF) 
cells to recombinant LEFTY blocked the induction of the decidual
differentiation-specific marker genes, IGFBP1 (IGF-binding protein 1) and PRL
(prolactin) in response to medroxyprogesterone acetate, estradiol, and
prostaglandin E2. The inhibitory effect was associated with decreased induction
of the transcription factors ETS1 and FOXO1, both of which are essential for
decidualization. Overexpression of LEFTY in decidualized HuF cells with an
adenovirus that transduced LEFTY caused a marked decrease in IGFBP1 secretion,
and withdrawal of medroxyprogesterone acetate from decidualized cells resulted in
a decrease in IGFBP1 secretion and an increase in LEFTY expression. Moreover,
overexpression of LEFTY in decidualized cells reprogrammed the cells to a less
differentiated state and attenuated expression of decidual markers. Uterine
decidualization was markedly attenuated and litter size was significantly reduced
by retroviral transduction of LEFTY in the uterine horns of pregnant mice or by
induction of LEFTY expression by doxycycline treatment in Tet-On conditional
LEFTY transgenic pregnant mice. In addition, administration of the contraceptive 
agent drospirenone to ovariectomized mice induced a marked increase in LEFTY
expression and inhibited decidualization. Taken together, these finding indicate 
that LEFTY acts as a molecular switch that modulates both the induction of
decidual differentiation and the maintenance of a decidualized state. Because
decidual cells express abundant amounts of LEFTY, the action of LEFTY on
decidualization occurs by an autocrine mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2840686
PMID: 20056823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Int J Oncol. 2010 Feb;36(2):415-20.

Integrative genomic analyses of CXCR4: transcriptional regulation of CXCR4 based 
on TGFbeta, Nodal, Activin signaling and POU5F1, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXH1, SOX17, and 
GFI1 transcription factors.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

CXCR4, CD133, CD44 and ABCG2 are representative transmembrane proteins expressed 
on the surfaces of normal and/or cancer stem cells. CXCR4 is co-expressed with
POU5F1 in endodermal precursors and adult-tissue stem cells. CXCR4 is expressed
in a variety of human tumors, such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, pancreatic 
cancer, and gastric cancer. CXCR4 is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) for
CXCL12 (SDF1) chemokine, and the CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling axis is involved in
proliferation, survival, migration, and homing of cancer cells. Integrative
genomic analyses of CXCR4 gene were carried out to elucidate the mechanisms of
CXCR4 expression in stem cells, because CXCR4 is a key molecule occupying the
crossroads of oncology, immunology, gerontology and regenerative medicine. Human 
CXCR4 promoter region with binding sites for HIF1alpha, ETS1, NF-kappaB and GLI
was not conserved in mouse and rat Cxcr4 orthologs. Proximal enhancer region with
palindromic Smad-binding sites, FOX-binding site, POU-binding site, triple
SOX17-binding sites, bHLH-binding site, TCF/LEF-binding site, and double
GFI1-binding sites was almost completely conserved among human, chimpanzee,
mouse, and rat CXCR4 orthologs. TGFbeta, Nodal, and Activin signals induce CXCR4 
upregulation based on Smad2/3 and FOX family members, such as FOXA2, FOXC2, and
FOXH1. CXCR4 is expressed in endodermal precursors due to the existence of triple
SOX17-binding sites around the POU-binding site instead of the POU5F1-SOX2 joint 
motif. Because CXCR4 is downregulated by p53-GFI1 signaling axis, p53 mutation in
cancer stem cells leads to CXCR4 upregulation. CXCR4 is also upregulated by
TGFbeta and Hedgehog signals in tumor cells at the invasion front. Small molecule
compound or human antibody targeted to CXCR4 will be applied for cancer
therapeutics focusing on cancer stem cells at the primary lesion as well as
metastasis or recurrence niches, such as bone marrow and peritoneal cavity.

PMID: 20043076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 1;184(3):1309-16. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0804162. Epub 2009
Dec 28.

Phylogenetic and functional analysis identifies Ets-1 as a novel regulator of the
Th2 cytokine gene locus.

Strempel JM(1), Grenningloh R, Ho IC, Vercelli D.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Laboratory, Arizona Respiratory Center, Tucson, AZ 85719, 
USA.

The Th2 cytokine gene locus has emerged as a remarkable example of coordinated
gene expression, the regulation of which seems to be rooted in an extensive array
of cis-regulatory regions. Using a hypothesis-generating computational approach
that integrated multispecies (n = 11) sequence comparisons with algorithm-based
transcription factor binding-site predictions, we sought to identify
evolutionarily conserved noncoding regions (ECRs) and motifs shared among them,
which may underlie coregulation. Twenty-two transcription factor families were
predicted to have binding sites in at least two Th2 ECRs. The ranking of these
shared motifs according to their distribution and relative frequency pointed to a
regulatory hierarchy among the transcription factor families. GATA sites were the
most prevalent and widely distributed, consistent with the known role of GATA3 as
a Th2 master switch. Unexpectedly, sites for ETS-domain proteins were also
predicted within several Th2 ECRs and the majority of these sites were found to
support Ets-1 binding in vitro and in vivo. Of note, the expression of all three 
Th2 cytokines (IL-5, -13, and -4) was significantly and selectively decreased in 
Th2 cells generated from Ets-1-deficient mice. Collectively, these data suggest
that Ets-1 contributes to Th2 cytokine gene regulation by interacting with
multiple cis-regulatory regions throughout the Th2 locus.

PMCID: PMC2809820
PMID: 20038639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2009 Sep;31(9):674-8.

[Relationship between Ets-1 expression and angiogenesis, clinicopathological
features and survival of patients with gastric carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren TW(1), Zhou YN, Wu J, Zhang ZY, Hao TJ, Wang JX, Zou SJ, Chen ZF, Huang SS,
Zhang LH, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology of the First Hospital of Lanzhou University,
Lanzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of Ets-1 in gastric carcinoma,
para-cancerous tissue and metastatic lymph nodes, and to determine the
relationship between Ets-1 expression and clinicopathological features,
angiogenesis and survival of patients with gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: Gastric carcinoma tissue microarray was used to determine Ets-1 protein 
expression by SP immunohistochemical staining in 189 advanced gastric cancer, 54 
papacancerous tissues, 41 metastatic lymph nodes and 32 control tissues.
RESULTS: The positive rates for Ets-1 expression of the carcinoma, paracancerous 
and control tissues were 71.4%, 29.6% and 18.8%, respectively, with a significant
difference among the three groups (P < 0.01). In the cancer tissues, the positive
rate of Ets-1 protein expression was significantly associated with depth of
invasion and lymph node metastasis (P < 0.01), but not associated with degree of 
differentiation, Lauren's histological type, sex, age, and size of tumor (P >
0.05). The positive rates for Ets-1 expression of the 41 gastric cancer and 41
metastatic lymph nodes were significantly different (P < 0.05). In metastatic
lymph nodes, the positive rate for Ets-1 expression was higher. The MVD in Ets-1 
positive tumors was higher than that in the Ets-1 negative tumors, with a
significant difference (P < 0.05). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that the
survival time of Ets-1-negative patients was longer than that of Ets-1-positive
patients (P < 0.05). Cox regression analysis showed that Ets-1 expression was not
an independent prognostic factor of gastric carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: A higher expression of Ets-1 is involved in carcinogenesis,
development, invasion, and metastasis of gastric cancer. Ets-1 plays an important
role in angiogenesis in gastric cancer. Ets-1 is a useful marker for predicting
the outcome for patients with gastric carcinoma, though it is not an independent 
prognostic indicator.

PMID: 20021863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. PLoS Genet. 2009 Dec;5(12):e1000778. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000778. Epub 2009
Dec 18.

DNA specificity determinants associate with distinct transcription factor
functions.

Hollenhorst PC(1), Chandler KJ, Poulsen RL, Johnson WE, Speck NA, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department of Oncological Sciences, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

To elucidate how genomic sequences build transcriptional control networks, we
need to understand the connection between DNA sequence and transcription factor
binding and function. Binding predictions based solely on consensus predictions
are limited, because a single factor can use degenerate sequence motifs and
because related transcription factors often prefer identical sequences. The ETS
family transcription factor, ETS1, exemplifies these challenges. Unexpected,
redundant occupancy of ETS1 and other ETS proteins is observed at promoters of
housekeeping genes in T cells due to common sequence preferences and the presence
of strong consensus motifs. However, ETS1 exhibits a specific function in T cell 
activation; thus, unique transcriptional targets are predicted. To uncover the
sequence motifs that mediate specific functions of ETS1, a genome-wide approach, 
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq),
identified both promoter and enhancer binding events in Jurkat T cells. A
comparison with DNase I sensitivity both validated the dataset and also improved 
accuracy. Redundant occupancy of ETS1 with the ETS protein GABPA occurred
primarily in promoters of housekeeping genes, whereas ETS1 specific occupancy
occurred in the enhancers of T cell-specific genes. Two routes to ETS1
specificity were identified: an intrinsic preference of ETS1 for a variant of the
ETS family consensus sequence and the presence of a composite sequence that can
support cooperative binding with a RUNX transcription factor. Genome-wide
occupancy of RUNX factors corroborated the importance of this partnership.
Furthermore, genome-wide occupancy of co-activator CBP indicated tight
co-localization with ETS1 at specific enhancers, but not redundant promoters. The
distinct sequences associated with redundant versus specific ETS1 occupancy were 
predictive of promoter or enhancer location and the ontology of nearby genes.
These findings demonstrate that diversity of DNA binding motifs may enable
variable transcription factor function at different genomic sites.

PMCID: PMC2787013
PMID: 20019798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Biochem J. 2010 Feb 9;426(2):229-41. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090877.

Caspase cleavage of Ets-1 p51 generates fragments with transcriptional
dominant-negative function.

Choul-Li S(1), Leroy C, Leprivier G, Laitem C, Tulasne D, Aumercier M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université Lille Nord de France, IFR 142, B.P. 447, 1 rue Calmette, 59021 Lille
Cedex, France.

Ets-1 is a transcription factor that plays an important role in various
physiological and pathological processes, such as development, angiogenesis,
apoptosis and tumour invasion. In the present study, we have demonstrated that
Ets-1 p51, but not the spliced variant Ets-1 p42, is processed in a
caspase-dependent manner in Jurkat T-leukaemia cells undergoing apoptosis,
resulting in three C-terminal fragments Cp20, Cp17 and Cp14 and a N-terminal
fragment, Np36. In vitro cleavage of Ets-1 p51 by caspase 3 produces fragments
consistent with those observed in cells undergoing apoptosis. These fragments are
generated by cleavage at three sites located in the exon VII-encoded region of
Ets-1 p51. This region is absent from the Ets-1 p42 isoform, which therefore
cannot be cleaved by caspases. In Ets-1 p51, cleavage generates C-terminal
fragments containing the DNA-binding domain, but lacking the transactivation
domain. The Cp17 fragment, the major cleavage product generated during apoptosis,
is devoid of transcriptional activity and inhibits Ets-1 p51-mediated
transactivation of target genes by competing with Ets-1 p51 for binding to
Ets-binding sites present in the target promoters. In the present study, we have 
demonstrated that caspase cleavage of Ets-1 within the exon VII-encoded region
leads to specific down-regulation of the Ets-1 p51 isoform during apoptosis.
Furthermore, our results establish that caspase cleavage generates a stable
C-terminal fragment that acts as a natural dominant-negative form of the
full-length Ets-1 p51 protein.

PMID: 20001963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Cell Oncol. 2009;31(6):415-22. doi: 10.3233/CLO-2009-0491.

Functional implication of Netrin expression in malignant melanoma.

Kaufmann S(1), Kuphal S, Schubert T, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Malignant melanoma cells are known to have altered expression of
genes supporting proliferation and invasion, however, the expression of molecules
of the Netrin family of repellent factors has not been analyzed in melanomas
until now.
RESULTS: Here, we show that Netrin-1 expression is strongly induced in melanoma
cells compared to melanocytes in vivo and in vitro controlled at the
transcriptional level via ETS-1. In addition, the expression of the netrin
receptor UNC5B was induced and that of UNC5C was reduced in the tumor cells. In
order to determine the functional relevance of Netrin-1 expression in malignant
melanoma, Netrin expression in melanoma cells was reduced by siRNA attempts and
primary human melanocytes were treated with recombinant Netrin-1. The cells
showed no changes in proliferation or apoptosis, however, a strong reduction of
migratory properties was observed in the melanoma cells after reduction of Netrin
expression whereas melanocyte migration was strongly induced by treatment with
Netrin.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that Netrin-1 promotes melanoma cell invasion and 
migration and therefore has an important role in the progression of malignant
melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4619052
PMID: 19940358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;87(6):905-18. doi: 10.1139/o09-055.

Functional cooperation between Stat-1 and ets-1 to optimize icam-1 gene
transcription.

Yockell-Lelièvre J(1), Spriet C, Cantin P, Malenfant P, Heliot L, de Launoit Y,
Audette M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en endocrinologie moléculaire et oncologique, Centre de
recherche du CHUQ, Pavillon CHUL, 2705 boulevard Laurier, QC G1V 4G2, Canada.

Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) plays an important role in the immune 
system, enabling the interactions between effector cells and target cells. It is 
also known to be involved in tumor growth and metastasis. Its expression is
transcriptionally regulated by several proinflammatory cytokines including
IFN-gamma, which induces ICAM-1 transcription via the JAK-STAT signaling pathway 
in a Stat1-dependent fashion. The ICAM-1 promoter contains several cis-active
regulatory elements including 2 Ets binding sites (EBSs) located at positions
-158 and -138 relatively to the AUG, which were previously shown to play a role
in the constitutive activity of the ICAM-1 promoter. In the present study, we
have determined whether the EBSs are also involved in the regulation of ICAM-1
gene transcription by pro-inflammatory cytokines. Transient transfection assays
were performed with reporter genes containing ICAM-1 promoter constructions
cloned upstream from the firefly luciferase gene. Site-specific mutations of the 
EBS diminished the promoter activity stimulated by IFN-gamma, although the
IFN-gamma responsive element (pIgammaRE), which binds Stat1, was intact.
Stimulation of the transcriptional activity following IFN-gamma treatment was
significantly reduced when both EBSs were inactivated. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments provided evidence of a physical interaction involving Ets1 and Stat1.
In COS-1 and HEK 293 cells cotransfected with CFP-Stat1 and YFP-Ets fusion
protein, fluorescence resonance energy transfer experiments confirmed the close
proximity of these 2 proteins in living cells following treatment with IFN-gamma.

PMID: 19935876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):621-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.109. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Involvement of ETS1 in thioredoxin-binding protein 2 transcription induced by a
synthetic retinoid CD437 in human osteosarcoma cells.

Hashiguchi K(1), Tsuchiya H, Tomita A, Ueda C, Akechi Y, Sakabe T, Kurimasa A,
Nozaki M, Yamada T, Tsuchida S, Shiota G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Department of Genetic Medicine and
Regenerative Therapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine, Tottori University,
Nishi-cho 86, Yonago 683-8504, Japan.

CD437, a synthetic retinoid, has a potent antitumor activity, in which an
RAR-independent mechanism may be involved. Our previous study showed that CD437
transcriptionally upregulates the expression of thioredoxin-binding protein 2
(TBP2), leading to c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1)-mediated apoptosis. In the
present study, we addressed the mechanism, by which CD437 induces TBP2 mRNA
expression. CD437 efficiently caused the cell death of human osteosarcoma cells
via apoptosis. CD437 also induced JNK1 activation through the upregulation of
TBP2 mRNA, in consistent with our previous observation. A luciferase reporter
assay for TBP2 promoter activation suggested that CD437-regulated TBP2 mRNA
transcription requires the region between -400 and -300, which contains multiple 
possible ETS-binding sites. Finally, we demonstrated CD437-dependent recruitment 
of ETS1 transcription factor to this region by chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay. These data suggest that ETS1 is involved in CD437-induced TBP2 mRNA
expression in human osteosarcoma MG-63 cells.

Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 19932085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biomed Sci. 2009 Nov 24;16:105. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-16-105.

Molecular events associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells in the absence of Epstein-Barr virus genome.

Lin JC(1), Liao SK, Lee EH, Hung MS, Sayion Y, Chen HC, Kang CC, Huang LS, Cherng
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital/Chung 
Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. jxl8@cdc.gov

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important process in tumor
metastasis. The EMT-related events associated with metastasis of NPC in the
absence of EBV have not been elucidated. We established an EBV-negative NPC cell 
line from a bone marrow biopsy of an NPC patient. Using a Matrigel system we
isolated an invasive and non-invasive sublines, designated NPC-BM29 and NPC-BM00.
NPC-BM29 acquired an invasive-like phenotype characterized by EMT, marked by
down-regulation of E-cadherin and beta-catenin with concomitant increased
expression of Ets1. NPC-BM29 cells expressed >or= 10-fold higher of MMP-9 than
NPC-BM00 cells. NPC-BM29 cells grew better in 2% serum than NPC-BM00 cells, with 
a population doubling-time of 26.8 h and 30.7 h, respectively. A marked reduction
in colony-formation ability of NPC-BM00 cells compared to NPC-BM29 was observed. 
Wound-healing assay revealed that NPC-BM29 cells displayed higher motility than
NPC-BM00 and the motility was further enhanced by cell treatment with TPA, a PKC 
activator. Cell surface markers and tumor-associated molecules, AE3, MAK6 and
sialyl-Tn, were up-regulated in NPC-BM29 cells, whereas the expression of HLA-DR 
and CD54 was significantly increased in NPC-BM00 cells. NPC-BM29 consistently
released higher levels of IL-8 and IL-10 than NPC-BM00, with low levels of
IL-1alpha expression in both cell lines. Higher level of VEGF production was
detected in NPC-BM00 than NPC-BM29 cells. These data show that EBV is not
required for exhibiting multiple metastatic phenotypes associated with EMT. More 
studies that target right molecules/signalings associated with the EMT may offer 
new therapeutic intervention options for NPC invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC2799403
PMID: 19930697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Circulation. 2009 Dec 1;120(22):2240-50. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.856815. 
Epub 2009 Nov 16.

Priming with angiopoietin-1 augments the vasculogenic potential of the peripheral
blood stem cells mobilized with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor through a
novel Tie2/Ets-1 pathway.

Kim MS(1), Lee CS, Hur J, Cho HJ, Jun SI, Kim TY, Lee SW, Suh JW, Park KW, Lee
HY, Kang HJ, Lee DS, Koh GY, Nakagami H, Morishita R, Park YB, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Cardiovascular Stem Cell, Innovative Research
Institute for Cell Therapy, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 110-744,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: The low engraftment rate of stem/progenitor cells infused via the
intracoronary route to the ischemic myocardium is one of the most important
factors limiting the efficacy of cell therapy. We investigated the concept of
priming peripheral blood stem cells enriched by granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor mobilization and apheresis ((mob)PBSCs) with angiopoietin-1 (Ang1), to
enhance the engraftment into the ischemic tissue and neovasculogenic potential.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression of Tie2, the Ang1 receptor, was significantly
higher in (mob)PBSCs than naïve peripheral blood mononuclear cells (19.2+/-3.0%
versus 1.2+/-0.8% versus 1.2+/-0.2%; P<0.001 for (mob)PBSCs from acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) patients with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor treatment
for 3 days versus peripheral blood mononuclear cells from AMI patients versus
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from stable angina patients). After 4 hours of
cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP)-Ang1 stimulation, (mob)PBSCs committed
to the endothelial lineage with the induction of CD31 and VE-cadherin expression,
mediated by Tie2/Ets-1 pathway. Priming of (mob)PBSCs with COMP-Ang1 induced the 
expression of alpha4beta1 and alpha5beta1 integrins, which are also Ets-1
downstream molecules, leading to enhanced adhesion to endothelial cells or
fibronectin. In a rabbit ear ischemia/reperfusion model, priming of (mob)PBSCs
with COMP-Ang1 improved first-pass engraftment to the distal vascular bed after
intraarterial delivery. In a murine ischemic hind-limb model, intravascular
delivery of primed (mob)PBSCs enhanced both engraftment and neovascularization.
CONCLUSIONS: The short-term priming with COMP-Ang1 may be a feasible and
promising option to activate (mob)PBSCs by enhancing differentiation and
adhesiveness and to improve the efficacy of cell therapy for ischemic diseases.

PMID: 19917886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Exp Med. 2009 Nov 23;206(12):2685-99. doi: 10.1084/jem.20092024. Epub 2009 Nov 
16.

The transcription factor Ets1 is important for CD4 repression and Runx3
up-regulation during CD8 T cell differentiation in the thymus.

Zamisch M(1), Tian L, Grenningloh R, Xiong Y, Wildt KF, Ehlers M, Ho IC, Bosselut
R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The transcription factor Ets1 contributes to the differentiation of CD8 lineage
cells in the thymus, but how it does so is not understood. In this study, we
demonstrate that Ets1 is required for the proper termination of CD4 expression
during the differentiation of major histocompatability class 1 (MHC I)-restricted
thymocytes, but not for other events associated with their positive selection,
including the initiation of cytotoxic gene expression, corticomedullary
migration, or thymus exit. We further show that Ets1 promotes expression of
Runx3, a transcription factor important for CD8 T cell differentiation and the
cessation of Cd4 gene expression. Enforced Runx3 expression in Ets1-deficient MHC
I-restricted thymocytes largely rescued their impaired Cd4 silencing, indicating 
that Ets1 is not required for Runx3 function. Finally, we document that Ets1
binds at least two evolutionarily conserved regions within the Runx3 gene in
vivo, supporting the possibility that Ets1 directly contributes to Runx3
transcription. These findings identify Ets1 as a key player during CD8 lineage
differentiation and indicate that it acts, at least in part, by promoting Runx3
expression.

PMCID: PMC2806616
PMID: 19917777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Gene. 2010 Jan 15;450(1-2):103-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.10.008.

Epigenetic regulation of caspase-3 gene expression in rat brain development.

Yakovlev A(1), Khafizova M, Abdullaev Z, Loukinov D, Kondratyev A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The expression levels of caspase-3, a major contributor to the execution of
neuronal apoptosis, markedly decrease in the process of brain maturation. We have
previously cloned the rat caspase-3 gene promoter and identified its essential
regulatory elements. In the present study, we extended previous findings by
examining transcriptional regulation of caspase-3 expression in the rat brain of 
two different ages, corresponding to the immature and mature brain. In
particular, we determined that the rate of transcription initiation substantially
declines during brain maturation. Furthermore, we established that mRNA levels of
Ets1, Ets2, and Sp1 do not change in the brain with maturation, suggesting that
these transcription factors do not contribute to age-dependent caspase-3
down-regulation. Hence, we examined a role of DNA methylation and histone
modification in this process. Utilizing bisulfite DNA sequencing, we determined
the presence of age-dependent differentially methylated fragments within the
caspase-3 promoter region. Strikingly, differentially methylated CpG sites
correspond to the predicted binding sites for a number of transcription factors
that have been previously shown to be involved in neuronal development and
differentiation. Moreover, using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found that
mature brains displayed significantly lower levels of histone 3 acetylated Lys14 
and histone 4 acetylated Lys5, 8, 12, and 16. This observation is consistent with
the decreased level of expression of caspase-3 in the mature brain. Together with
our observation that histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, increased the
level of caspase-3 mRNA in cortical neurons in vitro, these results further
indicate an important role of epigenetic factors in the regulation of caspase-3
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2795079
PMID: 19909801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Invest Dermatol. 2010 Apr;130(4):1048-62. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.355. Epub 2009 
Nov 12.

Bmi-1 reduction plays a key role in physiological and premature aging of primary 
human keratinocytes.

Cordisco S(1), Maurelli R, Bondanza S, Stefanini M, Zambruno G, Guerra L,
Dellambra E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tissue Engineering and Cutaneous Physiopathology, IDI, Istituto 
Dermopatico dell'Immacolata, Rome, Italy.

Accumulation of senescent cells contributes to the reduced regenerative capacity 
in aged tissues. By evaluating the molecular pathways of senescence in relation
to proliferative potential of primary keratinocyte cultures from young and old
healthy donors, and from young patients with inherited defects leading to
premature aging, we demonstrated that p16(INK4a) is a reliable marker of both
physiological and premature epidermal aging. Analysis of the expression and
activity of p16(INK4a) regulators showed that stem cell depletion, reduced
proliferation, and p16(INK4a) upregulation in keratinocytes derived from the
chronologically and prematurely aged epidermis strongly correlate with Bmi-1
downregulation. In highly proliferative tissues, replicative and premature
senescence participate in determining senescent cell accumulation. Our findings
demonstrated that Bmi-1 is downregulated in human keratinocytes during both in
vitro processes, in parallel with p16(INK4a) upregulation and accomplishment of
clonal conversion. When premature senescence was induced by specific exogenous
stimuli, concomitant Ets-1 upregulation was also observed. Moreover, Bmi-1
inhibited Ets-1-mediated p16(INK4a) upregulation. Finally, Bmi-1 overexpression
reduced p16(INK4a) promoter activity and decreased protein expression in aged and
diseased keratinocytes, inducing a delay of clonal conversion and an increase of 
cell clonogenic ability. Altogether these findings underline a key role of Bmi-1 
downregulation in enforcing aging in primary human keratinocytes.

PMID: 19907431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Invest Dermatol. 2010 Mar;130(3):706-15. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.302. Epub 2009
Oct 29.

IL-18 downregulates collagen production in human dermal fibroblasts via the ERK
pathway.

Kim HJ(1), Song SB, Choi JM, Kim KM, Cho BK, Cho DH, Park HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, St Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Dec;131(12):2495; author reply 2496-7.

Excessive accumulation of collagen contributes to the fibrotic process. Several
experimental studies have shown that IFN-gamma is effective in preventing
fibrogenesis. IL-18, originally identified as an IFN-gamma-inducing factor, is a 
key mediator of inflammation and host defense responses. In this study, we
investigated the regulatory effect of IL-18 on the expression of type I and III
collagen genes in dermal fibroblasts. The exposure of human dermal fibroblasts
(HDFs) to IL-18 resulted in a reduction of collagen gene expression and
production. Also, IL-18 inhibited the fibrogenic cytokine transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta-induced collagen gene expression. Next, to determine the
molecular mechanism involved in this regulation, we showed that IL-18-regulated
collagen expression was blocked by small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated Ets-1
knockdown. Furthermore, we showed that IL-18 induced phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) within 10 minutes and that the ERK
inhibitor PD98059 blocked the inhibitory effect of IL-18. IL-18 also inhibited
the production of collagen in systemic sclerosis (SSc) dermal fibroblasts. Our
data indicate that IL-18 downregulates collagen production in HDF directly via
Ets-1 and the ERK pathway, suggesting that IL-18 may exert antifibrotic
activities in dermal fibroblasts.

PMID: 19865096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Feb;87(2):257-63. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0409221. Epub 2009 Oct 20.

Antigen-induced Erk1/2 activation regulates Ets-1-mediated sensitization of CD8+ 
T cells for IL-12 responses.

Li Q(1), Eppolito C, Odunsi K, Shrikant PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA.

The presence of IL-12 during antigen stimulation instructs naive CD8+ T cells for
long-term effector responses, but their mechanisms of collaboration are not
understood completely. Herein, we report that CD8+ T cells (OT-I T cells)
stimulated with antigen for a longer duration show enhanced sensitization to
IL-12 as a result of Erk1/2-dependent, increased Ets-1 phosphorylation and
subsequent increases in IL-12Rbeta2 expression. Correspondingly, naive OT-I T
cells stimulated by antigen for a longer duration in the presence of IL-12,
irrespective of frequency of APCs, show robust effector maturation and mount
long-term antigen-recall responses upon adoptive transfer. These results identify
the role of antigen strength-dependent Erk1/2 activation for Ets-1-mediated
collaboration with IL-12 in CD8+ T cells.

PMCID: PMC2812555
PMID: 19843578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Nutr Cancer. 2009;61(4):530-7. doi: 10.1080/01635580902803719.

The effect of Scutellaria baicalensis on the signaling network in hepatocellular 
carcinoma cells.

Ye F(1), Che Y, McMillen E, Gorski J, Brodman D, Saw D, Jiang B, Zhang DY.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, USA.

Scutellaria baicalensis is an anti-inflammatory and antineoplastic Chinese herbal
therapy. We have previously shown that S. baicalensis can inhibit hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) cell growth in vitro. In this study, we sought to determine the
effect of S. baicalensis on the cell signaling network using our newly developed 
Pathway Array technology, which screens cell signaling pathways involved in cell 
cycle regulation. The HCC cell line (HepG2) was treated with S. baicalensis
extract in vitro. The effect on the cell cycle was analyzed by flow cytometry,
and the expression of various signaling proteins was assayed with Pathway Array. 
Our results indicate that S. baicalensis exerts a strong growth inhibition of the
HepG2 cells via G(2)/M phase arrest. The Pathway Array analysis of 56 proteins
revealed a total of 14 differentially expressed proteins or phosphorylations
after treatment. Of these, 9 showed a dose-dependent decrease (p53, ETS1, Cdc25B,
p63, EGFR, ERK1/2, XIAP, HIF-2alpha, and Cdc25C) whereas one demonstrated a
dose-dependent increase (Cyclin E) after treatment with 200 microg/ml of S.
baicalensis. Using computer simulation software, we identified additional hubs in
the signaling network activated by S. baicalensis. These results indicate that S.
baicalensis exerts a broad effect on cell signaling networks leading to a
collective inhibition of cell proliferation.

PMID: 19838925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Nat Immunol. 2009 Dec;10(12):1252-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.1798. Epub 2009 Oct 18.

MicroRNA miR-326 regulates TH-17 differentiation and is associated with the
pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.

Du C(1), Liu C, Kang J, Zhao G, Ye Z, Huang S, Li Z, Wu Z, Pei G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Graduate School of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2010 Jun;11(6):543.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2009 Dec;10(12):1229-31.

Interleukin 17 (IL-17)-producing T helper cells (T(H)-17 cells) are increasingly 
recognized as key participants in various autoimmune diseases, including multiple
sclerosis. Although sets of transcription factors and cytokines are known to
regulate T(H)-17 differentiation, the role of noncoding RNA is poorly understood.
Here we identify a T(H)-17 cell-associated microRNA, miR-326, whose expression
was highly correlated with disease severity in patients with multiple sclerosis
and mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). In vivo silencing 
of miR-326 resulted in fewer T(H)-17 cells and mild EAE, and its overexpression
led to more T(H)-17 cells and severe EAE. We also found that miR-326 promoted
T(H)-17 differentiation by targeting Ets-1, a negative regulator of T(H)-17
differentiation. Our data show a critical role for microRNA in T(H)-17
differentiation and the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.

PMID: 19838199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Nat Genet. 2009 Nov;41(11):1234-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.472. Epub 2009 Oct 18.

Genome-wide association study in a Chinese Han population identifies nine new
susceptibility loci for systemic lupus erythematosus.

Han JW, Zheng HF, Cui Y, Sun LD, Ye DQ, Hu Z, Xu JH, Cai ZM, Huang W, Zhao GP,
Xie HF, Fang H, Lu QJ, Xu JH, Li XP, Pan YF, Deng DQ, Zeng FQ, Ye ZZ, Zhang XY,
Wang QW, Hao F, Ma L, Zuo XB, Zhou FS, Du WH, Cheng YL, Yang JQ, Shen SK, Li J,
Sheng YJ, Zuo XX, Zhu WF, Gao F, Zhang PL, Guo Q, Li B, Gao M, Xiao FL, Quan C,
Zhang C, Zhang Z, Zhu KJ, Li Y, Hu DY, Lu WS, Huang JL, Liu SX, Li H, Ren YQ,
Wang ZX, Yang CJ, Wang PG, Zhou WM, Lv YM, Zhang AP, Zhang SQ, Lin D, Li Y, Low
HQ, Shen M, Zhai ZF, Wang Y, Zhang FY, Yang S, Liu JJ, Zhang XJ.

We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) in a Chinese Han population by genotyping 1,047 cases and
1,205 controls using Illumina Human610-Quad BeadChips and replicating 78 SNPs in 
two additional cohorts (3,152 cases and 7,050 controls). We identified nine new
susceptibility loci (ETS1, IKZF1, RASGRP3, SLC15A4, TNIP1, 7q11.23, 10q11.22,
11q23.3 and 16p11.2; 1.77 x 10(-25) < or = P(combined) < or = 2.77 x 10(-8)) and 
confirmed seven previously reported loci (BLK, IRF5, STAT4, TNFAIP3, TNFSF4, 6q21
and 22q11.21; 5.17 x 10(-42) < or = P(combined) < or = 5.18 x 10(-12)).
Comparison with previous GWAS findings highlighted the genetic heterogeneity of
SLE susceptibility between Chinese Han and European populations. This study not
only advances our understanding of the genetic basis of SLE but also highlights
the value of performing GWAS in diverse ancestral populations.

PMID: 19838193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 18;390(3):839-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.059. Epub 2009 Oct 21.

DNA-dependent protein kinase is a novel interaction partner for Ets-1 isoforms.

Choul-li S(1), Drobecq H, Aumercier M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Univ 
Lille Nord de France, IFR 142, BP 447, 1 rue du Pr Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex,
France.

The Ets-1 transcription factor plays an important role in various physiological
and pathological processes. These diverse roles of Ets-1 are likely to depend on 
its interaction partner proteins. We used our previously developed, recombinant
biotinylated Ets-1 that conserves native Ets-1 properties to identify new
interaction partners. Here, based on results from streptavidin pull-down assays, 
mass spectrometry and co-immunoprecipitation, we report a novel interaction
partner for Ets-1 isoforms: a heterotrimeric complex of DNA-dependent protein
kinase (DNA-PK), made up of Ku70, Ku86, and DNA-PK catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs). 
Kinase assays performed in vitro showed that DNA-PK phosphorylates the Ets-1
protein. Furthermore, we demonstrated that Ku86, but not Ku70 or DNA-PKcs,
down-regulated the transcriptional activity of Ets-1 when analysed using a
reporter gene assay. These results illustrate how detecting novel molecular
interactions may provide new clues for understanding the diverse functions of
Ets-1.

PMID: 19836356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Genes Immun. 2010 Mar;11(2):161-72. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.73. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

The mouse and human Fli1 genes are similarly regulated by Ets factors in T cells.

Svenson JL(1), Chike-Harris K, Amria MY, Nowling TK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Children's Research
Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, 96 Jonathon Lucas Street,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Fli1 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors and is preferentially
expressed in hematopoietic cell lineages. Its expression level is linked to the
pathogenesis of lupus. In this study, we identified mechanisms involved in the
transcriptional regulation of the mouse and human Fli1 promoters. We show that
the Fli1 promoter is upregulated by Ets factors Ets1, Ets2, Fli1 and Elf1 either 
alone or in combination with GATA factors, but is inhibited by Tel. In vitro
binding studies show that Elf1, Tel and Fli1 in T cells bind the three
Ets-binding sites in the murine Fli1 proximal promoter. We identified
transcription factor-binding sites in the human Fli1 promoter region that
function in T cells in a similar manner to those in the mouse promoter.
Furthermore, we show similar binding of Ets factors to the endogenous mouse and
human Fli1 promoters in T cells and knocking down Ets1 results in an upregulation
of Fli1 expression. Together, these results suggest that the human and mouse
genes are regulated similarly and that Ets1 may be important in preventing the
overexpression of Fli1 in T cells. This report lays the groundwork for
identifying targets for manipulating Fli1 expression as a possible therapeutic
approach.

PMCID: PMC2832078
PMID: 19829305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Apr;25(4):912-9. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.091013.

A functional polymorphism in MMP1 could influence osteomyelitis development.

Montes AH(1), Valle-Garay E, Alvarez V, Pevida M, García Pérez E, Paz J, Meana A,
Asensi V.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biologia Molecular, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.

Osteomyelitis (OM) is a bone infection characterized by necrosis and new
formation of bone. Because matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) play an important role 
in bone extracellular matrix remodeling, we investigated the role of some MMP
polymorphisms in OM patients. A total of 118 OM patients and 300 blood donors
were genotyped for the polymorphisms of MMP1 (-1607 1G/2G) and MMP13 (-77A/G).
Levels of MMPs (-1, -2, -3, -8, -9, -10, and -13) and tissue inhibitors of
metaloproteases (TIMP-1, -2, and -4) in serum and in human osteoblasts obtained
from OM biopsies also were determined. The MMP1 (-1607 2G/2G) genotype was
significantly more frequent among OM patients compared with controls [65.3%
versus 33.7%, chi(2) = 26.85, odds ratio (OR) = 3.24, 95% confidence interval
(CI) 2.03-5.2, p < .0001]. The MMP1 2G allele also was more frequent in OM
patients (73.3% versus 57.2%, chi(2) = 37.76, OR = 2.75, 95% CI 1.96-3.85, p <
.0001). Carriers of the 2G allele had significantly higher osteoblast MMP1 mRNA
and MMP-1 serum levels than noncarriers (p < .04). Interleukin 1alpha (IL-1alpha)
increased MMP-1 and -13 protein secretion and Ets1 mRNA expression by OM
patients' osteoblasts. No association of the MMP13 (-77 A/G) polymorphism with OM
was observed. The MMP1 (-1607 1G/2G) polymorphism might contribute to OM
pathogenesis. This could be due to increased expression of MMP-1 by osteoblasts
and is regulated by IL-1alpha.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 19821768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Rev Diabet Stud. 2009;6(2):104-16. doi: 10.1900/RDS.2009.6.104. Epub 2009 Aug 10.

Allelic variation of Ets1 does not contribute to NK and NKT cell deficiencies in 
type 1 diabetes susceptible NOD mice.

Jordan MA(1), Poulton LD, Fletcher JM, Baxter AG.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Genomics Centre, Molecular Sciences Bldg 21, James Cook
University, Townsville, QLD 4811, Australia.

The NOD mouse is a well characterized model of type 1 diabetes that shares
several of the characteristics of Ets1-deficient targeted mutant mice, viz:
defects in TCR allelic exclusion, susceptibility to a lupus like disease
characterized by IgM and IgG autoantibodies and immune complex-mediated
glomerulonephritis, and deficiencies of NK and NKT cells. Here, we sought
evidence for allelic variation of Ets1 in mice contributing to the NK and NKT
cell phenotypes of the NOD strain. ETS1 expression in NK and NKT cells was
reduced in NOD mice, compared to C57BL/6 mice. Although NKT cells numbers were
significantly correlated with ETS1 expression in both strains, NKT cell numbers
were not linked to the Ets1 gene in a first backcross from NOD to C57BL/6 mice.
These results indicate that allelic variation of Ets1 did not contribute to
variation in NKT cell numbers in these mice. It remains possible that a third
factor not linked to the Ets1 locus controls both ETS1 expression and
subsequently NK and NKT cell phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC2779013
PMID: 19806240  [PubMed]


452. Int J Oncol. 2009 Nov;35(5):989-96.

Regulation of protein tyrosine kinases in tumour cells by the transcription
factor Ets-1.

Hahne JC(1), Kummer S, Heukamp LC, Fuchs T, Gun M, Langer B, Von Ruecker A,
Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, 53011 Bonn, Germany.

Tyrosine phosphorylation is one of the key covalent modifications that occurs in 
multicellular organisms as a result of intercellular communication. The family of
tyrosine kinases (PTKs) are responsible for part of the cellular phosphorylation 
and are involved in a broad variety of cellular functions including
differentiation, proliferation, migration, invasion, angiogenesis and survival
under physiological as well as pathological conditions. Aberration in PTK
signalling occurs in inflammatory diseases and diabetes, and aberrant expression 
can lead to benign proliferative conditions as well as to various forms of
cancer. Indeed, more than 70% of the known oncogenes and proto-oncogenes involved
in cancer code for PTKs. Therefore, these enzymes are now used as targets in the 
treatment of different tumours. Ets-1 is a transcription factor expressed in a
number of human malignancies with demonstrated roles within both neoplastic cells
and tumour stroma. These roles include stimulation of tumour cell proliferation
and invasion as well as tumour angiogenesis. Database searches have revealed that
ETS binding sites are present in several promoters of PTK-encoding genes. We
investigated the role of Ets-1 in transcriptional regulation of a panel of 89
PTKs in epithelial HeLa tumour cells. In this study, HeLa cells stably
overexpressing and underexpressing Ets-1 were used for real-time PCR analysis of 
all known human PTKs. The results suggest that Ets-1 is an essential
transcription factor that cannot be substituted by other members of the ETS
family. Transcription of most PTKs was found to be increased by Ets-1. In
contrast Ets-1 seems to act as a transcriptional repressor of other PTKs. The
data presented here underscore the importance of Ets-1 in tumour development and 
progression.

PMID: 19787252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Biophys J. 2009 Sep 16;97(6):1747-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2009.07.019.

Extracting the causality of correlated motions from molecular dynamics
simulations.

Kamberaj H(1), van der Vaart A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biological Physics, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

The information theory measure of transfer entropy is used to extract the
causality of correlated motions from molecular dynamics simulations. For each
pair of correlated residues, the method quantifies which residue drives the
correlated motions, and which residue responds. The measure reveals how
correlated motions are used to transmit information through the system, and helps
to clarify the link between correlated motions and biological function in
biomolecular systems. The method is illustrated by its application to the Ets-1
transcription factor, which partially unfolds upon binding DNA. The calculations 
show dramatic changes in the direction of information flow upon DNA binding, and 
elucidate how the presence of DNA is communicated from the DNA binding H1 and H3 
helices to inhibitory helix HI-1. Helix H4 is shown to act as a relay, which is
attenuated in the apo state.

PMCID: PMC2749796
PMID: 19751680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Dev Biol. 2009 Nov 15;335(2):428-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.08.005. Epub 2009 
Aug 11.

The cis-regulatory system of the tbrain gene: Alternative use of multiple modules
to promote skeletogenic expression in the sea urchin embryo.

Wahl ME(1), Hahn J, Gora K, Davidson EH, Oliveri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

The genomic cis-regulatory systems controlling regulatory gene expression usually
include multiple modules. The regulatory output of such systems at any given time
depends on which module is directing the function of the basal transcription
apparatus, and ultimately on the transcription factor inputs into that module.
Here we examine regulation of the Strongylocentrotus purpuratus tbrain gene, a
required activator of the skeletogenic specification state in the lineage
descendant from the embryo micromeres. Alternate cis-regulatory modules were
found to convey skeletogenic expression in reporter constructs. To determine
their relative developmental functions in context, we made use of recombineered
BAC constructs containing a GFP reporter and of derivatives from which specific
modules had been deleted. The outputs of the various constructs were observed
spatially by GFP fluorescence and quantitatively over time by QPCR. In the
context of the complete genomic locus, early skeletogenic expression is
controlled by an intron enhancer plus a proximal region containing a HesC site as
predicted from network analysis. From ingression onward, however, a dedicated
distal module utilizing positive Ets1/2 inputs contributes to definitive
expression in the skeletogenic mesenchyme. This module also mediates a newly
discovered negative Erg input which excludes non-skeletogenic mesodermal
expression.

PMCID: PMC2784196
PMID: 19679118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cancer Lett. 2010 Feb 28;288(2):226-35. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.07.007. Epub
2009 Aug 4.

Hepatitis B virus X protein overcomes stress-induced premature senescence by
repressing p16(INK4a) expression via DNA methylation.

Kim YJ(1), Jung JK, Lee SY, Jang KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pusan National University, Busan, Republic of
Korea.

Cellular senescence is an important tumor suppression process under diverse
oncogenic conditions, entering a state of irreversible growth arrest to prevent
damaged cells from undergoing aberrant proliferation. Developing a means of
evading senescence thus seems to be a fundamental task that all cancer cells
should solve early on. Here, we show that an oncogenic X protein of hepatitis B
virus (HBx) overcomes cellular senescence provoked by a universal premature
senescence inducer, H(2)O(2), in human hepatoma cells, as demonstrated by
impaired induction of senescence-associated biomarkers, including morphological
change, G(1) arrest, and beta-galactosidase activity, in the presence of HBx. HBx
induced DNA hypermethylation of p16(INK4a) promoter and subsequently interfered
action of transcription factors like Ets1 and Ets2 activated by H(2)O(2) through 
the p38(MAPK) pathway, resulting in inhibition of its transcription.
Down-regulation of p16(INK4a) expression by HBx subsequently led to activation of
G(1)-CDKs, phosphorylation of Rb, activation of E2F1, and finally evasion from
G(1) arrest induced by H(2)O(2). Levels of another senescence regulator,
p21(waf1), however, were not affected by HBx under our senescence-inducing
conditions. In addition, the potentials of HBx to inactivate Rb and subsequently 
inhibit cellular senescence almost completely disappeared when levels of
p16(INK4a) were recovered either by exogenous complementation or inhibition of
the promoter hypermethylation. To our knowledge, our present study represents the
first report that an oncogenic virus evades cellular senescence through
epigenetic down-regulation of p16(INK4a) expression.

2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19656618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):934-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-221812.

Functional redundancy of Ets1 and Ets2.

Oettgen P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

Comment on
    Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):1123-30.

PMID: 19643995  [PubMed]


457. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2009 Aug;12(3):178-86. doi:
10.1111/j.1601-6343.2009.01451.x.

Induction of MMP-1 (collagenase-1) by relaxin in fibrocartilaginous cells
requires both the AP-1 and PEA-3 promoter sites.

Kapila S(1), Xie Y, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, The University of Michigan
School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1078, USA. skapila@umich.edu

OBJECTIVES - Relaxin induces the matrix metalloproteinase MMP-1 (collagenase-1)
in TMJ fibrocartilaginous cells, and this response is potentiated by
beta-estradiol. We identified the MMP-1 promoter sites and transcription factors 
that are induced by relaxin with or without beta-estradiol in fibrocartilaginous 
cells. MATERIAL AND METHODS - Early passage cells were transiently transfected
with the pBLCAT2 plasmid containing specific segments of the human MMP-1 promoter
regulating the chloramphenicol acyl transferase (CAT) gene and co-transfected
with a plasmid containing the beta-galactosidase gene. The cells were cultured in
serum-free medium alone or medium containing 0.1 ng/ml relaxin, or 20 ng/ml
beta-estradiol or both hormones, and lysates assayed for CAT and
beta-galactosidase activity. RESULTS - Cells transfected with the -1200/-42 or
-139/-42 bp MMP-1 promoter-reporter constructs showed 1.5-fold and 3-fold
induction of CAT by relaxin in the absence or presence of beta-estradiol,
respectively. Relaxin failed to induce CAT in the absence of the -137/-69 region 
of the MMP-1 promoter, which contains the AP-1-and PEA3-binding sites. Using wild
type or mutated minimal AP-1 and PEA-3 promoters we found that both these
promoter sites are essential for the induction of MMP-1 by relaxin. The mRNAs for
transcription factors c-fos and c-jun, which together form the AP-1 heterodimer, 
and Ets-1 that modulates the PEA-3 site, were upregulated by relaxin or
beta-estradiol plus relaxin. CONCLUSION - These studies show that both the AP-1
and PEA-3 promoter sites are necessary for the induction of MMP-1 by relaxin in
fibrocartilaginous cells.

PMCID: PMC2753518
PMID: 19627519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Sep 1;617(1-3):90-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.06.040.
Epub 2009 Jul 1.

Single low-dose administration of pharmacological inhibitor of mitogen-activated 
ERK kinase to the adventitia of the injured rat carotid artery suppresses
neointima formation and inhibits nuclear ERK signaling.

Fahrenholz M(1), Real R, Küken A, Saxena A, Orzechowski HD.

Author information: 
(1)Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Berlin, Germany.

Arterial injury has been reported to activate the mitogen-activated ERK kinase
(MEK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway.
Pharmacological MEK inhibition was previously shown to inhibit injury-induced
neointima formation in rodent models, but inhibitor compounds were administered
either locally at a high dose or systemic treatment was performed over an
extended period of time. Aim of this study was, therefore, to explore the
efficiency of single low-dose administration of the MEK inhibitor PD98059 on
neointima formation in the injured rat carotid artery. The second aim of the
study was to analyse treatment effects on MEK-dependent signaling and protein
expression. PD98059 (at doses of 10 and 40 nmol) was administered to the
adventitia immediately after injury using Pluronic gel as drug carrier. Compared 
to untreated controls, PD98059 treatment (10 nmol) resulted in significant
reductions of neointima-to-media ratio (by 66%) and injury-induced lumen loss (by
53%). Conversely, lumen was increased by 33% in PD98059-treated arteries. There
were no significant differences between the 10 and 40 nmol treatment groups. Dual
ERK1/2 phosphorylation, and also ERK1/2 protein expression, was significantly
inhibited by PD98059 treatment. Expression of the transcription factor Ets-1, a
nuclear target protein of ERK1/2 was significantly suppressed in PD98059-treated 
arteries. Attenuation of neointima formation was associated with significantly
decreased expression of the proliferation marker PCNA. In contrast, we did not
find biochemical evidence of increased apoptosis in PD98059-treated arteries. Our
data show that the single adventitial administration of low-dose MEK inhibitor
PD98059 is sufficient to suppress neointima formation in injured arteries.

PMID: 19576207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mech Dev. 2009 Aug-Sep;126(8-9):611-23. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.06.1083. Epub
2009 Jun 21.

Structure-function correlation of micro1 for micromere specification in sea
urchin embryos.

Yamazaki A(1), Ki S, Kokubo T, Yamaguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan.

The micromeres of sea urchin embryos have two functions: to promote the
autonomous differentiation of skeletogenic cells and to induce endomesodermal
tissues. Micromere specification is controlled by a double-repression gate
consisting of two repressors, Pmar1 and HesC. Micro1/pmar1 encodes a
transcriptional repressor with a paired-type N-terminal homeodomain and two
C-terminal serine-rich repeats, each of which includes a sequence similar to
engrailed homology region 1, which interacts with the co-repressor Groucho. To
understand the molecular mechanisms of the double-repression gate, we examined
the correlation between the structure and function of micro1. Phenotypic and gene
expression pattern analyses of embryos injected with mutated micro1 mRNA revealed
that micro1 consists of five functional domain and motifs; namely, a DNA-binding 
homeodomain, a nuclear localization signal in the C-terminal flanking region of
the homeodomain, and two eh1-like motifs plus a short C-terminal stretch that
together mediate transcriptional repression. Our data suggest that micro1
represses target genes, including hesC, via two redundant means: its eh1-like and
C-terminal motifs. The C-terminal motif requires unidentified sequences for
micro1 function; a micro1 mutant with the motif but lacking the unidentified
sequences failed to trigger the double-repression gate for early micromere
regulatory genes, except for delta, though it did repress hesC. Our results
suggest that the spatial regulation of primary mesenchyme cell specification
genes, including tbr, alx1, and ets1, may be different from that of delta.

PMID: 19549568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jul;238(7):1836-50. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21990.

Identification of vasculature-specific genes by microarray analysis of Etsrp/Etv2
overexpressing zebrafish embryos.

Wong KS(1), Proulx K, Rost MS, Sumanas S.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Signaling pathways controlling vasculogenesis, angiogenesis, and myelopoiesis are
still poorly understood, in part because not all genes important for vasculature 
or myeloid cell formation have been characterized. To identify novel potential
regulators of vasculature and myeloid cell formation we performed microarray
analysis of zebrafish embryos that overexpress Ets1-related protein
(Etsrp/Etv2/ER71), sufficient to induce vasculogenesis and myelopoiesis (Sumanas 
and Lin [2006] Development 121:3141-3150; Lee [2008] Cell Stem Cell 2:497-507;
Sumanas et al. [2008] Blood 111:4500-4510). We performed sequence homology and
expression analysis for up-regulated genes that were novel or previously
unassociated with the zebrafish vasculature formation. Angiotensin II type 2
receptor (agtr2), src homology 2 domain containing E (she), mannose receptor C1
(mrc1), endothelial cell-specific adhesion molecule (esam), yes-related kinase
(yrk/fyn), zinc finger protein, multitype 2b (zfpm2b/fog2b), and stabilin 2
(stab2) were specifically expressed in vascular endothelial cells during early
development while keratin18 expression was localized to the myeloid cells.
Identification of vasculature and myeloid-specific genes will be important for
dissecting molecular mechanisms of vasculogenesis/angiogenesis and myelopoiesis.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19504456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2009 Jun;41(6):504-14.

NGX6 inhibits AP-1 and Ets-1 expression and down-regulates cyclin D1 in human
colorectal cancer.

Peng Y(1), Li H, Wu M, Wang X, Fan S, Liu F, Xiang B, Guo Q, Tang X, Shen S.

Author information: 
(1)The Third Affiliated Hospital, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410013, China.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a common malignant tumor that is associated with an
increased incidence of morbidity and mortality. Nasopharyngeal
carcinoma-associated gene 6 (NGX6) is a novel candidate suppressor gene of tumor 
metastasis, which is down-regulated in CRC. In the present study, we constructed 
a colorectal tissue microarray to examine the expression profiles of NGX6,
phospho-c-Jun N-terminal kinase (p-JNK), and phospho-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (p-ERK ) in CRC tissues. We found that the NGX6
expression was lower in CRC tissues and metastatic lymph nodes, whereas the
expressions of p-JNK and p-ERK were higher in CRC tissues, than in normal
intestinal mucosa. The expressions of NGX6, p-JNK, and p-ERK were associated with
the clinical pathological features of colorectal tissues. NGX6 overexpression
inhibited the activation and nuclear translocation of JNK1, which led to an
accumulation of p-JNK in the cytoplasm, but did not inhibit the activation and
nuclear translocation of ERK1/2. NGX6 also inhibited the expression of the
transcription factors AP-1 (c-jun and c-fos) and Ets-1. In addition, NGX6
overexpression decreased the expression of cyclin D1 and dramatically suppressed 
the transcriptional efficiency of the cyclin D1 promoter. We propose that NGX6
expression is lost in the multistep process of human colorectal carcinogenesis.
Its overexpression can inhibit the expression of transcription factors AP-1 and
Ets-1, and down-regulate the transcriptional activity of the cyclin D1 promoter
in human CRC.

PMID: 19499154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Hypertension. 2009 Jul;54(1):172-8. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.133033. Epub
2009 Jun 1.

Cooperative activation of Npr1 gene transcription and expression by interaction
of Ets-1 and p300.

Kumar P(1), Pandey KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Tulane University Health Sciences Center School of
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

The objective of the present study was to gain insight into the cooperative roles
of Ets-1 and p300 in transcriptional regulation and expression of the Npr1 gene
(coding for guanylyl cyclase-A/natriuretic peptide receptor-A). Overexpression of
Ets-1 and p300 in mouse mesangial cells increased Npr1 promoter activity by
12-fold, natriuretic peptide receptor-A mRNA levels by 5-fold, and ANP-dependent 
intracellular accumulation of cGMP by 26-fold. Knockdown of Ets-1 and p300
expression by small interfering RNA inhibited Npr1 gene transcription by 90%.
Sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated a direct physical
association between p300 and Ets-1 on binding to the Npr1 promoter, suggesting
that a physical interaction between Ets-1 and p300 is important to enhance Npr1
gene transcription. Mutant p300 lacking histone acetyltransferase activity did
not show a functional effect with Ets-1, suggesting that histone
acetyltransferase activity of p300 is required for the cooperative interaction in
modulating Npr1 gene transcription. Overexpression of wild-type adenovirus E1A
significantly decreased the Npr1 promoter activity by 40%, whereas mutant E1A,
which is incapable of binding to p300, did not show any effect. The results
indicate that Npr1 gene transcription is critically controlled by histone
acetyltransferase p300 and Ets-1. The present findings should yield important
insights into the molecular signaling governing Npr1 gene transcription, an
important regulator in the control of hypertension and cardiovascular events.

PMCID: PMC3085902
PMID: 19487584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Immunol. 2009 Jul;46(11-12):2226-35. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.04.018. Epub 
2009 May 14.

The human CD6 gene is transcriptionally regulated by RUNX and Ets transcription
factors in T cells.

Arman M(1), Aguilera-Montilla N, Mas V, Puig-Kröger A, Pignatelli M, Guigó R,
Corbí AL, Lozano F.

Author information: 
(1)Servei d'Immunologia, Hospital Clínic Universitari de Barcelona, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Facultat de Medicina,
Universitat de Barcelona, Villarroel 170, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

CD6 is a lymphocyte surface receptor involved in lymphocyte activation and
differentiation processes that is constitutively expressed on developing and
mature T cells and on the B1a cells. To define the molecular basis for the
tissue-specific expression of CD6 we have identified the transcription factors
that control the activity of the proximal regulatory region of the human CD6
gene. The TATA-less CD6 promoter contains multiple transcriptional start sites,
and its preferential activity in human T lymphocytes is dependent on RUNX- and
Ets-binding sites located within a highly conserved region. RUNX and Ets-1
factors transactivated the CD6 promoter through recognition of the -215 and -230 
binding sites, respectively. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that
RUNX1 constitutively occupies the CD6 promoter in vivo, and knockdown experiments
demonstrated that the steady-state level of CD6 mRNA is dependent on the
expression of RUNX1, RUNX3 and Ets-1 transcription factors. Therefore, RUNX1/3
and Ets1 control the expression of CD6 in human T lymphocytes, thus expanding the
range of T-cell specific and developmentally regulated lymphocyte gene targets
involved in T-cell activation and differentiation.

PMID: 19446338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Pathol. 2009 Aug;218(4):520-9. doi: 10.1002/path.2563.

Bone morphogenetic protein 4 is induced in hepatocellular carcinoma by hypoxia
and promotes tumour progression.

Maegdefrau U(1), Amann T, Winklmeier A, Braig S, Schubert T, Weiss TS, Schardt K,
Warnecke C, Hellerbrand C, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Germany.

Striking similarities exist between molecular mechanisms driving embryonic liver 
development and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs), particularly BMP4, have been proposed to regulate embryonic
hepatic development. BMP expression has been observed in neoplasia but the
expression and biological role of BMP4 in human HCC are unknown. We found
increased BMP4 mRNA and protein in HCC cell lines and tissue samples compared to 
primary human hepatocytes and corresponding non-tumourous tissue. Hypoxia further
induced BMP4 expression in HCC cells, which was abolished by transfection of a
dominant negative form of HIF-1 alpha (dnHIF-1 alpha). However, gel shift assays 
revealed only minor binding activity in nuclear extracts from (hypoxic) HCC cells
to a putative hypoxia-response element in the BMP4 promoter. Sequence analysis of
the BMP4 promoter revealed two Ets-1 binding sites, and Ets-1 activity was
increased in HCC cells under hypoxic conditions. Transfection of dnHIF-1 alpha
completely abrogated hypoxia-induced Ets-1 activity as well as BMP4 expression.
Overexpression of Ets-1 markedly enhanced BMP4 promoter activity, while antisense
Ets-1 almost completely abolished basal as well as hypoxia-induced BMP4
expression. These data demonstrate that Ets-1 activity contributes to baseline
expression of the BMP4 gene and is the predominant mediator of the HIF-dependent 
BMP4 induction under hypoxic conditions. To determine the functional relevance of
BMP4 expression, HCC cell lines were treated with antisense BMP4 constructs or
siRNA against BMP4. BMP4 suppression resulted in a strong reduction of the
migratory and invasive potential and anchorage-independent growth. Furthermore,
tube formation assays indicated that BMP4 expressed by HCC cells promotes
vasculogenesis. Our findings demonstrate that BMP4 is increased in HCC and
promotes HCC progression. Therefore, BMP4 expression may have clinical relevance,
and interfering with BMP4 signalling appears as an attractive therapeutic target 
for this highly aggressive tumour.

(c) 2009 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19431154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Int J Oncol. 2009 Jun;34(6):1737-42.

Integrative genomic analyses of ZEB2: Transcriptional regulation of ZEB2 based on
SMADs, ETS1, HIF1alpha, POU/OCT, and NF-kappaB.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is defined as phenotypic change of
epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells. EMT, allowing cellular dissociation from
epithelial tissues, plays a key role in invasion and metastasis during
carcinogenesis as well as in gastrulation and neurulation during embryogenesis.
SNAI1/Snail, SNAI2/Slug, ZEB1/deltaEF1/ZFHX1A, ZEB2/SIP1/ZFHX1B, TWIST1/TWIST,
and TWIST2/DERMO1 are representative EMT regulators. ZEB2 represses transcription
of CDH1, CLDN4, CCND1, TERT, SFRP1, ALPL and miR-200b-200a-429 primary miRNA, and
upregulates transcription of mesenchymal markers. ZEB2 is relatively highly
expressed in brain corpus callosum and monocytes. ZEB2 is expressed in various
types of human tumors, such as breast cancer, gastric cancer, and pancreatic
cancer. TGFbeta, TNFalpha, IL1, AKT and hypoxia signals are involved in ZEB2
upregulation and EMT induction; however precise mechanisms of ZEB2 transcription 
remained unclear. Here, refined integrative genomic analyses of ZEB2 gene were
carried out. ZEB2 was co-expressed with POU3F2 (BRN2) and POU3F3 (BRN1) in brain 
corpus callosum, spinal cord, and fetal brain, whereas ZEB2 was co-expressed with
POU2F2 (OCT2) in monocytes. Ets-Smad-binding CGGAGAC motif, bHLH-binding site,
and POU/OCT-binding site within proximal promoter region, and NF-kappaB-binding
site within intron 2 were completely conserved in human ZEB2, chimpanzee ZEB2,
cow ZEB2, mouse Zeb2, rat Zeb2, and chicken zeb2 genes. In addition,
HIF1alpha-binding site within proximal promoter region was conserved in mammalian
ZEB2 orthologs. Consensus binding site for Hedgehog effector GLI was not
identified within or adjacent to the 7-kb regions of human ZEB2 gene. TGFbeta,
TNFalpha, IL1, and hypoxia signals directly upregulate ZEB2 to induce EMT, growth
arrest, and senescence, whereas Hedgehog signals indirectly upregulate ZEB2 via
TGFbeta. Together these facts indicate that ZEB2, occupying the crossroads of
inflammation, aging and carcinogenesis, is an important target for drug
discovery.

PMID: 19424592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 12;106(19):7921-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0902191106. Epub 2009 Apr 28.

An age-related homeostasis mechanism is essential for spontaneous amelioration of
hemophilia B Leyden.

Kurachi S(1), Huo JS, Ameri A, Zhang K, Yoshizawa AC, Kurachi K.

Author information: 
(1)Age Dimension Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology, Tsukuba, 305-8566 Japan.

Regulation of age-related changes in gene expression underlies many diseases. We 
previously discovered the first puberty-onset gene switch, the age-related
stability element (ASE)/age-related increase element (AIE)-mediated genetic
mechanism for age-related gene regulation. Here, we report that this mechanism
underlies the mysterious puberty-onset amelioration of abnormal bleeding seen in 
hemophilia B Leyden. Transgenic mice robustly mimicking the Leyden phenotype were
constructed. Analysis of these animals indicated that ASE plays a central role in
the puberty-onset amelioration of the disease. Human factor IX expression in
these animals was reproducibly nullified by hypophysectomy, but nearly fully
restored by administration of growth hormone, being consistent with the observed 
sex-independent recovery of factor IX expression. Ets1 was identified as the
specific liver nuclear protein binding only to the functional ASE, G/CAGGAAG, and
not to other Ets consensus elements. This study demonstrates the clinical
relevance of the first discovered puberty-onset gene switch, the ASE/AIE-mediated
regulatory mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2674395
PMID: 19416882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):1123-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-211391. Epub 2009
May 1.

Ets1 and Ets2 are required for endothelial cell survival during embryonic
angiogenesis.

Wei G(1), Srinivasan R, Cantemir-Stone CZ, Sharma SM, Santhanam R, Weinstein M,
Muthusamy N, Man AK, Oshima RG, Leone G, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The OhioState University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):934-5.

The ras/Raf/Mek/Erk pathway plays a central role in coordinating endothelial cell
activities during angiogenesis. Transcription factors Ets1 and Ets2 are targets
of ras/Erk signaling pathways that have been implicated in endothelial cell
function in vitro, but their precise role in vascular formation and function in
vivo remains ill-defined. In this work, mutation of both Ets1 and Ets2 resulted
in embryonic lethality at midgestation, with striking defects in vascular
branching having been observed. The action of these factors was endothelial cell 
autonomous as demonstrated using Cre/loxP technology. Analysis of Ets1/Ets2
target genes in isolated embryonic endothelial cells demonstrated down-regulation
of Mmp9, Bcl-X(L), and cIAP2 in double mutants versus controls, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that both Ets1 and Ets2 were loaded at target
promoters. Consistent with these observations, endothelial cell apoptosis was
significantly increased both in vivo and in vitro when both Ets1 and Ets2 were
mutated. These results establish essential and overlapping functions for Ets1 and
Ets2 in coordinating endothelial cell functions with survival during embryonic
angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2721789
PMID: 19411629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5341. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005341. Epub 2009 Apr 28.

BNP signaling is crucial for embryonic stem cell proliferation.

Abdelalim EM(1), Tooyama I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuroscience Research Center, Shiga University of Medical Science,
Otsu, Japan. essam@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Embryonic stem (ES) cells have unlimited proliferation potential, and
can differentiate into several cell types, which represent ideal sources for
cell-based therapy. This high-level proliferative ability is attributed to an
unusual type of cell cycle. The Signaling pathways that regulate the
proliferation of ES cells are of great interest.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we show that murine ES cells
specifically express brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), and its signaling is
essential for ES cell proliferation. We found that BNP and its receptor (NPR-A,
natriuretic peptide receptor-A) were highly expressed in self-renewing murine ES 
cells, whereas the levels were markedly reduced after ES cell differentiation by 
the withdrawal of LIF. Targeting of BNP with short interfering RNA (siRNA)
resulted in the inhibition of ES cell proliferation, as indicated by a marked
reduction in the cell number and colony size, a significant reduction in DNA
synthesis, and decreased numbers of cells in S phase. BNP knockdown in ES cells
led to the up-regulation of gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor A (GABA(A)R) genes, 
and activation of phosphorylated histone (gamma-H2AX), which negatively affects
ES cell proliferation. In addition, knockdown of BNP increased the rate of
apoptosis and reduced the expression of the transcription factor Ets-1.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Appropriate BNP expression is essential for the
maintenance of ES cell propagation. These findings establish BNP as a novel
endogenous regulator of ES cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2670516
PMID: 19399180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 14;106(15):6321-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0809536106. Epub 2009 Mar 31.

Isolation of a cellular factor that can reactivate latent HIV-1 without T cell
activation.

Yang HC(1), Shen L, Siliciano RF, Pomerantz JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

HIV-1 latency in resting CD4(+) T cells represents a major barrier to virus
eradication in patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
Eliminating the latent HIV-1 reservoir may require the reactivation of viral gene
expression in latently infected cells. Most approaches for reactivating latent
HIV-1 require nonspecific T cell activation, which has potential toxicity. To
identify factors for reactivating latent HIV-1 without inducing global T cell
activation, we performed a previously undescribed unbiased screen for genes that 
could activate transcription from the HIV-1 LTR in an NF-kappaB-independent
manner, and isolated an alternatively spliced form of the transcription factor
Ets-1, DeltaVII-Ets-1. DeltaVII-Ets-1 activated HIV-1 transcription through 2
conserved regions in the LTR, and reactivated latent HIV-1 in cells from patients
on HAART without causing significant T cell activation. Our results highlight the
therapeutic potential of cellular factors for the reactivation of latent HIV-1
and provide an efficient approach for their identification.

PMCID: PMC2663775
PMID: 19336585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Connect Tissue Res. 2009;50(2):98-109. doi: 10.1080/03008200802348625.

Mechanical stretch regulates the expression of matrix metalloproteinase in
rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like synoviocytes.

Wang P(1), Yang L, You X, Singh GK, Zhang L, Yan Y, Sung KL.

Author information: 
(1)College of Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.

Mechanical stretch plays a crucial role in articular joints. In rheumatoid
arthritis (RA), it is well known that fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) produce 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), resulting in local invasion into and
degradation of bone and cartilage. We sought to examine whether mechanical
stretch regulates the expression and underlying signal pathways of MMP secretion 
(MMP-1, -3, -13) in RA-FLS. FLS were grown on elastic silicone membrane in an
equibiaxial strain apparatus and were exposed to 6% mechanical stretch
(equivalent to gentle stretch exercise) for 15 min and 75 min, respectively.
Semiquantitative PCR and real-time PCR were used to measure and analyze gene
expression. Protein levels were determined by Western blotting. The results
showed that 15 min of mechanical stretch inhibited MMP-1 and MMP-13 mRNA and
protein level. However, the degree of inhibition by 75 min of stretch in
expression of MMP-1 and MMP-13 was lower compared with 15 min stretch groups. The
mRNA expression of ERK-1, ets-1 and citied-2 were increased by 6% mechanical
stretch under both time points, however c-jun and c-fos mRNA level were affected 
differently after 15 min and 75 min mechanical stretch compared to control group.
There were no significant changes on MMP-3 and ets-2 mRNA level under both 6%
mechanical stretch time points. In the presence of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(IL-1beta and TNF-alpha), the stretch also reduced the mRNA expression of MMP-1
and MMP-13. In short, our results showed that gentle mechanical strain affects
MMP-1 and MMP-13 expression, potentially through the ERK-1-ets-1-cited-2-c-jun
signaling pathway.

PMID: 19296301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Haematologica. 2009 Apr;94(4):518-27. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2008.001347. Epub
2009 Mar 10.

Molecular allelokaryotyping of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia cells with high
density single nucleotide polymorphism arrays identifies novel common genomic
lesions and acquired uniparental disomy.

Nowak D(1), Le Toriellec E, Stern MH, Kawamata N, Akagi T, Dyer MJ, Hofmann WK,
Ogawa S, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School 
of Medicine, 8700 Beverly Blvd, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. Daniel.Nowak@cshs.org

BACKGROUND: T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia is a rare aggressive
lymphoproliferative disease with a mature T-cell phenotype and characteristic
genomic lesions such as inv(14)(q11q34), t(14;14)(q11;q32) or t(X;14)(q28;q11),
mutation of the ATM gene on chromosome 11 and secondary alterations such as
deletions of chromosome 8p and duplications of 8q.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed malignant cells from 18 patients with T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia using high density 250K single nucleotide polymorphism
arrays and molecular allelokaryotyping to refine understanding of known
alterations and identify new target genes.
RESULTS: Our analyses revealed that characteristic disruptions of chromosome 14
are frequently unbalanced. In the commonly deleted region on chromosome 11, we
found recurrent microdeletions targeting the microRNA 34b/c and the transcription
factors ETS1 and FLI1. On chromosome 8, we identified genes such as PLEKHA2,
NBS1, NOV and MYST3 to be involved in breakpoints. New recurrent alterations were
identified on chromosomes 5p, 12p, 13q, 17 and 22 with a common region of
acquired uniparental disomy in four samples on chromosome 17q. Single nucleotide 
polymorphism array results were confirmed by direct sequencing and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction.
CONCLUSIONS: The first high density single nucleotide polymorphism array
allelokaryotyping of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia genomes added substantial new
details about established alterations in this disease and moreover identified
numerous new potential target genes in common breakpoints, deletions and regions 
of acquired uniparental disomy.

PMCID: PMC2663615
PMID: 19278963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jun 15;124(12):2837-44. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24280.

DeltaNp63alpha-dependent expression of Id-3 distinctively suppresses the
invasiveness of human squamous cell carcinoma.

Higashikawa K(1), Yoneda S, Tobiume K, Saitoh M, Taki M, Mitani Y, Shigeishi H,
Ono S, Kamata N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Division of
Cervico-Gnathostomatology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan. khigashi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

p63 is a member of the p53 family and DeltaNp63alpha is the dominant-expressing
isoform of p63 in basal layer of normal stratified epithelium and human squamous 
cell carcinoma (SCC) cells. We have previously reported that down-regulation of
p63 was accompanied with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by
Snail-expressing SCC cells, in which re-expression of DeltaNp63alpha diminished
their invasiveness (Higashikawa K, Yoneda S, Tobiume K, Taki M, Shigeishi H,
Kamata N. Snail-induced down-regulation of DeltaNp63alpha acquires invasive
phenotype of human squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 2007;67:9207-13). In this 
study, we found that DeltaNp63alpha positively regulated inhibitor of
differentiation-3 (Id-3) expression. Id is a dominant negative regulator of E2A
which is a transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin. Enforced expression of Id-3
was incapable of invoking E-cadherin expression in the SCC cells with EMT
phenotype, whereas it significantly impaired their invasiveness with
down-regulation of matrix-metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) expression. Reporter gene
assay revealed that the Ets-1-induced MMP-2 promoter activity was suppressed by
the Id-3, while the Id-3-dependent E-cadherin promoter activity was remarkably
reduced in the presence of Snail. Furthermore, knockdown of p63 in SCC cells
significantly decreased Id-3 expression, in which up-regulation of MMP-2
expression was concomitant with the acquired invasiveness. These findings propose
a particular role of the off-signaling of the DeltaNp63alpha-Id-3 axis incident
to Snail-mediated EMT for the MMP-2-dependent invasiveness in SCC cells.

Copyright 2008 UICC.

PMID: 19267405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Mar;7(3):354-60. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0373. Epub
2009 Feb 24.

p53 Deficiency leads to compensatory up-regulation of p16INK4a.

Leong WF(1), Chau JF, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Developmental Biology Division, The Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research, Singapore.

p53-p21-cyclin-dependent kinase and p16(INK4a)-cyclin-dependent kinase pathways
have parallel functions in preventing tumorigenesis. In cancer patients, tumor
suppressor p53 is frequently inactivated through mutations, whereas p16(INK4a) is
silenced through promoter methylation. However, the interaction between these two
pathways is less well understood. Here, we report that p53 controls p16(INK4a)
expression in a unique way. p53 deficiency led to up-regulation of p16(INK4a) in 
primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts, osteoblasts, and various mouse organs, and
an increase in the p16(INK4a) promoter activity, without affecting the half-life 
of p16(INK4a). Reconstitution of p53, but not mutant p53, restored the proper
expression of p16(INK4a). These results indicate that p53 is necessary in
repressing p16(INK4a) expression. However, up-regulation of p53 in response to
genotoxic stress or nutlin-3 treatment did not down-regulate p16(INK4a). p53 did 
not repress the p16(INK4a) promoter activity either. These findings suggest that 
p53 has a necessary but not sufficient role in repressing p16(INK4a) expression. 
p16(INK4a) elevation in p53(-/-) cells is, at least partially, mediated by Ets1, 
a known positive regulator of p16(INK4a), as p53 deficiency up-regulated Ets1
through protein stabilization and knockdown of Ets1 down-regulated p16(INK4a)
expression in p53(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts. These studies uncover a
compensatory mechanism for the loss of p53 and provide a basis for targeting both
p53 and p16(INK4a) in cancer therapy.

PMID: 19240179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4529. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004529. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

Downregulation of ETS rescues diabetes-induced reduction of endothelial
progenitor cells.

Seeger FH(1), Chen L, Spyridopoulos I, Altschmied J, Aicher A, Haendeler J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Transplantation of vasculogenic progenitor cells (VPC) improves
neovascularization after ischemia. However, patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus show a reduced VPC number and impaired functional activity. Previously, 
we demonstrated that p38 kinase inhibition prevents the negative effects of
glucose on VPC number by increasing proliferation and differentiation towards the
endothelial lineage in vitro. Moreover, the functional capacity of progenitor
cells is reduced in a mouse model of metabolic syndrome including type 2 diabetes
(Lepr(db)) in vivo.
FINDINGS: The aim of this study was to elucidate the underlying signalling
mechanisms in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, we performed DNA-protein binding
arrays in the bone marrow of mice with metabolic syndrome, in blood-derived
progenitor cells of diabetic patients as well as in VPC ex vivo treated with high
levels of glucose. The transcriptional activation of ETS transcription factors
was increased in all samples analyzed. Downregulation of ETS1 expression by siRNA
abrogated the reduction of VPC number induced by high-glucose treatment. In
addition, we observed a concomitant suppression of the non-endothelial ETS-target
genes matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) and CD115 upon short term lentiviral
delivery of ETS-specific shRNAs. Long term inhibition of ETS expression by
lentiviral infection increased the number of cells with the endothelial markers
CD144 and CD105.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate that diabetes leads to dysregulated activation
of ETS, which blocks the functional activity of progenitor cells and their
commitment towards the endothelial cell lineage.

PMCID: PMC2639694
PMID: 19225563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biophys J. 2009 Feb 18;96(4):1307-17. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2008.11.019.

Correlated motions and interactions at the onset of the DNA-induced partial
unfolding of Ets-1.

Kamberaj H(1), van der Vaart A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biological Physics, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

The binding of the Ets-1 transcription factor to its target DNA sequence is
characterized by a highly unusual conformational change consisting of the
unfolding of inhibitory helix 1 (HI-1). To probe the interactions that lead to
this unfolding, we performed molecular dynamics simulations of the folded states 
of apo-Ets-1 and the Ets-1-DNA complex. The simulations showed large differences 
in correlated motions between helix 4 (H4) and HI-1. In apo-Ets-1, H4 and HI-1
moved in-phase and stabilized each other by hydrogen bonding and macrodipolar
interactions, whereas in the DNA-bound state, the motion was out-of-phase, with a
disruption of the stabilizing interactions. This change in motion was due to
hydrogen-bonding interactions between helix 1 (H1) and the DNA. The dipolar
energy between H1 and H4 was modulated by hydrogen bonds between H1 and DNA, and,
in accordance with experiments, elimination of the hydrogen bonds increased the
stability of HI-1. The simulations confirm that the hydrogen bonds between H1 and
DNA act as a conformational switch and show that the presence of DNA is
communicated from H1 to H4, destabilizing HI-1. The calculations reveal a
critical role for correlated motions at the onset of the DNA-induced unfolding.

PMCID: PMC2717251
PMID: 19217849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Feb;7(2):221-9. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0229. Epub
2009 Feb 10.

Yin yang 1 regulates the expression of snail through a distal enhancer.

Palmer MB(1), Majumder P, Cooper JC, Yoon H, Wade PA, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Expression of the Snail gene is required for the epithelial-mesenchymal
transitions that accompany mammalian gastrulation, neural crest migration, and
organ formation. Pathologic expression of Snail contributes to the migratory
capacity of invasive tumors, including melanomas. To investigate the mechanism of
Snail up-regulation in human melanoma cells, a conserved enhancer located 3' of
the Snail gene was analyzed. An overlapping Ets and yin yang 1 (YY1) consensus
sequence, in addition to a SOX consensus sequence, was required for full enhancer
activity. Proteins specifically binding these sequences were detected by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The Ets/YY1 binding activity was purified
by DNA-affinity chromatography and identified as YY1. Although ubiquitously
expressed, YY1 was bound at the Snail 3' enhancer in vivo in Snail-expressing
cells but not in cells that did not express Snail. Knockdown of YY1 in A375 cells
led to decreased Snail expression. These results identify a role for YY1 in
regulating transcription of Snail in melanoma cells through binding to the Snail 
3' enhancer.

PMCID: PMC2819842
PMID: 19208738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Jan;119(1):63-70. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0330-4.
Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Regulation of alphaB-crystallin gene expression by the transcription factor Ets1 
in breast cancer.

Bosman JD(1), Yehiely F, Evans JR, Cryns VL.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Death Regulation Laboratory, Departments of Medicine and Cell and
Molecular Biology, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School
of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Recent studies indicate that the small heat shock protein alphaB-crystallin is
expressed in poor prognosis basal-like breast tumors and likely contributes to
their aggressive phenotype. However, the mechanisms underlying the deregulated
expression of alphaB-crystallin in basal-like tumors are poorly understood. Using
a bioinformatics approach, we identified a putative DNA binding motif in the
human alphaB-crystallin promoter for the proto-oncogene Ets1, a member of the ETS
transcription factor family that bind to DNA at palindromic ETS-binding sites
(EBS). Here we demonstrate that ectopic expression of Ets1 activates the
alphaB-crystallin promoter by an EBS-dependent mechanism and increases
alphaB-crystallin protein levels, while silencing Ets1 reduces alphaB-crystallin 
promoter activity and protein levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses
showed that endogenous Ets1 binds to the alphaB-crystallin promoter in basal-like
breast cancer cells in vivo. Interrogation of publically available gene
expression data revealed that Ets1 is expressed in human basal-like breast tumors
and is associated with poor survival. Collectively, our results point to a
previously unrecognized link between the oncogenic transcription factor Ets1 and 
alphaB-crystallin in basal-like breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2791186
PMID: 19205872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2441-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0813002106. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Systems-level analysis of cell-specific AQP2 gene expression in renal collecting 
duct.

Yu MJ(1), Miller RL, Uawithya P, Rinschen MM, Khositseth S, Braucht DW, Chou CL, 
Pisitkun T, Nelson RD, Knepper MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Kidney and Electrolyte Metabolism, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We used a systems biology-based approach to investigate the basis of
cell-specific expression of the water channel aquaporin-2 (AQP2) in the renal
collecting duct. Computational analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the AQP2
gene (Genomatix) revealed 2 conserved clusters of putative transcriptional
regulator (TR) binding elements (BEs) centered at -513 bp (corresponding to the
SF1, NFAT, and FKHD TR families) and -224 bp (corresponding to the AP2, SRF,
CREB, GATA, and HOX TR families). Three other conserved motifs corresponded to
the ETS, EBOX, and RXR TR families. To identify TRs that potentially bind to
these BEs, we carried out mRNA profiling (Affymetrix) in mouse mpkCCDc14
collecting duct cells, revealing expression of 25 TRs that are also expressed in 
native inner medullary collecting duct. One showed a significant positive
correlation with AQP2 mRNA abundance among mpkCCD subclones (Ets1), and 2 showed 
a significant negative correlation (Elf1 and an orphan nuclear receptor Nr1h2).
Transcriptomic profiling in native proximal tubules (PT), medullary thick
ascending limbs (MTAL), and IMCDs from kidney identified 14 TRs (including Ets1
and HoxD3) expressed in the IMCD but not PT or MTAL (candidate AQP2 enhancer
roles), and 5 TRs (including HoxA5, HoxA9 and HoxA10) expressed in PT and MTAL
but not in IMCD (candidate AQP2 repressor roles). In luciferase reporter assays, 
overexpression of 3 ETS family TRs transactivated the mouse proximal AQP2
promoter. The results implicate ETS family TRs in cell-specific expression of
AQP2 and point to HOX, RXR, CREB and GATA family TRs as playing likely additional
roles.

PMCID: PMC2650175
PMID: 19190182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Mar;1791(3):173-82. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2008.12.016.
Epub 2009 Jan 10.

Identification of nuclear localization and nuclear export signals in Ets2, and
the transcriptional regulation of Ets2 and CTP:phosphocholine
cytidylyltransferase alpha in tetradecanoyl-13-acetate or macrophage-colony
stimulating factor stimulated RAW264 cells.

Okamura K(1), Yamashita S, Ando H, Horibata Y, Aoyama C, Takagishi K, Izumi T,
Vance DE, Sugimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine, Mibu
321-0293, Japan.

PC is made via the CDP-choline pathway, in which CTP:phosphocholine
cytidylyltransferase alpha (CTalpha), encoded by Pcyt1a, is the rate-limiting
enzyme whose mRNA expression is strictly regulated. Previously, we reported that 
Ets1 enhanced and Net repressed CTalpha transcription by binding at the Ets
binding site (-49/-47) in the Pcyt1a promoter. In this study, we asked if an Ets1
analogue, Ets2, also regulates CTalpha transcription and investigated the
importance of its nuclear localization signal (NLS) and nuclear export signal
(NES). Ets2 is primarily detected in the nucleus. Various mutated Ets2 proteins
fused with enhanced green fluorescent protein were constructed to identify the
NLS and NES in Ets2. Mutation of Ets2 at amino acids 404-410 results in a protein
that is evenly distributed in the cell. Interestingly, an Ets2 protein deleted at
the C-terminus (amino acids 1-392 present) was localized to the cytoplasm and
site-specific mutation in the region 364-372 of this construct resulted in
cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution. These results suggest that the NLS in Ets2 
is between amino acids 404 and 410, and that the NES is between amino acids 364
and 372. Ets2 enhanced, but the mutant forms of Ets2 had little effects on the
transcription of a CTalpha-reporter construct. When RAW264 cells, murine
macrophage cell-line, were stimulated with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA) or macrophage-colony stimulating factor, the transcription of CTalpha was
enhanced accompanied by increased mRNA of Ets2. These results suggest that the
induction of Ets2 is important for CTalpha transcription by TPA and
macrophage-colony stimulating factor.

PMID: 19168148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cancer Sci. 2009 Mar;100(3):396-404. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.01059.x. Epub 
2008 Dec 16.

Essential contribution of Ets-1 to constitutive Pim-3 expression in human
pancreatic cancer cells.

Li YY(1), Wu Y, Tsuneyama K, Baba T, Mukaida N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Bioregulation, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa, Japan.

We previously demonstrated that the proto-oncogene Pim-3 with serine/threonine
kinase activity was aberrantly expressed in cancer cells but not in the normal
cells of the pancreas. In order to elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying
aberrant Pim-3 expression in pancreatic cancer cells, we constructed luciferase
expression vectors linked to 5'-flanking deletion mutants of the human Pim-3 gene
and transfected human pancreatic cancer cells with the resultant vectors. The
region up to -264 bp was essential for constitutive Pim-3 gene expression, and
the mutation in the Ets-1 binding site (between -216 and -211 bp) reduced
luciferase activities. Moreover, Ets-1 mRNA and protein were constitutively
expressed together with Pim-3 in human pancreatic cancer cell lines. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated constitutive binding of Ets-1 to the
5'-flanking region of human Pim-3 gene between -249 and -183 bp. Pim-3 promoter
activity and its protein expression were induced by transfection with wild
type-Ets-1 and were reduced by transfection with dominant negative-Ets-1 or Ets-1
small-interfering RNA (siRNA). Furthermore, dominant negative-Ets-1 and Ets-1
siRNA reduced the amount of Bad phosphorylated at its Ser(112) and induced
apoptosis, when they were transfected into human pancreatic cancer cells.
Finally, Pim-3 cDNA transfection reversed Ets-1 siRNA-induced increase in
apoptosis and decrease in Bad phosphorylation at its Ser(112). These observations
would indicate that the transcription factor Ets-1 can induce aberrant Pim-3
expression and subsequently prevent apoptosis in human pancreatic cancer cells.

PMID: 19154409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Thromb Haemost. 2008 Nov;6(11):1953-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2008.03139.x. 
Epub 2008 Aug 28.

Angiostatin K1-3 induces E-selectin via AP1 and Ets1: a mediator for
anti-angiogenic action of K1-3.

Chen YH(1), Huang YH, Wu HL, Wu MP, Chang WT, Kuo YZ, Lu KC, Wu LW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Mdicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwa, ROC.

BACKGROUND: Angiostatin, a circulating angiogenic inhibitor, is an internal
fragment of plasminogen and consists of several isoforms, K1-3 included. We
previously showed that K1-3 was the most potent angiostatin to induce E-selectin 
mRNA expression. The purpose of this study was to identify the mechanism
responsible for K1-3-induced E-selectin expression and investigate the role of
E-selectin in the anti-angiogenic action of K1-3.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Quantitative real time RT-PCR and Western blotting analyses 
confirmed a time-dependent increase of E-selectin mRNA and protein induced by
K1-3. Subcellular fractionation and immunofluorescence microscopy showed the
co-localization of K1-3-induced E-selectin with caveolin 1 (Cav1) in lipid rafts 
in which E-selectin may behave as a signaling receptor. Promoter-driven reporter 
assays and site-directed mutagenesis showed that K1-3 induced E-selectin
expression via promoter activation and AP1 and Ets-1 binding sites in the
proximal E-selectin promoter were required for E-selectin induction. The in vivo 
binding of both protein complexes to the proximal promoter was confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Although K1-3 induced the activation of
ERK1/2 and JNK, only repression of JNK activation attenuated the induction of
E-selectin by K1-3. A modulatory role of E-selectin in the anti-angiogenic action
of K1-3 was manifested by both overexpression and knockdown of E-selectin
followed by cell proliferation assay.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that K1-3 induced E-selectin expression via AP1 and Ets-1
binding to the proximal E-selectin promoter (-356/+1), which was positively
mediated by JNK activation. Our findings also demonstrate E-selectin as a novel
target for the anti-angiogenic therapy.

PMID: 18761727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Acta Otolaryngol. 2009 May;129(5):569-74. doi: 10.1080/00016480802294351.

Expression profiling of supraglottic carcinoma: PTEN and thrombospondin 2 are
associated with inhibition of lymphatic metastasis.

Bai W(1), Wang L, Ji W, Gao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Shenjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, China. bweiliang@yahoo.com.cn

CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of metastasis inhibitor genes PTEN and thrombospondin
2 may play a role in the lymphatic metastasis of supraglottic carcinoma.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate differentially expressed genes in supraglottic
squamous cell carcinoma with and without lymphatic metastasis using cDNA
microarray.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: cDNA microarray was used to detect the expression profiles
of supraglottic carcinoma and the results were validated with real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Compared with normal laryngeal tissues, the expression of 15.6% (15/96) 
genes including cathepsin B, cathepsin D, cathepsin L, Ets1, c-Ets2, and PEA3
were up-regulated in both cases of supraglottic carcinoma. Compared with the
supraglottic carcinoma with no lymph node metastasis, the expression of
metastasis inhibitor genes PTEN and thrombospondin 2 was down-regulated in the
supraglottic carcinoma tissue with lymph node metastasis.

PMID: 18720079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 15;322(2):425-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.036. Epub 2008 
Aug 7.

The surprising complexity of the transcriptional regulation of the spdri gene
reveals the existence of new linkages inside sea urchin's PMC and Oral Ectoderm
Gene Regulatory Networks.

Mahmud AA(1), Amore G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Evolution Group, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Napoli, Villa
Comunale Napoli, Italy.

During sea urchin embryogenesis the spdri gene participates in two separate Gene 
Regulatory Networks (GRNs): the Primary Mesenchyme Cells' (PMCs) and the Oral
Ectoderm's one. In both cases, activation of the gene follows initial
specification events [Amore, G., Yavrouian, R., Peterson, K., Ransick, A.,
McClay, D., Davidson, E., 2003. Spdeadringer, a sea urchin embryo gene required
separately in skeletogenic and oral ectoderm gene regulatory networks. Dev. Biol.
261, 55-81.]. We identified a portion of genomic DNA ("4.7IL" -3456;+389) which
is sufficient to replicate sdpri's expression pattern in experiments of
transgenesis, using a GFP reporter. In our experiments, the activation kinetic of
4.7IL-GFP was similar to that of the endogenous gene and the reporter responded
to known spdri's transcriptional regulators (Ets1, Alx1, Gsc and Dri). Here we
present a dissection of this regulatory region and a description of the modules
involved in spdri's transcriptional regulation. Both in the PMCs' and Oral
Ectoderm's expression phases, activation of spdri is obtained through the
integration of three kinds of inputs: positive and globally distributed ones;
negative ones (that prevent ectopic expression); positive and tissue-specific
ones. Our results allow to expand the map of the regulatory connections at the
spdri node, both in the PMCs and in the Oral Ectoderm Gene Regulatory Networks
(GRNs).

PMID: 18718463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Hypertens Res. 2008 May;31(5):987-98. doi: 10.1291/hypres.31.987.

Angiotensin II-induced osteopontin expression in vascular smooth muscle cells
involves Gq/11, Ras, ERK, Src and Ets-1.

Abe K(1), Nakashima H, Ishida M, Miho N, Sawano M, Soe NN, Kurabayashi M, Chayama
K, Yoshizumi M, Ishida T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

Recent studies suggest that osteopontin (OPN) plays a critical role in the
progression of atherosclerotic plaques and that angiotensin II (Ang II) is a
potent upregulator of OPN expression. The goal of the present study was to
characterize the signaling mechanisms whereby Ang II increases OPN expression in 
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). YM-254890, a specific inhibitor of G(q/11), 
potently suppressed Ang II-induced OPN expression and ERK1/2 activation. Among
dominant-negative (DN) mutants of small G proteins, only DN-Ras suppressed Ang
II-induced OPN promoter activity. DN-MEK1 markedly inhibited Ang II-induced OPN
promoter activity, while neither DN-JNK nor DN-p38 MAP kinase had any effect.
DN-Src and DN-Fyn suppressed Ang II-induced OPN promoter activity. YM-254890
inhibited Ang II-induced Src and Ras activation, and PP2, a selective inhibitor
for the Src kinase family, inhibited Ras activation, suggesting that the
G(q/11)-Src-Ras axis is the upstream signaling cascade for Ang II-induced OPN
expression. Finally, small interfering RNA against Ets-1 suppressed Ang
II-induced OPN expression. In conclusion, these data suggest that Ang II-induced 
OPN expression in VSMC is mediated by signaling cascades involving G(q/11) the
Ras-ERK axis, and the Src kinase family, and by the transcription factor, Ets-1. 
These signaling molecules may represent therapeutic targets for the prevention of
pathological vascular remodeling.

PMID: 18712054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Semin Oncol. 2008 Aug;35(4):365-77. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2008.04.007.

Cytogenetic, molecular genetic, and clinical characteristics of acute myeloid
leukemia with a complex karyotype.

Mrózek K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210-1228, 
USA. krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu <krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu>

Patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) harboring three or more acquired
chromosome aberrations in the absence of the prognostically favorable
t(8;21)(q22;q22), inv(16)(p13q22)/t(6;16)(p13;q22), and t(15;17)(q22;q21)
aberrations form a separate category - AML with a complex karyotype. They
constitute 10% to 12% of all AML patents, with the incidence of complex
karyotypes increasing with the more advanced age. Recent studies using
molecular-cytogenetic techniques (spectral karyotyping [SKY], multiplex
fluorescence in situ hybridization [M-FISH]) and array comparative genomic
hybridization (a-CGH) considerably improved characterization of previously
unidentified, partially identified, or cryptic chromosome aberrations, and
allowed precise delineation of genomic imbalances. The emerging nonrandom pattern
of abnormalities includes relative paucity, but not absence, of balanced
rearrangements (translocations, insertions, or inversions), predominance of
aberrations leading to loss of chromosome material (monosomies, deletions, and
unbalanced translocations) that involve, in decreasing order, chromosome arms 5q,
17p, 7q, 18q, 16q, 17q, 12p, 20q, 18p, and 3p, and the presence of recurrent,
albeit less frequent and often hidden (in marker chromosomes and unbalanced
translocations) aberrations leading to overrepresentation of segments from 8q,
11q, 21q, 22q, 1p, 9p, and 13q. Several candidate genes have been identified as
targets of genomic losses, for example, TP53, CTNNA1, NF1, ETV6, and TCF4, and
amplifications, for example, ERG, ETS2, APP, ETS1, FLI1, MLL, DDX6, GAB2, MYC,
TRIB1, and CDX2. Treatment outcomes of complex karyotype patients receiving
chemotherapy are very poor. They can be improved to some extent by allogeneic
stem cell transplantation in younger patients. It is hoped that better
understanding of genomic alterations will result in identification of novel
therapeutic targets and improved prognosis in patients with complex karyotypes.

PMCID: PMC3640813
PMID: 18692687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 3;283(40):26869-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802507200. Epub 2008 
Aug 1.

cAMP-responding element-binding protein and c-Ets1 interact in the regulation of 
ATP-dependent MUC5AC gene expression.

Song KS(1), Lee TJ, Kim K, Chung KC, Yoon JH.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Mucus Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 134
Shinchon-Dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Exogenous ATP activates purinoreceptors on the cell surface that regulate diverse
cellular functions, including mucous cell secretion in the respiratory
epithelium. In this study, ATP increased MUC5AC mRNA in primary human nasal
epithelial cells and in NCI-H292 pulmonary adenocarcinoma cells in vitro.
ATP-induced MUC5AC mRNA was mediated by phospholipase Cbeta3. A dominant-negative
mutation in the PDZ binding domain of PLCbeta3 inhibited ATP-induced MUC5AC gene 
expression. ATP sequentially activated the phosphorylation of Akt, ERK1/2, p38,
RSK1, and cAMP-responding element-binding protein (CREB) in a protein kinase
C-independent manner. ATP-induced MUC5AC mRNA levels were regulated by CREB via
direct interaction with c-Ets1 on the MUC5AC gene promoter (located -938 to
-930). Effects of CREB and c-Ets1 were additive. Inhibition of either CREB or
c-Ets1 inhibited ATP-induced MUC5AC gene expression. Stimulation with ATP caused 
the direct binding of CREB and c-Ets1 to the MUC5AC promoter, increasing the
phosphorylation of c-Ets1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that
in the presence of ATP, both c-Ets1 and CREB bound to the MUC5AC promoter. The
effects of exogenous ATP on MUC5AC gene expression are mediated by a complex
regulatory cascade controlling interactions between CREB and c-Ets1 that bind to 
a promoter element in the MUC5AC gene enhancing MUC5AC gene transcription.
ATP-dependent activation of MUC5AC gene expression via CREB-c-Ets1 may contribute
to mucous cell hypersecretion associated with common respiratory disorders.

PMID: 18676374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biosci Rep. 2009 Feb;29(1):57-70. doi: 10.1042/BSR20080094.

Regulation of natriuretic peptide receptor-A gene expression and stimulation of
its guanylate cyclase activity by transcription factor Ets-1.

Kumar P(1), Bolden G, Arise KK, Krazit ST, Pandey KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, U.S.A.

ANP (atrial natriuretic peptide) exerts its biological effects by binding to GC
(guanylate cyclase)-A/NPR (natriuretic peptide receptor)-A, which generates the
second messenger cGMP. The molecular mechanism mediating Npr1 (coding for
GC-A/NPRA) gene regulation and expression is not well understood. The objective
of the present study was to elucidate the mechanism by which Ets-1 [Ets (E
twenty-six) transformation-specific sequence] contributes to the regulation of
Npr1 gene transcription and expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
gel-shift assays confirmed the in vivo and in vitro binding of Ets-1 to the Npr1 
promoter. Overexpression of Ets-1 enhanced significantly Npr1 mRNA levels,
protein expression, GC activity and ANP-stimulated intracellular accumulation of 
cGMP in transfected cells. Depletion of endogenous Ets-1 by siRNA (small
interfering RNA) dramatically decreased promoter activity by 80%. Moreover,
methylation of the Npr1 promoter region (-356 to +55) reduced significantly the
promoter activity and hypermethylation around the Ets-1 binding sites directly
reduced Ets-1 binding to the Npr1 promoter. Collectively, the present study
demonstrates that Npr1 gene transcription and GC activity of the receptor are
critically controlled by Ets-1 in target cells.

PMCID: PMC2739220
PMID: 18651838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Nov;217(2):502-10. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21526.

Shear stress-induced Ets-1 modulates protease inhibitor expression in
microvascular endothelial cells.

Milkiewicz M(1), Uchida C, Gee E, Fudalewski T, Haas TL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Elevated shear stress within the skeletal muscle microvasculature is implicated
in the induction of a longitudinal splitting form of angiogenesis, which is
characterized by the lack of basement membrane breakage. We investigated whether 
the transcriptional regulator, Ets-1, is responsive to changes in hemodynamic
forces and if so, whether Ets-1 controls microvascular endothelial cell integrity
by inducing the expression of inhibitors of matrix degrading proteases. Rats were
treated with prazosin for 2, 4, and 7 days to increase in microvascular shear
stress in hindlimb skeletal muscles. In complimentary in vitro experiments, rat
microvascular skeletal muscle endothelial cells were exposed to laminar shear
stress (15 dyne/cm(2)) for 0.5, 2, and 24 h. TaqMan PCR analysis of laser
microdissected capillaries isolated from EDL muscles demonstrated transient
(after 2 days) induction of Ets-1 gene expression. In cultured cells, a transient
up-regulation of Ets-1 mRNA was observed after 2 h shear stimulation, accompanied
by increased phosphorylation of Ets-1 and enhanced Ets-1 DNA binding activity.
This response was modulated by ERK1/2 and p38 MAP kinases, but was not dependent 
on NOS or COX-2 activity. PAI-1, TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 mRNA were elevated
significantly in prazosin treated EDL, and in response to shear stimulation in
vitro. In cultured endothelial cells, Ets-1 RNA interference abolished the
shear-induced increases in Ets-1, PAI-1, TIMP-1, and TIMP-3 mRNA expression.
These results suggest that enhanced laminar shear stress may act to preserve the 
integrity of microvascular walls in part through Ets-1-dependent induction of
protease inhibitors.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMCID: PMC3947630
PMID: 18636553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 12;283(37):25404-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804349200. Epub 2008
Jul 14.

Activation of the VEGFR1 chromatin domain: an angiogenic signal-ETS1/HIF-2alpha
regulatory axis.

Dutta D(1), Ray S, Vivian JL, Paul S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Maternal-Fetal Biology and the Division of Cancer and
Developmental Biology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Angiogenesis is induced by multiple growth factors including vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2). In vascular
endothelium VEGF signals through two receptor-tyrosine kinases, VEGFR1 and
VEGFR2. The VEGFR1 gene encodes both a receptor-tyrosine kinase and a secreted
splice variant, soluble VEGFR1. Whereas VEGFR1 is essential for vascular
development, mechanisms that regulate VEGFR1 expression in endothelial cells are 
poorly understood. We demonstrate here that in endothelial cells, FGF2 and
epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling induce VEGFR1 mRNA expression in a
combinatorial fashion. EGF/FGF2-mediated VEGFR1 induction is mediated via
functional interaction of transcription factors ETS1 and HIF-2alpha. Mechanistic 
analyses revealed that in endothelial cells EGF/FGF2 signaling induces ETS1
expression, increases HIF-2alpha protein level in absence of hypoxia, and
recruits both ETS1 and HIF-2alpha to the VEGFR1 chromatin domain. Knockdown of
ETS1 and HIF-2alpha by RNA interference inhibits EGF/FGF2-induced VEGFR1
expression, and loss of expression is associated with impaired RNA-polymerase II 
recruitment and histone modifications at the VEGFR1 promoter region. In addition,
using a mouse embryonic stem cell in vitro differentiation system, we found that 
induction of VEGFR1 in embryoid bodies is also associated with ETS1 and
HIF-2alpha recruitment to the VEGFR1 locus. These results establish an angiogenic
signal-ETS1/HIF-2alpha axis that regulates the VEGFR1 chromatin domain to induce 
VEGFR1 transcription in endothelial cells and in differentiating embryonic stem
cells.

PMCID: PMC2533069
PMID: 18625704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Neurooncol. 2008 Nov;90(2):133-40. doi: 10.1007/s11060-008-9644-z. Epub 2008
Jul 11.

Genomic changes in progression of low-grade gliomas.

Idbaih A(1), Carvalho Silva R, Crinière E, Marie Y, Carpentier C, Boisselier B,
Taillibert S, Rousseau A, Mokhtari K, Ducray F, Thillet J, Sanson M, Hoang-Xuan
K, Delattre JY.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 711, Paris, France. ahmed.idbaih@gmail.com

Using a one-megabase BAC-based array comparative genomic hybridization technique 
(aCGH), we have investigated a series of 16 low-grade gliomas (LGGs) and their
subsequent progression to higher-grade malignancies. The most frequent chromosome
imbalances in primary tumors were gains of chromosomes 7q, 8q, and 22q, and
losses of chromosomes 1p, 13q, and 19q. In tumor progression, gains of
chromosomes 11q, 7q, 20q, and 21q, and losses of chromosomes 9p, including CDKN2A
locus, 19q, 14q, 1p, and 6q were the most frequent genomic disequilibria.
Progressive tumors were more imbalanced than primary tumors in terms of altered
chromosomal arms (3.8 vs. 6.6 in mean abnormal chromosomal arm) and altered BACs 
(17 vs. 21%). Interestingly, putative novel candidate genes associated with
glioma progression were identified, in particular DOCK8, PTPRD, CER1, TPHO, DHFR,
MSH3, ETS1, ACACA, and CSE1L.

PMID: 18618226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Neurosurg. 2008 Jul;109(1):83-91. doi: 10.3171/JNS/2008/109/7/0083.

Expression of hypoxia-inducible angiogenic proteins (hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha, vascular endothelial growth factor, and E26
transformation-specific-1) and plaque hemorrhage in human carotid
atherosclerosis.

Higashida T(1), Kanno H, Nakano M, Funakoshi K, Yamamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan.
t056042a@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

OBJECT: Plaque hemorrhage in carotid atherosclerosis promotes plaque progression,
resulting in cerebrovascular disease. Hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha) induces angiogenesis via the expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and E26 transformation-specific-1 (Ets-1). The authors
investigated human carotid plaques to determine whether these hypoxia-inducible
angiogenic proteins play a major role in intraplaque angiogenesis and hemorrhage.
METHODS: The expression of HIF-1alpha, VEGF, and Ets-1 was analyzed using
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting in 29 human carotid plaques obtained at
carotid endarterectomy. The authors investigated the relationship between plaque 
characteristics and clinical symptoms.
RESULTS: A higher incidence of plaque hemorrhage was observed in plaques
associated with symptoms than in those without symptoms (p = 0.03).
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha, VEGF, and Ets-1 coexisted in the deep layer of
plaque, where angiogenesis was remarkably developed; the expression levels of
HIF-1alpha, VEGF, and Ets-1 were significantly enhanced in the main lesion of the
plaque (p < 0.01). Symptomatic plaques showed higher expression of VEGF (p =
0.04) than asymptomatic plaques. Plaques with hemorrhage showed a higher
incidence of plaque ulcer (p = 0.001) and higher expression of Ets-1 (p = 0.03)
than those without hemorrhage. Moreover, significantly increased expressions of
VEGF (p = 0.01) and Ets-1 (p = 0.006) were observed in plaques with not only
hemorrhages but also ulcers and severe stenosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings in this study suggest that hypoxia-inducible angiogenic
proteins in human carotid atherosclerosis promote intraplaque angiogenesis, which
can induce plaque hemorrhage and progression.

PMID: 18590436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Jun;6(6):1071-83. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0375.

TATA box-binding protein-associated factor 12 is important for RAS-induced
transformation properties of colorectal cancer cells.

Voulgari A(1), Voskou S, Tora L, Davidson I, Sasazuki T, Shirasawa S, Pintzas A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Mediated Gene Expression, Institute of Biological
Research and Biotechnology, National Hellenic Research Foundation, 48 Vasileos
Konstantinou Avenue, Athens 11635, Greece.

Activating mutations in the RAS proto-oncogene result in constant stimulation of 
its downstream pathways, further leading to tumorigenesis. Transcription factor
IID (TFIID) can be regulated by cellular signals to specifically alter
transcription of particular subsets of genes. To investigate potential links
between the regulation of TFIID function and the RAS-induced carcinogenesis, we
monitored the expression of the TATA box-binding protein and its associated
factors (TAF) in human colon carcinoma cells. We primarily identified TAF12
levels as being up-regulated in cell lines bearing natural RAS mutations or
stably overexpressing a mutated RAS isoform via a mitogen-activated protein
kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase-dependent pathway. We further
showed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation
that the ETS1 protein was interacting with an ETS-binding site on the TAF12
promoter and was regulating TAF12 expression. The binding was enhanced in
extracts from oncogenic RAS-transformed cells, pointing to a role in the
RAS-mediated regulation of TAF12 expression. Reduction of TAF12 levels by small
interfering RNA treatment induced a destabilization of the TFIID complex,
enhanced E-cadherin mRNA and protein levels, and reduced migration and adhesion
properties of RAS-transformed cells with epithelial to mesenchymal transition.
Overall, our study indicates the importance of TAF12 in the process of
RAS-induced transformation properties of human colon cells and epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, most notably those related to increased motility, by
regulating specifically expression of genes such as E-cadherin.

PMID: 18567809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. EMBO J. 2008 Jul 23;27(14):2006-17. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.117. Epub 2008 Jun
19.

Regulation of the transcription factor Ets-1 by DNA-mediated homo-dimerization.

Lamber EP(1), Vanhille L, Textor LC, Kachalova GS, Sieweke MH, Wilmanns M.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL-Hamburg, c/o DESY, Hamburg, Germany.

The function of the Ets-1 transcription factor is regulated by two regions that
flank its DNA-binding domain. A previously established mechanism for
auto-inhibition of monomeric Ets-1 on DNA response elements with a single
ETS-binding site, however, has not been observed for the stromelysin-1 promoter
containing two palindromic ETS-binding sites. We present the structure of Ets-1
on this promoter element, revealing a ternary complex in which protein
homo-dimerization is mediated by the specific arrangement of the two ETS-binding 
sites. In this complex, the N-terminal-flanking region is required for ternary
protein-DNA assembly. Ets-1 variants, in which residues from this region are
mutated, loose the ability for DNA-mediated dimerization and stromelysin-1
promoter transactivation. Thus, our data unravel the molecular basis for relief
of auto-inhibition and the ability of Ets-1 to function as a facultative dimeric 
transcription factor on this site. Our findings may also explain previous data of
Ets-1 function in the context of heterologous transcription factors, thus
providing a molecular model that could also be valid for Ets-1 regulation by
hetero-oligomeric assembly.

PMCID: PMC2486274
PMID: 18566588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 15;68(12):4649-57. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6003.

Endothelial function of von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene: control of
fibroblast growth factor receptor signaling.

Champion KJ(1), Guinea M, Dammai V, Hsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease results from germline and somatic mutations in
the VHL tumor suppressor gene and is characterized by highly vascularized tumors.
VHL mutations lead to stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), which
up-regulates proangiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). This pathway is therefore believed to underlie the hypervascular
phenotypes of the VHL tumors. However, recent studies have identified novel VHL
functions that are independent of the HIF-VEGF pathway. In addition, a potential 
role of VHL in the tumor microenvironment, which carries heterozygous VHL
mutations in VHL patients, has been overlooked. Here, we report a novel
HIF-independent VHL function in the endothelium. VHL knockdown in primary human
microvascular endothelial cells caused defective turnover of surface fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) receptor, increased extracellular signal-regulated kinase
signaling, and ETS1 activation, leading to increased cell motility in response to
FGF and three-dimensional cord formation in vitro. HIF-alpha knockdown in VHL
loss-of-function endothelial cells does not impede their elevated in vitro
angiogenic activity. Importantly, the elevated angiogenic response to FGF is
recapitulated in Vhl-heterozygous mice. Thus, partial loss of function of VHL in 
endothelium may be a contributing factor in tumor angiogenesis through a
HIF-VEGF-independent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2650247
PMID: 18559510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hepatology. 2008 Jul;48(1):265-75. doi: 10.1002/hep.22280.

Thirty-kilodalton Tat-interacting protein suppresses tumor metastasis by
inhibition of osteopontin transcription in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhao J(1), Lu B, Xu H, Tong X, Wu G, Zhang X, Liang A, Cong W, Dai J, Wang H, Wu 
M, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)International Joint Cancer Institute and Eastern Hospital of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, People's Republic of
China.

It has been previously demonstrated that the 30-kDa Tat-interacting protein
(TIP30) plays an important role in the suppression of hepatocarcinogenesis by
acting as a tumor suppressor. Here we report that TIP30 suppresses metastasis of 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) through inhibiting the transcription of
osteopontin (OPN), a key molecule in the development of tumor metastasis. The
expression of TIP30 messenger RNA was reverse to that of OPN messenger RNA in HCC
cell lines. Ectopic expression of TIP30 greatly suppressed OPN expression,
inhibited invasion of HCC cells through extracellular matrix (ECM) and adhesion
with fibronectin in vitro, whereas down-regulation of TIP30 by RNA-mediated
interference enhanced OPN expression and promoted metastatic abilities of HCC
cells in vitro. Moreover, overexpression of TIP30 significantly inhibited the
growth and lung metastases of HCC cells in nude mice. In contrast,
down-regulation of TIP30 greatly promoted tumor cell growth and metastases in
vivo. TIP30 repressed OPN transcription through interaction with Ets-1 and
suppressed the transcriptional activity of Ets-1 and synergistic actions of Ets-1
and alkaline phosphatase-1. Thus, TIP30 may act as an Ets-1 modulator and inhibit
tumor metastasis through abrogating Ets-1-dependent transcription. Moreover,
expression of TIP30 was inversely associated with OPN expression in HCC tissue
samples as detected by immunohistochemistry assay.CONCLUSION: Our results reveal 
a novel pathway by which OPN and possibly other Ets-1 target genes involved in
tumor metastasis are regulated by TIP30 and elucidate a mechanism for metastasis 
promoted by TIP30 deficiency.

PMID: 18537194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Oral Oncol. 2008 Dec;44(12):1155-9. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2008.02.015. Epub
2008 May 15.

Effects of epidermal growth factor on the invasion activity of the oral cancer
cell lines HSC3 and SAS.

Ohnishi Y(1), Lieger O, Attygalla M, Iizuka T, Kakudo K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Osaka Dental University, 
1-5-17 Otemae, Chuo-ku, 540-0008 Osaka, Japan. onishi_yu_ku@msn.com

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is excreted in a high concentration in human saliva
and modulates the growth and differentiation of various cancer cells. To
elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which EGF affects oral cancer growth and
invasion, we analyzed the Matrigel invasion activity of the cultured oral cancer 
cell line. Cells grown under the influence of EGF were subjected to Matrigel
invasion assays and cells grown in the absence of EGF were used as controls.
Gelatin-zymography and Northern blot analyses quantified the invasiveness and
tumorigenicity. Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase assay (CAT assay) determined
the EGF stimulation of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression. EGF increased
the number of cells penetrating a Matrigel membrane. Gelatin-zymography and
Northern blot analysis revealed that MMP9 and Ets1 expressions correlated with
EGF but MMP2 was not changed. a transient transfection assay revealed that EGF
increased the promoter activities of the MMP9 genes in HSC3 and SAS cells. These 
results suggest that EGF increases the invasion activity of oral cancer cells
partly by increasing MMP9.

PMID: 18485796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Jun;38(6):1700-5. doi: 10.1002/eji.200738112.

Role of Ets-1 phosphorylation in the effector function of Th cells.

Grenningloh R(1), Miaw SC, Moisan J, Graves BJ, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor Ets-1 critically regulates differentiation and function 
of T helper (Th) cells. In vitro studies have demonstrated that DNA binding and
transcriptional activity of Ets-1 are regulated by phosphorylation. Depending on 
the site of phosphorylation, Ets-1 function can either be increased or inhibited.
In addition, a splice variant lacking several inhibitory phosphorylation sites
has been identified, raising the possibility that this splice variant may
function differently from the full-length Ets-1. However, it is unclear how the
activating and inhibitory phosphorylation events of Ets-1 are coordinated during 
Th cell activation. Furthermore, the biological consequences of Ets-1
phosphorylation and alternative splicing in regulating the function of Th cells
are unknown. We report here that both activating and inhibitory phosphorylation
events of Ets-1 occur simultaneously and independently of each other during Th
cell activation. We further demonstrate that the effect of Ets-1 phosphorylation 
is very modest and that full-length Ets-1 and its splice variant are functionally
interchangeable in the regulation of cytokine production in Th cells.

PMID: 18465773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Fertil Steril. 2009 May;91(5 Suppl):1998-2005. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.02.166. Epub 2008 Apr 25.

Expression and localization of transcription factor Ets-1 in the rat ovary during
the estrous cycle and pregnancy.

Xiao X(1), Liu A, Wen H, Tian Y, Ni J, Liu G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Endocrinology, Department of Physiology, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the expression and localization of Ets-1 in the rat ovary
during the estrous cycle and pregnancy, and to investigate its effects on ovarian
function.
DESIGN: Prospective, randomized study.
SETTING: Department of Physiology at Harbin Medical University.
ANIMAL(S): Pubertal female Wistar rats.
INTERVENTION(S): Vaginal smears were taken daily from female rats to determine
the stage of the estrous cycle. Pregnancies were achieved by caging female and
male rats together overnight. Ovaries were collected from both cycling and
pregnant rats for tissue sectioning and RNA and protein extractions.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction,
Western blot, in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry were performed to
investigate the expression and localization of Ets-1 messenger RNA (mRNA) and
protein in the rat ovary during the estrous cycle and pregnancy.
RESULT(S): During the estrous cycle, the levels of Ets-1 mRNA and protein
expression increased during the follicular phase, achieving their highest
measurements at proestrus and lowest at metestrus. The expression of Ets-1 mRNA
and protein fluctuated during pregnancy, increasing during early pregnancy, then 
decreasing during mid-pregnancy, and again increasing until parturition. Ets-1
mRNA and protein were present throughout the estrous cycle and pregnancy,
principally localized in follicles of various sizes and in the corpus luteum.
CONCLUSION(S): Ets-1 may participate and play an important role in the regulation
of follicular development, corpus luteum formation, maintenance, and regression.

PMID: 18439600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 15;318(2):360-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.056. Epub 2008
Mar 14.

A new method, using cis-regulatory control, for blocking embryonic gene
expression.

Smith J(1), Davidson EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA. jsmith1@caltech.edu

Many genes, and particularly regulatory genes, are utilized multiple times in
unrelated phases of development. For studies of gene function during
embryogenesis, there is often need of a method for interfering with expression
only at a specific developmental time or place. Here we show that in sea urchin
embryos cis-regulatory control systems which operate only at specific times and
places can be used to drive expression of short designed sequences targeting
given primary transcripts, thereby effectively taking out the function of the
target genes. The active sequences are designed to be complementary to intronic
sequences of the primary transcript of the target genes. In this work, the target
genes were the transcription factors alx1 and ets1, both required for
skeletogenesis, and the regulatory drivers were from the sm30 and tbr genes. The 
sm30 gene is expressed only after skeletogenic cell ingression. When its
regulatory apparatus was used as driver, the alx1 and ets1 repression constructs 
had the effect of preventing postgastrular skeletogenesis, while not interfering 
with earlier alx1 and ets1 function in promoting skeletogenic mesenchyme
ingression. In contrast, repression constructs using the tbr driver, which is
active in blastula stage, block ingression. This method thus provides the
opportunity to study regulatory requirements of skeletogenesis after ingression, 
and may be similarly useful in many other developmental contexts.

PMCID: PMC3929273
PMID: 18423438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Aug;29(8):1493-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn088. Epub 2008 Apr 
1.

Regulation of hypoxia-inducible genes by ETS1 transcription factor.

Salnikow K(1), Aprelikova O, Ivanov S, Tackett S, Kaczmarek M, Karaczyn A, Yee H,
Kasprzak KS, Niederhuber J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. salnikow@ncifcrf.gov

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1) regulates the expression of genes that
facilitate tumor cell survival by making them more resistant to therapeutic
intervention. Recent evidence suggests that the activation of other transcription
factors, in cooperation with HIF-1 or acting alone, is involved in the
upregulation of hypoxia-inducible genes. Here we report that high cell density, a
condition that might mimic the physiologic situation in growing tumor and most
probably representing nutritional starvation, upregulates hypoxia-inducible
genes. This upregulation can occur in HIF-independent manner since
hypoxia-inducible genes carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9), lysyloxidase like 2 (LOXL2)
and n-myc-down regulated 1 (NDRG1)/calcium activated protein (Cap43) can be
upregulated by increased cell density under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions 
in both HIF-1 alpha-proficient and -deficient mouse fibroblasts. Moreover, cell
density upregulates the same genes in 1HAEo- and A549 human lung epithelial
cells. Searching for other transcription factors involved in the regulation of
hypoxia-inducible genes by cell density, we focused our attention on ETS1. As
reported previously, members of v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog
(ETS) family transcription factors participate in the upregulation of
hypoxia-inducible genes. Here, we provide evidence that ETS1 protein is
upregulated at high cell density in both human and mouse cells. The involvement
of ETS1 in the upregulation of hypoxia-inducible genes was further confirmed in a
luciferase reporter assay using cotransfection of ETS1 expression vector with
NDRG1/Cap43 promoter construct. The downregulation of ETS1 expression with small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibited the upregulation of CA9 and NDRG1/Cap43 caused 
by increased cell density. Collectively, our data indicate the involvement of
ETS1 along with HIF-1 in regulating hypoxia-inducible genes.

PMCID: PMC2516492
PMID: 18381358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Brain Res. 2008 May 1;1207:19-31. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.02.016. Epub 2008 
Mar 28.

Inhibition of basal activity of c-jun-NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) represses the
expression of presenilin-1 by a p53-dependent mechanism.

Lee S(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, Texas 76107,
USA.

Presenilin-1 (PS1) is a multifunctional protein involved in many cellular
functions including the processing of type 1 transmembrane proteins and
regulation of calcium signaling. Although PS1 is important in many aspects of
cellular functions, little is known about the PS1 gene regulation in the context 
of intracellular signal pathways. We tested the role of c-jun-NH2-terminal kinase
(JNK) on PS1 gene expression using a JNK specific inhibitor, SP600125. SP600125
efficiently suppressed basal JNK activity in SK-N-SH cell line as shown by
inhibition of phosphor-JNK and phosphor-c-jun, and also decreased PS1 expression.
Previously we reported that Ets1/2 bind to the PS1 promoter to activate PS1
transcription and p53 represses PS1 transcription without direct binding to the
PS1 promoter [Pastorcic, M., Das, H.K., 2000. Regulation of transcription of the 
human presenilin-1 gene by ets transcription factors and the p53 protooncogene. J
Biol Chem. 275, 34938-45.]. Involvement of protein-protein interaction between
p53 and other transcription factors was speculated to be a mechanism by which p53
represses PS1 expression. Therefore, we tested whether the interaction between
p53 and Ets1/2 is involved in JNK-mediated inhibition of PS1 expression. In this 
report we showed that p53 level was upregulated by SP600125 in SK-N-SH cell line.
In addition, protein-protein interaction between p53 and Ets1/2 was enhanced with
a concomitant dissociation of Ets1/2 from the PS1 promoter resulting in the
suppression of PS1 transcription. We also showed that suppression of JNK1 by JNK1
siRNA increased p53 protein level and decreased PS1 expression. This observation 
was supported by the fact that overexpression of p53 in SK-N-SH cell line
promoted dissociation of Ets1/2 from the PS1 promoter and suppressed PS1
expression. Furthermore, p53 inhibitor pifithrin-alpha partially nullified the
suppressive effects of SP600125 on PS1 expression. We also showed that
transfection of p53 was required for SP600125-mediated suppression of PS1
expression in p53-deficient PC3 cell line suggesting that inhibition of basal JNK
activity suppresses PS1 expression through a p53-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 18374905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 1;105(13):5166-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0800121105. Epub 2008 Mar 24.

MiR-15a and miR-16-1 cluster functions in human leukemia.

Calin GA(1), Cimmino A, Fabbri M, Ferracin M, Wojcik SE, Shimizu M, Taccioli C,
Zanesi N, Garzon R, Aqeilan RI, Alder H, Volinia S, Rassenti L, Liu X, Liu CG,
Kipps TJ, Negrini M, Croce CM.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program and Department of Molecular Virology,
Immunology, and Medical Genetics, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
gcalin@mdanderson.org

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short noncoding RNAs regulating gene expression that play 
roles in human diseases, including cancer. Each miRNA is predicted to regulate
hundreds of transcripts, but only few have experimental validation. In chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the most common adult human leukemia, miR-15a and
miR-16-1 are lost or down-regulated in the majority of cases. After our previous 
work indicating a tumor suppressor function of miR-15a/16-1 by targeting the BCL2
oncogene, here, we produced a high-throughput profiling of genes modulated by
miR-15a/16-1 in a leukemic cell line model (MEG-01) and in primary CLL samples.
By combining experimental and bioinformatics data, we identified a
miR-15a/16-1-gene signature in leukemic cells. Among the components of the
miR-15a/16-1 signature, we observed a statistically significant enrichment in
AU-rich elements (AREs). By examining the Gene Ontology (GO) database, a
significant enrichment in cancer genes (such as MCL1, BCL2, ETS1, or JUN) that
directly or indirectly affect apoptosis and cell cycle was found.

PMCID: PMC2278188
PMID: 18362358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2008 May;294(5):F1094-100. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00458.2007. Epub 2008 Mar 12.

Angiotensin II increases the expression of the transcription factor ETS-1 in
mesangial cells.

Pearse DD(1), Tian RX, Nigro J, Iorgulescu JB, Puzis L, Jaimes EA.

Author information: 
(1)The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Miller School of Medicine, University of 
Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.

Maladaptive activation of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) has been shown to
play a critical role in the pathogenesis of chronic kidney disease. Reactive
oxygen species (ROS) are critical signals for many of the nonhemodynamic effects 
of angiotensin II (ANG II). We have demonstrated that ANG II increases mesangial 
and cortical cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression and activity via NADPH
oxidase-derived ROS. The transcription factor ETS-1 (E26 transformation-specific 
sequence) has been identified as a critical regulator of growth-related responses
and inflammation. The present studies were designed to determine: 1) whether ANG 
II induces ETS-1 expression in vitro in cultured rat mesangial cells and in vivo 
in rats infused with ANG II; and 2) whether ROS and COX-2 are mediators of ETS-1 
induction in response to ANG II. Mesangial cells stimulated with ANG II (10(-7)
M) exhibited a significant increase in ETS-1 expression that was prevented by the
angiotensin type 1 receptor blocker candesartan. NADPH oxidase inhibition with
dyphenilene iodinium or apocynin also prevented ETS-1 induction, establishing the
role of ROS as mediators of ETS-1 expression in response to ANG II. COX-2
inhibition prevented ETS-1 expression in response to ANG II, suggesting that
COX-2 is required for ETS-1 induction. By utilizing short interfering RNAs
against ETS-1, we have also determined that ETS-1 is required to induce the
production of fibronectin in response to ANG II. Furthermore, rats infused with
ANG II manifested increased glomerular expression of ETS-1. These studies unveil 
novel pathways that may play an important role in the pathogenesis of renal
injury when RAS is activated.

PMID: 18337545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Immunol. 2008 Mar 1;180(5):2786-95.

1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 induces CCR10 expression in terminally differentiating
human B cells.

Shirakawa AK(1), Nagakubo D, Hieshima K, Nakayama T, Jin Z, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama,
Osaka, Japan.

In the B cell lineage, CCR10 is known to be selectively expressed by plasma
cells, especially those secreting IgA. In this study, we examined the regulation 
of CCR10 expression in terminally differentiating human B cells. As reported
previously, IL-21 efficiently induced the differentiation of activated human
CD19+ B cells into IgD-CD38+ plasma cells in vitro. A minor proportion of the
resulting CD19+IgD-CD38+ cells expressed CCR10 at low levels.
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25-(OH)2D3), the active metabolite of vitamine D3,
dramatically increased the proportion of CD19+IgD-CD38+ cells expressing high
levels of CCR10. The 1,25-(OH)2D3 also increased the number of CCR10+ cells
expressing surface IgA, although the majority of CCR10+ cells remained negative
for surface IgA. Thus, 1,25-(OH)2D3 alone may not be sufficient for the induction
of IgA expression in terminally differentiating human B cells. To further
determine whether 1,25-(OH)2D3 directly induces CCR10 expression in terminally
differentiating B cells, we next performed the analysis on the human CCR10
promoter. We identified a proximal Ets-1 site and an upstream potential vitamin D
response element to be critical for the inducible expression of CCR10 by
1,25-(OH)2D3. We confirmed the specific binding of Ets-1 and
1,25-(OH)2D3-activated vitamin D receptor to the respective sites. In conclusion,
1,25-(OH)2D3 efficiently induces CCR10 expression in terminally differentiating
human B cells in vitro. Furthermore, the human CCR10 promoter is cooperatively
activated by Ets-1 and vitamin D receptor in the presence of 1,25-(OH)2D3.

PMID: 18292499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2008 May;37(5):453-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ijom.2007.12.008. Epub 2008 Feb 12.

Mechanical strain induces osteogenic differentiation: Cbfa1 and Ets-1 expression 
in stretched rat mesenchymal stem cells.

Qi MC(1), Hu J, Zou SJ, Chen HQ, Zhou HX, Han LC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical Engineering, Basic Medicine and Forensic Medicine
College, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Distraction osteogenesis is an active process of bone regeneration under
controlled mechanical stimulation. Osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) is essential for bone formation during this process. Cbfa1 and Ets-1
(core binding factor alpha 1 and v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene
homolog 1) are transcription factors that play important roles in the
differentiation of MSCs to osteoblasts. In order to mimic a single activation of 
a clinical distraction device, a short period of cyclic mechanical strain (40 min
and 2,000 microstrains) was applied to rat MSCs. Cellular proliferation and
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity were examined. The mRNA expression of Cbfa1
and Ets-1, as well as ALP, a specific osteoblast marker, was detected using
real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The
results showed that mechanical strain can promote MSC proliferation, increase ALP
activity and up-regulate the expression of Cbfa1 and Ets-1. A significant
increase in Ets-1 expression was detected immediately after mechanical
stimulation, but Cbfa1 expression was elevated later. The temporal expression
pattern of ALP coincided perfectly with that of Cbfa1. Mechanical strain may act 
as a stimulator to induce differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells into
osteoblasts, which is vital for bone formation in distraction osteogenesis.

PMID: 18272346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Blood. 2008 May 1;111(9):4500-10. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-110569. Epub 2008
Feb 12.

Interplay among Etsrp/ER71, Scl, and Alk8 signaling controls endothelial and
myeloid cell formation.

Sumanas S(1), Gomez G, Zhao Y, Park C, Choi K, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, USA. saulius.sumanas@cchmc.org

Vascular endothelial and myeloid cells have been proposed to originate from a
common precursor cell, the hemangioblast. The mechanism of endothelial and
myeloid cell specification and differentiation is poorly understood. We have
previously described the endothelial-specific zebrafish Ets1-related protein
(Etsrp), which was both necessary and sufficient to initiate vasculogenesis in
the zebrafish embryos. Here we identify human Etv2/ER71 and mouse ER71 proteins
as functional orthologs of Etsrp. Overexpression of mouse ER71 and Etsrp caused
strong expansion of hemangioblast and vascular endothelial lineages in a
zebrafish embryo. In addition, we show that etsrp is also required for the
formation of myeloid but not erythroid cells. In the absence of etsrp function,
the number of granulocytes and macrophages is greatly reduced. Etsrp
overexpression causes expansion of both myeloid and vascular endothelial
lineages. Analysis of mosaic embryos indicates that etsrp functions cell
autonomously in inducing myeloid lineage. We further demonstrate that the choice 
of endothelial versus myeloid fate depends on a combinatorial effect of etsrp,
scl, and alk8 genes.

PMCID: PMC2343590
PMID: 18270322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Nov 27;87(44):3138-42.

[Effects of vascular endothelial growth factor on apoptosis of sinusoidal
endothelial cells caused by ethanol: experiment with rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang YJ(1), Xu L, Wang XD, Shi L, Wang ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Beijing Hospital, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the cell death pattern of sinusoidal endothelial cells 
(SECs) caused by ethanol and the effects of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) on this cell death, as well as the underlying mechanism involving Ets-1
and Caspase-8.
METHODS: SECs were isolated from male Wistar rats and cultured in medium
containing ethanol (25 - 100 mmol/L). VEGF (20 - 30 ng/ml) was added into the
medium to be co-incubated for up to 6 h. Apoptosis was detected by terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT)-mediated d-uridine triphosphate (dUTP)-biotin 
nick end labeling (TUNEL) technique. The protein expression of Ets-1, prototype
of anti-apoptotic Ets family, was determined by Western blotting and the
Caspase-8 was measured by FLICE/caspase-8 colorimetric protease assay kit.
RESULTS: Three days after culture, the SECs showed spindle-like shapes and nearly
confluent, however, the cells tended to shrink and die during the time course of 
ethanol incubation under phase contrast microscope. The control SECs contained
only a few percent of TUNEL-positive cells; however, the TUNEL-positive cells
started to increase 2 hours after the addition of ethanol (100 mmol/L), and about
75% of the cells were TUNEL-positive 6 hours after ethanol incubation (P < 0.05) 
under fluorescent microscope. Again, TUNEL-positive cells increased 6 hours after
ethanol (25 - 100 mmol/L) incubation in a dose dependent manner (P < 0.05). Six
hours after VEGF (20 - 30 ng/ml) was added into the medium with ethanol (100
mmol/L) the percentage of TUNEL positive SECs decreased in a dose dependent
manner (P < 0.05), the level of ethanol-induced apoptotic cells in the presence
of VEGF (30 ng/ml) being around 71% 6 hours after ethanol incubation alone. The
Ets-1 protein level of the SECs decreased 6 hours after ethanol (100 mmol/L)
incubation, which was prevented almost completely by VEGF (30 ng/ml). The
Caspase-8 activity level was significantly increased to 44.9 +/- 14.3 2 hours
after ethanol (100 mmol/L) incubation, and decrease to 30.4 +/- 2.0 and 25.2 +/- 
2.2 respectively after the addition of VEGF (20 - 30 ng/ml) (both P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: VEGF prevents the apoptosis of primary cultured SECs induced by
ethanol, through at least in part, inhibition of ethanol-induced down-regulation 
of Ets-1 protein expression and ethanol-induced up-regulation of Casepase-8
activity in SECs.

PMID: 18269875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Oncogene. 2008 Jun 12;27(26):3662-72. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1211044. Epub 2008 Jan 
21.

The Wilms' tumour suppressor WT1 is involved in endothelial cell proliferation
and migration: expression in tumour vessels in vivo.

Wagner N(1), Michiels JF, Schedl A, Wagner KD.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U907, Nice, France.

Vascularization is an important step in tumour growth. Although a variety of
molecules, for example, VEGF, ETS-1 or nestin have been implicated in tumour
angiogenesis, the molecular mechanisms of vessel formation are not fully
characterized. We showed that the Wilms' tumour suppressor WT1 activates nestin
during development. Here we tested whether WT1 might also be involved in tumour
angiogenesis. Endothelial WT1 expression was detected in 95% of 113 tumours of
different origin. To analyse the function of WT1 in endothelial cells, we used an
RNAi approach in vitro and showed that inhibition of WT1 reduces cell
proliferation, migration and endothelial tube formation. On a molecular level,
WT1 silencing diminished expression of the ETS-1 transcription factor. WT1 and
ETS-1 shared an overlapping expression in tumour endothelia. The ETS-1 promoter
was stimulated approximately 10-fold by transient co-transfection of a WT1
expression construct and WT1 bound to the ETS-1 promoter in chromatin
immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Deletion of the
identified WT1-binding site abolished stimulation of the ETS-1 promoter by WT1.
These findings suggest that transcriptional activation of ETS-1 by the Wilms'
tumour suppressor WT1 is a crucial step in tumour vascularization via regulation 
of endothelial cell proliferation and migration.

PMID: 18212735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Apr;93(4):1390-3. doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-1255. Epub
2008 Jan 15.

TFF3-based candidate gene discrimination of benign and malignant thyroid tumors
in a region with borderline iodine deficiency.

Krause K(1), Eszlinger M, Gimm O, Karger S, Engelhardt C, Dralle H, Fuhrer D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Universität Leipzig, Ph.-Rosenthal-Str. 27,
04103 Leipzig, Germany.

BACKGROUND: With the advent of microarray technology, increasing numbers of
marker genes are proposed to distinguish benign and malignant thyroid lesions.
However, most markers await confirmation through independent studies. In this
paper, we re-evaluate the diagnostic potential of 10 proposed candidate genes in 
benign and malignant thyroid pathologies in a region with borderline iodine
deficiency.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time PCR was performed for CCND2, PLAB, PCSK2, HGD1,
TFF3, B4GALT, LGALS3, ETS1, ADM3, and TG in 150 thyroid specimens, including 52
benign thyroid nodules (28 follicular adenoma and 24 adenomatous nodules), 52
corresponding normal thyroid tissues, 20 follicular carcinomas, 20 papillary
carcinomas, and six undifferentiated carcinomas.
RESULTS: On a single-gene basis, significant differences in mRNA expression were 
found for TFF3, PLAB, and ADM3 in benign thyroid nodules and thyroid malignancy. 
Using two-marker gene sets, we identified 11 combinations, which allowed both a
distinction of benign and malignant thyroid nodules and a discrimination of
follicular adenoma and carcinoma. However, for cancer prediction, analysis of a
minimum of six genes per sample was necessary and allowed correct prediction of a
benign thyroid lesion and thyroid cancer with 94% accuracy in the most
discriminative set (TFF3/PLAB/TG/ADM3/HGD1/LGALS3).
CONCLUSION: We confirm the applicability of a number of recently proposed marker 
genes for the distinction of benign and malignant thyroid tumor and suggest that 
their diagnostic usefulness is independent of the iodide supply. We propose that 
the most discriminative marker set identified in our validation study together
with marker combinations proposed by other investigators should now be evaluated 
in multicenter trials.

PMID: 18198227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Vasc Res. 2008;45(3):222-32. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Poly-N-acetyl glucosamine nanofibers regulate endothelial cell movement and
angiogenesis: dependency on integrin activation of Ets1.

Vournakis JN(1), Eldridge J, Demcheva M, Muise-Helmericks RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Poly-N-acetyl glucosamine (pGlcNAc) nanofiber-derived materials effectively
achieve hemostasis during surgical procedures. Treatment of cutaneous wounds with
pGlcNAc in a diabetic mouse animal model causes marked increases in cell
proliferation and angiogenesis. We sought to understand the effect of the pGlcNAc
fibers on primary endothelial cells (EC) in culture and found that pGlcNAc
induces EC motility. Cell motility induced by pGlcNAc fibers is blocked by
antibodies directed against alphaVbeta3 and alpha5beta1 integrins, both known to 
play important roles in the regulation of EC motility, in vitroand in vivo.
pGlcNAc treatment activates mitogen-activated protein kinase and increases Ets1, 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and interleukin 1 (IL-1) expression.
pGlcNAc activity is not secondary to its induction of VEGF; inhibition of the
VEGF receptor does not inhibit the pGlcNAc-induced expression of Ets1 nor does
pGlcNAc cause the activation of VEGF receptor. Both dominant negative and RNA
interference inhibition of Ets1 blocks pGlcNAc-induced EC motility. Antibody
blockade of integrin results in the inhibition of pGlcNAc-induced Ets1
expression. These findings support the hypothesis that pGlcNAc fibers induce
integrin activation which results in the regulation of EC motility and thus in
angiogenesis via a pathway dependent on the Ets1 transcription factor and
demonstrate that Ets1 is a downstream mediator of integrin activation.

Copyright 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2769246
PMID: 18097146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Cell Physiol. 2008 May;215(2):562-73.

ESE-1 is a potent repressor of type II collagen gene (COL2A1) transcription in
human chondrocytes.

Peng H(1), Tan L, Osaki M, Zhan Y, Ijiri K, Tsuchimochi K, Otero M, Wang H, Choy 
BK, Grall FT, Gu X, Libermann TA, Oettgen P, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, New England
Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The epithelium-specific ETS (ESE)-1 transcription factor is induced in
chondrocytes by interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta). We reported previously that early
activation of EGR-1 by IL-1beta results in suppression of the proximal COL2A1
promoter activity by displacement of Sp1 from GC boxes. Here we report that ESE-1
is a potent transcriptional suppressor of COL2A1 promoter activity in
chondrocytes and accounts for the sustained, NF-kappaB-dependent inhibition by
IL-1beta. Of the ETS factors tested, this response was specific to ESE-1, since
ESE-3, which was also induced by IL-1beta, suppressed COL2A1 promoter activity
only weakly. In contrast, overexpression of ETS-1 increased COL2A1 promoter
activity and blocked the inhibition by IL-1beta. These responses to ESE-1 and
ETS-1 were confirmed using siRNA-ESE1 and siRNA-ETS1. In transient
cotransfections, the inhibitory responses to ESE-1 and IL-1beta colocalized in
the -577/-132 bp promoter region, ESE-1 bound specifically to tandem ETS sites at
-403/-381 bp, and IL-1-induced binding of ESE-1 to the COL2A1 promoter was
confirmed in vivo by ChIP. Our results indicate that ESE-1 serves a potent
repressor function by interacting with at least two sites in the COL2A1 promoter.
However, the endogenous response may depend upon the balance of other ETS factors
such as ETS-1, and other IL-1-induced factors, including EGR-1 at any given time.
Intracellular ESE-1 staining in chondrocytes in cartilage from patients with
osteoarthritis (OA), but not in normal cartilage, further suggests a fundamental 
role for ESE-1 in cartilage degeneration and suppression of repair.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3937869
PMID: 18044710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 15;67(22):10694-702.

Cyclooxygenase-2 is a target gene of rho GDP dissociation inhibitor beta in
breast cancer cells.

Schunke D(1), Span P, Ronneburg H, Dittmer A, Vetter M, Holzhausen HJ,
Kantelhardt E, Krenkel S, Müller V, Sweep FC, Thomssen C, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Gynäkologie, Universität Halle, Halle (Saale), Germany.

Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor beta (Rho-GDI beta), an inhibitor of Rho GTPases, 
is primarily expressed by hematopoietic cells but is also found in epithelial
cancer cells. Recently, we have identified Rho-GDI beta as a target of the
transcription factor Ets1. Here, we show that, in breast cancer cells, Ets1
regulates Rho-GDI beta expression and binds to the upstream region of the Rho-GDI
beta gene. Furthermore, in primary breast cancer, Rho-GDI beta is coexpressed
with Ets1. Studying the function of Rho-GDI beta in breast cancer, we found that 
a Rho-GD beta-specific small interfering RNA increased cellular migration but
also decreased the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) oncogene as shown by
microarray, quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, and Western blot analyses.
Further studies revealed that Rho-GDI beta regulates Cox-2 gene at least partly
on the transcriptional level, most likely by activating nuclear factor of
activated T cells 1 (NFAT-1). Vav-1, an interaction partner of Rho-GDI beta, was 
also found to interfere with Cox-2 expression and NFAT-1 cellular distribution,
suggesting a cooperative action of Rho-GDI beta and Vav-1 on Cox-2 expression. To
explore the importance of Rho-GDI beta for the survival of breast cancer
patients, two cohorts, including 263 and 117 patients, were analyzed for clinical
outcome in relation to Rho-GDI beta RNA and protein levels, respectively.
Expression of Rho-GDI beta was not associated with either disease-free or overall
survival in the two patient population. Our data suggest that the expression of
Rho-GDI beta in breast cancer is neither beneficial nor disadvantageous to the
patient. This may be the net effect of two opposing activities of Rho-GDI beta,
one that suppresses tumor progression by inhibiting migration and the other that 
stimulates it by enhancing Cox-2 expression.

PMID: 18006811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Circ Res. 2007 Nov 9;101(10):962-4.

Targeting NAD(P)H oxidase: Ets-1 regulates p47(phox).

Adachi T, Yamamoto M, Suematsu M.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2007 Nov 9;101(10):985-94.

PMID: 17991888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(6):R76.

Identification of the functional role of peroxiredoxin 6 in the progression of
breast cancer.

Chang XZ(1), Li DQ, Hou YF, Wu J, Lu JS, Di GH, Jin W, Ou ZL, Shen ZZ, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Institute, Cancer Hospital, Department of Oncology, Shanghai
Medical College, Institutes of Biomedical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai,
200032, People's Republic of China.

INTRODUCTION: The molecular mechanisms involved in breast cancer metastasis still
remain unclear to date. In our previous study, differential expression of
peroxiredoxin 6 was found between the highly metastatic MDA-MB-435HM cells and
their parental counterparts, MDA-MB-435 cells. In this study, we investigated the
effects of peroxiredoxin 6 on the proliferation and metastatic potential of human
breast cancer cells and their potential mechanism.
METHODS: Expression of peroxiredoxin 6 in the highly metastatic MDA-MB-231HM
cells was investigated by RT-PCR, real-time PCR and western blot. A recombinant
expression plasmid of the human peroxiredoxin 6 gene was constructed and
transfected into MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 cells. The effects of peroxiredoxin 6 
on the proliferation and invasion of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 cells were
investigated by the Cell Counting Kit-8 method, colony-formation assay, adhesion 
assay, flow cytometry and invasion assay in vitro. miRNA was used to downregulate
the expression of peroxiredoxin 6. Genes related to the invasion and metastasis
of cancer were determined by RT-PCR, real-time PCR and western blot. The
tumorigenicity and spontaneously metastatic capability regulated by peroxiredoxin
6 were determined using an orthotopic xenograft tumor model in athymic mice.
RESULTS: Overexpression of peroxiredoxin 6 in MDA-MB-231HM cells compared with
their parental counterparts was confirmed. Upregulation of peroxiredoxin 6
enhanced the in vitro proliferation and invasion of breast cancer cells. The
enhancement was associated with decreasing levels of tissue inhibitor of matrix
metalloproteinase (TIMP)-2 and increasing levels of the urokinase-type
plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR), Ets-1 (E26 transformation-specific-1),
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and RhoC (ras homolog gene family, member C)
expression. The results were further demonstrated by RNA interference experiments
in vitro. In an in vivo study, we also demonstrated that peroxiredoxin
6-transfected breast cancer cells grew much faster and had more pulmonary
metastases than control cells. By contrast, peroxiredoxin 6 knockdown breast
cancer cells grew more slowly and had fewer pulmonary metastases. Effects similar
to those of peroxiredoxin 6 on the uPAR, Ets-1, MMP-9, RhoC and TIMP-2 expression
observed in in vitro studies were found in the in vivo study.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of peroxiredoxin 6 leads to a more invasive phenotype 
and metastatic potential in human breast cancer, at least in part, through
regulation of the levels of uPAR, Ets-1, MMP-9, RhoC and TIMP-2 expression.

PMCID: PMC2246172
PMID: 17980029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 11;283(2):951-62. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Ets-1 regulates plasma cell differentiation by interfering with the activity of
the transcription factor Blimp-1.

John SA(1), Clements JL, Russell LM, Garrett-Sinha LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York, Buffalo, New York
14214, USA.

Development of immunoglobulin-secreting plasma cells from B cells is a tightly
regulated process controlled by the action of a number of transcription factors. 
In particular, the transcription factor Blimp-1 is a key positive regulator of
plasmacytic differentiation via its ability to suppress expression of genes
involved in the mature B cell program. The transcription factor Ets-1 is a
negative regulator of plasmacytic differentiation, as indicated by the
development of increased numbers of IgM-secreting plasma cells in Ets-1 knock-out
mice. We have previously shown that Ets-1-deficient B cells undergo enhanced
differentiation into IgM-secreting plasma cells in response to Toll-like receptor
9 (TLR9) signaling. We now explore the mechanism by which Ets-1 limits
differentiation downstream of TLR9. Our results indicate that Ets-1 physically
interacts with Blimp-1, which leads to a block in Blimp-1 DNA binding activity
and a reduction in the ability of Blimp-1 to repress target genes without
interfering with Blimp-1 protein levels. In addition, we show that Ets-1 induces 
the expression of several target genes that are repressed by Blimp-1, including
Pax-5. These results reveal a previously unknown mechanism for the control of
Blimp-1 activity by Ets-1 and suggest that expression of Ets-1 must be
down-regulated before plasmacytic differentiation can occur.

PMID: 17977828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Exp Med. 2007 Nov 26;204(12):2825-35. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Ets-1 is a negative regulator of Th17 differentiation.

Moisan J(1), Grenningloh R, Bettelli E, Oukka M, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital/Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

IL-17 is a proinflammatory cytokine that plays a role in the clearance of
extracellular bacteria and contributes to the pathology of many autoimmune and
allergic conditions. IL-17 is produced mainly by a newly characterized subset of 
T helper (Th) cells termed Th17. Although the role of Th17 cells in the pathology
of autoimmune diseases is well established, the transcription factors regulating 
the differentiation of Th17 cells remain poorly characterized. We report that
Ets-1-deficient Th cells differentiated more efficiently to Th17 cells than
wild-type cells. This was attributed to both low IL-2 production and increased
resistance to the inhibitory effect of IL-2 on Th17 differentiation. The
resistance to IL-2 suppression was caused by a defect downstream of STAT5
phosphorylation, but was not caused by a difference in the level of RORgamma t.
Furthermore, Ets-1-deficient mice contained an abnormally high level of IL-17
transcripts in their lungs and exhibited increased mucus production by airway
epithelial cells in an IL-17-dependent manner. Based on these observations, we
report that Ets-1 is a negative regulator of Th17 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2118518
PMID: 17967903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(19):6648-62. Epub 2007 Oct 2.

The ePHD protein SPBP interacts with TopBP1 and together they co-operate to
stimulate Ets1-mediated transcription.

Sjøttem E(1), Rekdal C, Svineng G, Johnsen SS, Klenow H, Uglehus RD, Johansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department and Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Institute
of Medical Biology, University of Tromsø, 9037 Tromsø, Norway.

SPBP (Stromelysin-1 PDGF responsive element binding protein) is a ubiquitously
expressed 220 kDa nuclear protein shown to enhance or repress the transcriptional
activity of various transcription factors. A yeast two-hybrid screen, with the
extended plant homeodomain (ePHD) of SPBP as bait, identified TopBP1
(topoisomerase II beta-binding protein 1) as a candidate interaction partner of
SPBP. TopBP1 has eight BRCA1 carboxy-terminal (BRCT) domains and is involved in
DNA replication, DNA damage responses and in the regulation of gene expression.
The interaction between SPBP and TopBP1 was confirmed in vitro and in vivo, and
was found to be mediated by the ePHD domain of SPBP and the BRCT6 domain of
TopBP1. Both SPBP and TopBP1 enhanced the transcriptional activity of Ets1 on the
c-myc P1P2- and matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP3) promoters. Together they
displayed a more than additive effect. Both proteins were associated with these
promoters. The involvement of TopBP1 was dependent on the serine 1159
phosphorylation site, known to be important for transcriptional activation.
Depletion of endogenous SPBP by siRNA treatment reduced MMP3 secretion by 50% in 
phorbol ester-stimulated human fibroblasts. Taken together, our results show that
TopBP1 and SPBP interact physically and functionally to co-operate as
co-activators of Ets1.

PMCID: PMC2095823
PMID: 17913746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Circ Res. 2007 Nov 9;101(10):985-94. Epub 2007 Sep 13.

Ets-1 is a critical transcriptional regulator of reactive oxygen species and
p47(phox) gene expression in response to angiotensin II.

Ni W(1), Zhan Y, He H, Maynard E, Balschi JA, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2007 Nov 9;101(10):962-4.

Angiotensin (Ang) II is a potent mediator of vascular inflammation. A central
mechanism by which Ang II promotes inflammation is through the generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). In the current study, we investigated the role of 
the transcription factor Ets-1 in regulating Ang II-induced ROS generation. ROS
generation was measured in the thoracic aorta of Ets-1(-/-) mice compared with
littermate controls after continuous infusion of Ang II. H2O2 and superoxide
anion (O2(-)) production were significantly blunted in the Ets-1(-/-) mice.
Inhibition of Ets-1 expression by small interfering RNA in primary human aortic
smooth muscle cells also potently inhibited ROS production and the induction of
the NAD(P)H oxidase subunit p47(phox) in response to Ang II. To evaluate the
therapeutic potential of inhibiting Ets-1 in wild-type mice, dominant negative
Ets-1 membrane-permeable peptides were administered systemically. Ang II-induced 
ROS production and medial hypertrophy in the thoracic aorta were markedly
diminished as a result of blocking Ets-1. In summary, Ets-1 functions as a
critical downstream transcriptional mediator of Ang II ROS generation by
regulating the expression of NAD(P)H oxidase subunits such as p47(phox).

PMID: 17872466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Allergy. 2007 Oct;62(10):1131-8.

Eosinophilic inflammation: mechanisms regulating IL-5 transcription in human T
lymphocytes.

Wang J(1), Young IG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin (IL)-5 is a key regulator of eosinophilia in allergic
inflammation and parasite infections but the mechanisms regulating IL-5
expression in activated human T lymphocytes are poorly understood. From studies
on mouse cells, the activation protein (AP)-1 and GATA-3 sites in the proximal
promoter region appear to be important in IL-5 regulation but the significance of
an adjacent Ets/nuclear factor of activated T cell (NFAT) site has been less
clear.
METHODS: Interleukin-5 transcriptional activity was measured by transfection of
reporter genes into the human HSB-2 cells and normal T lymphocytes. Expression
vectors encoding transcription factors were used for transactivation studies and 
IL-5 expression measured using reporter genes and mRNA levels. Transcription
factor binding was shown with chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP).
RESULTS: HSB-2 cells showed high inducible expression of IL-5 mRNA. Mutation of
reporter gene plasmids showed the Ets/NFAT site was of equal importance to the
AP-1 and GATA-3 sites in regulating IL-5 transcription. Transactivation by Ets1
increased luciferase expression 15-fold, in the absence of stimulation, and AP-1 
(c-Fos/c-Jun) and GATA-3 gave transactivations of 85-fold, and 100-fold,
respectively. Synergistic interactions were demonstrated between Ets1, GATA-3 and
AP-1. Dominant-negative AP-1 inhibited IL-5 transcription. Transactivation by
GATA-3 and synergy between GATA-3, Ets1 and AP-1 were verified measuring IL-5
mRNA levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed increased binding of Ets1 and
GATA-3 to the IL-5 promoter after stimulation. The importance of the Ets1 site
and of synergistic interactions between the three transcription factors were
verified with primary human T cells.
CONCLUSION: Ets1, GATA-3 and AP-1 synergize to regulate IL-5 transcription in
human T cells.

PMID: 17845581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. EMBO Rep. 2007 Sep;8(9):871-8. Epub 2007 Aug 17.

New androgen receptor genomic targets show an interaction with the ETS1
transcription factor.

Massie CE(1), Adryan B, Barbosa-Morais NL, Lynch AG, Tran MG, Neal DE, Mills IG.

Author information: 
(1)Uro-Oncology Research Group, Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, 
Cancer Research UK Cambridge, Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson
Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. charlie.massie@cancer.org.uk

The androgen receptor (AR) initiates important developmental and oncogenic
transcriptional pathways. The AR is known to bind as a homodimer to 15-base pair 
bipartite palindromic androgen-response elements; however, few direct AR gene
targets are known. To identify AR promoter targets, we used chromatin
immunoprecipitation with on-chip detection of genomic fragments. We identified
1,532 potential AR-binding sites, including previously known AR gene targets.
Many of the new AR target genes show altered expression in prostate cancer.
Analysis of sequences underlying AR-binding sites showed that more than 50% of
AR-binding sites did not contain the established 15 bp AR-binding element.
Unbiased sequence analysis showed 6-bp motifs, which were significantly enriched 
and were bound directly by the AR in vitro. Binding sequences for the avian
erythroblastosis virus E26 homologue (ETS) transcription factor family were also 
highly enriched, and we uncovered an interaction between the AR and ETS1 at a
subset of AR promoter targets.

PMCID: PMC1950328
PMID: 17721441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Development. 2007 Sep;134(18):3297-305.

FoxF is essential for FGF-induced migration of heart progenitor cells in the
ascidian Ciona intestinalis.

Beh J(1), Shi W, Levine M, Davidson B, Christiaen L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Heart development requires precise coordination of morphogenetic movements with
progressive cell fate specification and differentiation. In ascidian embryos,
FGF/MAPK-mediated activation of the transcription factor Ets1/2 is required for
heart tissue specification and cell migration. We found that FoxF is one of the
first genes to be activated in heart precursors in response to FGF signaling. We 
identified the FoxF minimal heart enhancer and used a cis-trans complementation
test to show that Ets1/2 can interact with the FoxF enhancer in vivo. Next, we
found that FoxF function is required downstream and in parallel to the
FGF/MAPK/Ets cascade for cell migration. In addition, we demonstrated that
targeted expression of a dominant-negative form of FoxF inhibits cell migration
but not heart differentiation, resulting in a striking phenotype: a beating heart
at an ectopic location within the body cavity of juveniles. Taken together, our
results indicate that FoxF is a direct target of FGF signaling and is
predominantly involved in the regulation of heart cell migration.

PMID: 17720694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. In Vivo. 2007 Jul-Aug;21(4):615-21.

Diabetes increases both N-ras and ets-1 expression during rat oral oncogenesis
resulting in enhanced cell proliferation and metastatic potential.

Vairaktaris E(1), Goutzanis L, Kalokerinos G, Yannopoulos A, Yapijakis C,
Vassiliou S, Spyridonidou S, Vylliotis A, Nkenke E, Lazaris AC, Tesseromatis C,
Patsouris E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University ofAthens Medical
School, Athens, Greece. lvairakt@med.uoa.gr

BACKGROUND: The expression of N-ras and ets-1 proteins was investigated in an
experimental model of chemically-induced carcinogenesis in normal and diabetic
(type I) Sprague-Dawley rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tissue sections ranging from normal mucosa to
moderately-differentiated oral squamous cell carcinoma were studied using
monoclonal antibodies against N-ras and ets-1 proteins.
RESULTS: In diabetic rats, N-ras expression increased with tumor advancement,
while in normal rats N-ras was not detected in initial stages of oral oncogenesis
and increased only in well-differentiated OSCC. The same pattern of elevated
ets-1 expression was observed both in diabetic and normal rats, but in cancerous 
stages this expression was higher in diabetic than in normal rats.
CONCLUSION: It seems that diabetes may contribute to increased cell proliferation
due to N-ras constitutive activation, as well as to enhanced invasion and
metastatic potential by increasing ets-1 levels.

PMID: 17708355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007 Nov 15;225(1):61-9. Epub 2007 Jul 14.

Gene expression profiling reveals underlying molecular mechanisms of the early
stages of tamoxifen-induced rat hepatocarcinogenesis.

Pogribny IP(1), Bagnyukova TV, Tryndyak VP, Muskhelishvili L, Rodriguez-Juarez R,
Kovalchuk O, Han T, Fuscoe JC, Ross SA, Beland FA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemical Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological
Research, Jefferson, AR 72079, USA. igor.pogribny@fda.hhs.gov

Tamoxifen is a widely used anti-estrogenic drug for chemotherapy and, more
recently, for the chemoprevention of breast cancer. Despite the indisputable
benefits of tamoxifen in preventing the occurrence and re-occurrence of breast
cancer, the use of tamoxifen has been shown to induce non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis, which is a life-threatening fatty liver disease with a risk of
progression to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. In recent years, the
high-throughput microarray technology for large-scale analysis of gene expression
has become a powerful tool for increasing the understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of carcinogenesis and for identifying new biomarkers with diagnostic
and predictive values. In the present study, we used the high-throughput
microarray technology to determine the gene expression profiles in the liver
during early stages of tamoxifen-induced rat hepatocarcinogenesis. Female Fisher 
344 rats were fed a 420 ppm tamoxifen containing diet for 12 or 24 weeks, and
gene expression profiles were determined in liver of control and
tamoxifen-exposed rats. The results indicate that early stages of
tamoxifen-induced liver carcinogenesis are characterized by alterations in
several major cellular pathways, specifically those involved in the tamoxifen
metabolism, lipid metabolism, cell cycle signaling, and apoptosis/cell
proliferation control. One of the most prominent changes during early stages of
tamoxifen-induced hepatocarcinogenesis is dysregulation of signaling pathways in 
cell cycle progression from the G(1) to S phase, evidenced by the progressive and
sustained increase in expression of the Pdgfc, Calb3, Ets1, and Ccnd1 genes
accompanied by the elevated level of the PI3K, p-PI3K, Akt1/2, Akt3, and cyclin
B, D1, and D3 proteins. The early appearance of these alterations suggests their 
importance in the mechanism of neoplastic cell transformation induced by
tamoxifen.

PMID: 17706260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2007 May;36(5):331-2.

[The expression of vascular endothelial growth factor C, ETS-1, microvessal
density, and microlymphaticdensity and their clinicopathologic in colorectal
carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

He C(1), Chen J, Zhong Y, Zhang WY.

Author information: 
(1)hechang_66@163.com

PMID: 17706142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Cancer Res. 2007 Aug;5(8):833-45.

c-Src/histone deacetylase 3 interaction is crucial for hepatocyte growth factor
dependent decrease of CXCR4 expression in highly invasive breast tumor cells.

Matteucci E(1), Ridolfi E, Maroni P, Bendinelli P, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Milan, via
Luigi Mangiagalli, 31-20133 Milan, Italy.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), a cytokine of tumor microenvironment, exerts
opposite effects on CXCR4 expression in MCF-7 (low invasive) and MDA-MB231
(highly invasive) breast carcinoma cells, and here, we show that completely
different molecular mechanisms downstream of c-Src activation were involved. As
experimental models, we used cells transfected with two CXCR4 promoter constructs
and treated with HGF or cotransfected with c-Src wild-type (Srcwt) expression
vector; phospho-c-Src formation was enhanced in both cell lines. In MCF-7 cells, 
consistent with activations of CXCR4Luc constructs after HGF treatment and Srcwt 
expression, Ets1 and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) transcription factors were
activated. In contrast, in MDA-MB231 cells, CXCR4Luc construct, Ets1 and
NF-kappaB activities decreased. The divergence point seemed to be downstream of
HGF/c-Src and consisted in the interaction between c-Src and the substrate
histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3). Only in MDA-MB231 cells, HDAC3 level was enhanced 
in membranes and nuclei 30 min after HGF and colocalized/coimmunoprecipitated
with phospho-c-Src and phosphotyrosine. Thus, the CXCR4 induction by HGF in MCF-7
cells required NF-kappaB and Ets1 activations, downstream of
phosphoinositide-3-kinase/Akt, whereas in HGF-treated MDA-MB231 cells, HDAC3
activation via c-Src probably caused a reduction of transcription factor
activities, such as that of NF-kappaB. These results indicate possible roles of
HGF in invasive growth of breast carcinomas. By enhancing CXCR4 in low invasive
tumor cells, HGF probably favors their homing to secondary sites, whereas by
suppressing CXCR4 in highly invasive cells, HGF might participate to retain them 
in the metastatic sites.

PMID: 17699109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 21;282(38):27702-12. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

Sequential action of Ets-1 and Sp1 in the activation of the human
beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase V gene involved in abnormal glycosylation
characteristic of cancer cells.

Sato T(1), Furukawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Glycobiology, Department of Bioengineering, Nagaoka University
of Technology, Kamitomioka 1603-1, Nagaoka 940-2188, Japan.
taksato@vos.nagaokaut.ac.jp

Malignant transformation is associated with increased gene expression of
beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase (beta-1,4-GalT) V, which contributes to the
biosynthesis of highly branched N-linked oligosaccharides characteristic of
cancer cells. Our previous study showed that expression of the human
beta-1,4-GalT V gene is regulated by Sp1 (Sato, T., and Furukawa, K. (2004) J.
Biol. Chem. 279, 39574-39583), and a subsequent study showed that the gene
expression is also activated by Ets-1, a product of the oncogene (Sato, T., and
Furukawa, K. (2005) Glycoconj. J. 22, 365). Herein we report the mechanism of
beta-1,4-GalT V gene activation by these transcription factors. The gene
expression and promoter activity of beta-1,4-GalT V increased when the ets-1 cDNA
was transfected into A549 cells, which contain a small amount of Ets-1, but
decreased dramatically when the dominant-negative ets-1 cDNA was transfected into
HepG2 cells, which contain a large amount of Ets-1. Luciferase assays using
deletion constructs of the beta-1,4-GalT V gene promoter showed that promoter
region -116 to +22 is critical for the transcriptional activation of the gene by 
Ets-1. Despite the presence of one Ets-1-binding site, which overlapped the
Sp1-binding site, electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that the region
bound preferentially to Sp1 rather than to Ets-1. To solve this problem, we
examined the transcriptional regulation of the human Sp1 gene by Ets-1 and found 
that the gene expression and promoter activity of Sp1 are regulated by Ets-1 in
cancer cells. Functional analyses of two Ets-1-binding sites in the Sp1 gene
promoter showed that only Ets-1-binding site -413 to -404 is involved in the
activation of the gene by Ets-1. These results indicate that Ets-1 enhances
expression of the beta-1,4-GalT V gene through activation of the Sp1 gene in
cancer cells.

PMID: 17656364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genes Dev. 2007 Aug 1;21(15):1882-94. Epub 2007 Jul 24.

Genome-wide analyses reveal properties of redundant and specific promoter
occupancy within the ETS gene family.

Hollenhorst PC(1), Shah AA, Hopkins C, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The conservation of in vitro DNA-binding properties within families of
transcription factors presents a challenge for achieving in vivo specificity. To 
uncover the mechanisms regulating specificity within the ETS gene family, we have
used chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with genome-wide promoter microarrays 
to query the occupancy of three ETS proteins in a human T-cell line.
Unexpectedly, redundant occupancy was frequently detected, while specific
occupancy was less likely. Redundant binding correlated with housekeeping classes
of genes, whereas specific binding examples represented more specialized genes.
Bioinformatics approaches demonstrated that redundant binding correlated with
consensus ETS-binding sequences near transcription start sites. In contrast,
specific binding sites diverged dramatically from the consensus and were found
further from transcription start sites. One route to specificity was found--a
highly divergent binding site that facilitates ETS1 and RUNX1 cooperative DNA
binding. The specific and redundant DNA-binding modes suggest two distinct roles 
for members of the ETS transcription factor family.

PMCID: PMC1935027
PMID: 17652178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Ophthalmic Res. 2007;39(4):224-31. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Coordinated expression of Ets-1, pERK1/2, and VEGF in retina of
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

Du ZJ(1), Kamei M, Suzuki M, Tano Y, Wang BR, Hui YN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China. tomdzj@163.com

PURPOSE: To investigate the role played by E26 transformation-specific-1 (Ets-1),
a transcription factor, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) in
the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and the interaction 
of Ets-1 and ERK1/2 in the retina of diabetic rats.
METHODS: Diabetes was induced in rats by an intraperitoneal injection of
streptozotocin (STZ). To follow the time course in the expression of Ets-1,
phosphorylated ERK1/2 (pERK1/2), and VEGF, rats were killed at 1, 2, 4, and 8
weeks after the injection of STZ, and total proteins were extracted from the
isolated retinas. An adenovirus vector encoding dominant-negative Ets-1 and an
inhibitor of PD98059 was injected intravitreally to investigate the effects of
Ets-1 blockade and ERK1/2 inhibition on the expression of VEGF. Four weeks after 
the first intravitreal injection, total proteins and total RNA were extracted
from the retinas for Western blot and Northern blot analyses.
RESULTS: The expression of Ets-1, pERK1/2, and VEGF in the retina increased in a 
time-dependent manner after STZ injection. The phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and
protein level of VEGF were significantly reduced following intravitreal Ets-1.
Inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphorylation resulted in a significant reduction in the
expression of Ets-1 and the level of VEGF protein.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that in the retina of STZ-induced diabetic
rats: (1) the alterations of Ets-1, pERK1/2, and VEGF are approximately
synchronized; (2) the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 is regulated by the expression of
Ets-1; (3) the production of Ets-1 protein is dependent on the ERK1/2 pathway,
and (4) the protein level of VEGF is regulated by both Ets-1 expression and
ERK1/2 phosphorylation. We propose that VEGF, Ets-1, and ERK1 act synergistically
in the development of diabetic retinopathy.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17622743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Sep;18(9):3533-44. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

Differential regulation of epithelial and mesenchymal markers by deltaEF1
proteins in epithelial mesenchymal transition induced by TGF-beta.

Shirakihara T(1), Saitoh M, Miyazono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a crucial event in cancer progression
and embryonic development, is induced by transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta in
mouse mammary NMuMG epithelial cells. Id proteins have previously been reported
to inhibit major features of TGF-beta-induced EMT. In this study, we show that
expression of the deltaEF1 family proteins, deltaEF1 (ZEB1) and SIP1, is
gradually increased by TGF-beta with expression profiles reciprocal to that of
E-cadherin. SIP1 and deltaEF1 each dramatically down-regulated the transcription 
of E-cadherin in NMuMG cells through direct binding to the E-cadherin promoter.
Silencing of the expression of both SIP1 and deltaEF1, but not either alone,
completely abolished TGF-beta-induced E-cadherin repression. However, expression 
of mesenchymal markers, including fibronectin, N-cadherin, and vimentin, was not 
affected by knockdown of SIP1 and deltaEF1. TGF-beta-induced the expression of
Ets1, which in turn activated deltaEF1 promoter activity. Moreover, up-regulation
of SIP1 and deltaEF1 expression by TGF-beta was suppressed by knockdown of Ets1
expression. In addition, Id2 suppressed the TGF-beta- and Ets1-induced
up-regulation of deltaEF1. Taken together, these findings suggest that the
deltaEF1 family proteins, SIP1 and deltaEF1, are necessary, but not sufficient,
for TGF-beta-induced EMT and that Ets1 induced by TGF-beta may function as an
upstream transcriptional regulator of SIP1 and deltaEF1.

PMCID: PMC1951739
PMID: 17615296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Oncol Rep. 2007 Aug;18(2):457-63.

Characterization of an intramolecular protein-protein interaction in c-Ets1 and
its viral homologue v-Ets.

Schmidt M(1), Schmidt AM, Dietl J, Kammerer U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University of Würzburg, 97080
Würzburg, Germany. melanie_weigand@hotmail.de

The proto-oncoprotein c-Ets1 is a well-known transcription factor that belongs to
the Ets family and plays a role in haematopoietic differentiation, angiogenesis, 
and carcinogenesis. Ets family members share a unique DNA binding domain, the Ets
domain, and are known to control DNA binding activity and transcriptional
activation by autoinhibition. In c-Ets1 the DNA binding domain as well as
N-terminal and C-terminal inhibitory domains are involved in autoinhibitory
regulation. It has been proposed that intramolecular interactions are part of the
autoinhibitory mechanism. We applied a GST pull-down assay as well as a
two-hybrid system in yeast to show an interaction between the DNA binding domain 
of c-Ets1 and a domain N-terminal thereof. We have mapped the interaction sites
within both of the c-Ets1 domains. Comparison of the analogous intramolecular
interaction in c-Ets1 and in v-Ets revealed that the interaction we detected is
stronger in v-Ets than in c-Ets1. In view of previous findings from DNA binding
studies, and kinetic experiments as well as structural data, our results suggest 
a new model as to how intramolecular interactions might participate in the
regulation of DNA binding. Binding of c-Ets1 to DNA temporarily changes the
intramolecular pattern of interaction in c-Ets1, leading to an increase in
affinity of c-Ets1 to DNA. In full-length c-Ets1 the intramolecular interactions 
re-form spontaneously and the protein-DNA complex dissociates. The interaction we
characterize herein might increase the DNA binding affinity temporarily in
DNA-bound c-Ets1. In v-Ets in which the C-terminal domain is mutated this
interaction appears to lead to strong DNA binding affinity. Therefore, changes in
v-Ets might contribute to the tumorigenic process by altering intramolecular
interactions.

PMID: 17611671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Neuroimmunol. 2007 Aug;188(1-2):86-94. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Ets-1 represents a pivotal transcription factor for viral clearance,
inflammation, and demyelination in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis.

Gerhauser I(1), Alldinger S, Baumgärtner W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.

Demyelination of Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis (TME) depends on viral
persistence and on the mouse genotype. Ets-1 expression, a transcription factor
involved in T cell activation and cytokine expression, was investigated in the
spinal cord during TME using RT-qPCR and immunohistochemistry. Resistant C57BL/6 
mice lacking virus persistence and demyelination demonstrated a stronger
upregulation of Ets-1 mRNA transcripts in the early phase of TME compared to
susceptible SJL/J mice probably linked to viral clearance. Though strong Ets-1
expression in resident glial cells such as astrocytes might inhibit lesion
development, delayed Ets-1 activation in inflammatory cells seemed to promote
demyelination in the late phase of TME in SJL/J mice.

PMID: 17599467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Gynecol Oncol. 2007 Sep;106(3):541-8. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Curcumin down-regulates Ets-1 and Bcl-2 expression in human endometrial carcinoma
HEC-1-A cells.

Yu Z(1), Shah DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
7E-Meriter Hospital, 202 South Park Street, Madison, WI 53715, USA. zyu1@wisc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Curcumin has been demonstrated to have an anti-tumor activity but the 
underlying molecular mechanisms are not fully uncovered. The present study was
undertaken to determine the effect of curcumin on the expression of the
proto-oncogene Ets-1 and the anti-apoptotic molecule Bcl-2 in human endometrial
adenocarcinoma HEC-1-A cells.
METHODS: Confluent HEC-1-A cells were treated with curcumin at various doses for 
16 h or at 60 microM for various time points. At the end of the designated
treatments, changes in cell morphology, DNA fragmentation and protein contents of
Ets-1 and Bcl-2 were determined, respectively, by light microscopy, DNA laddering
assay and Western blot analysis. As an initial step towards understanding whether
Ets-1 was a possible up-stream regulator of Bcl-2 expression in HEC-1-A cells and
if so, whether curcumin could attenuate the Ets-1-induced up-regulation of Bcl-2 
expression, cells were transiently transfected with an Ets-1/GFP (Green
Fluorescence Protein) fusion construct and the transfectants were treated with 60
microM curcumin for 16 h, followed by whole cell lysate preparation for Western
blot analysis of Bcl-2 protein contents.
RESULTS: Curcumin induced apoptosis-like morphological changes and DNA
degradation and decreased basal levels of Ets-1 and Bcl-2 protein contents in
HEC-1-A cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Overexpression of Ets-1 in
the cell resulted in an increase in Bcl-2 protein contents and that increase was 
attenuated by curcumin treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Curcumin down-regulates Ets-1 and Bcl-2 expression and induces
apoptosis in HEC-1-A cells, suggesting a novel molecular mechanism for the
anti-tumor activity of curcumin.

PMID: 17590421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Aug;1770(8):1085-97. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Array-based functional screening for genes that regulate vascular endothelial
differentiation of Flk1-positive progenitors derived from embryonic stem cells.

Yamauchi F(1), Okada M, Kato K, Jakt LM, Iwata H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho,
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Functional genomics is a central topic of current biological research, where a
reverse genetic approach is one of the most promising strategies to discover
functions of novel genes. Such an approach requires high-throughput methodologies
to assess biological functions for a huge number of genes. We have developed a
transfection array that permits parallel introduction of multiple plasmids
separately into living cells. The feasibility of this array was examined in an
assay system. Eleven genes were over-expressed alone, or in combination in
vascular progenitors derived from embryonic stem cells. Endothelial
differentiation of the cells was monitored through a stably transformed EGFP
reporter construct that is expressed only in endothelial cells. Transcriptional
activators that promote endothelial differentiation, such as Ets1 and Sox7, were 
identified. In addition, the assays also revealed an inhibitory effect on
endothelial differentiation by several of the factors. These results demonstrate 
the feasibility of the transfection array for use in cell-based, high-throughput 
functional assays.

PMID: 17532144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Biol Rep. 2007 Sep;34(3):199-206. Epub 2007 May 16.

Several transcription factors regulate COX-2 gene expression in pancreatic
beta-cells.

Zhang X(1), Zhang J, Yang X, Han X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing, PR
China.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression is associated with many aspects of
physiological and pathological conditions, including pancreatic beta-cell
dysfunction. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production, as a consequence of COX-2 gene
induction, has been reported to impair beta-cell function. The molecular
mechanisms involved in the regulation of COX-2 gene expression are not fully
understood. In this report, we used pancreatic beta-cells (RINm5F) to explore the
potential transcription factors regulating COX-2 promoter activity. Using
promoter screening method, we selected several transcription factors in our
study. Through luciferase reporter studies, we found that these factors can
regulate COX-2 promoter activity in RINm5F cells. Among these factors, cyclic AMP
response-element binding protein (CREB), Ets family members Ets-1 and Elk-1 can
positively regulate COX-2 promoter activity. On the contrary, signal transducer
and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) plays a negative role on COX-2 promoter.
Our findings will be helpful for better understanding the transcriptional
regulation of COX-2 in pancreatic beta-cells. Moreover, these transcriptional
regulators of COX-2 expression will be potential targets for the prevention of
beta-cell damage mediated by PGE2.

PMID: 17505916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Neoplasia. 2007 Mar;9(3):184-91.

Ets1 transcription factor mediates gastrin-releasing peptide-induced IL-8
regulation in neuroblastoma cells.

Qiao J(1), Kang JH, Cree J, Evers BM, Chung DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX
77555-0353, USA.

Angiogenesis plays a critical role in tumor progression in various cancers,
including neuroblastoma. We have previously shown that gastrin-releasing peptide 
(GRP) stimulates neuroblastoma growth and that its cell surface receptors,
gastrin-releasing peptide receptors (GRP-R), are overexpressed in advanced-stage 
human neuroblastomas; however, the effects of GRP on angiogenesis are not clearly
elucidated. Interleukin (IL) 8, a proinflammatory chemokine, plays an important
role during tumor angiogenesis. Ets transcription factors, such as oncoproteins, 
cause tumor development and are also known to induce IL-8 expression. In the
present study, we found an increased expression of Ets1 in more undifferentiated 
human neuroblastomas. Stable transfection of SK-N-SH human neuroblastoma cells
with Ets1 plasmid resulted in increased IL-8 luciferase activity and IL-8
secretion into cell culture media. Conversely, silencing of Ets1 resulted in a
significant decrease in IL-8 secretion in SK-N-SH cells. Moreover, exogenous GRP 
treatment increased Ets1 (T38) phosphorylation and Ets1 nuclear accumulation, and
enhanced Ets1 binding to its DNA consensus sequence, resulting in the stimulation
of IL-8 mRNA expression and protein secretion. Our findings demonstrate that GRP 
upregulates proangiogenic IL-8 expression in an Ets1-dependent manner, suggesting
a critical role of this process during GRP-induced neuroblastoma angiogenesis and
metastasis.

PMCID: PMC1838576
PMID: 17401458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS Pathog. 2007 Mar;3(3):e44.

Systematic identification of cellular signals reactivating Kaposi
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

Yu F(1), Harada JN, Brown HJ, Deng H, Song MJ, Wu TT, Kato-Stankiewicz J, Nelson 
CG, Vieira J, Tamanoi F, Chanda SK, Sun R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

The herpesvirus life cycle has two distinct phases: latency and lytic
replication. The balance between these two phases is critical for viral
pathogenesis. It is believed that cellular signals regulate the switch from
latency to lytic replication. To systematically evaluate the cellular signals
regulating this reactivation process in Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus,
the effects of 26,000 full-length cDNA expression constructs on viral
reactivation were individually assessed in primary effusion lymphoma-derived
cells that harbor the latent virus. A group of diverse cellular signaling
proteins were identified and validated in their effect of inducing viral lytic
gene expression from the latent viral genome. The results suggest that multiple
cellular signaling pathways can reactivate the virus in a genetically homogeneous
cell population. Further analysis revealed that the Raf/MEK/ERK/Ets-1 pathway
mediates Ras-induced reactivation. The same pathway also mediates spontaneous
reactivation, which sets the first example to our knowledge of a specific
cellular pathway being studied in the spontaneous reactivation process. Our study
provides a functional genomic approach to systematically identify the cellular
signals regulating the herpesvirus life cycle, thus facilitating better
understanding of a fundamental issue in virology and identifying novel
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC1839163
PMID: 17397260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Immunology. 2007 Jul;121(3):337-48. Epub 2007 Mar 22.

A role for mitogen-activated protein kinase and Ets-1 in the induction of
interleukin-10 transcription by human immunodeficiency virus-1 Tat.

Li JC(1), Lau AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine and Bio-Screening Unit, Li
Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, Teh University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Tat protein has multiple regulatory roles,
including trans-activation of the HIV genome and regulation of immune signalling 
processes, including kinase activation and cytokine expression. We recently
demonstrated that HIV-1 Tat induces the expression of interleukin (IL)-10 via p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation. We further delineated that
the Tat-responsive element of the IL-10 promoter was located within 625 to 595 bp
upstream from the transcription start site. Using electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays, the transcription factors Ets-1 and Sp-1 were shown to bind to the IL-10 
promoter to activate transcription of the gene. Furthermore, sequential
deletional mutations of the Ets-1- and Sp-1-binding sites in the -625/-595 region
reduced the DNA binding and transcription activity of the IL-10 promoter. Our
results also showed that both the Tat-induced and Ets-1-regulated IL-10
promoter-driven luciferase activity can be abrogated by inhibitors of the p38
MAPK activity. In conclusion, the coordinated activities of p38 MAPK and the
transcription factors, Ets-1 and Sp-1, may play an important role in the HIV-1
Tat-induced IL-10 transcription.

PMCID: PMC2265950
PMID: 17376198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Pathol. 2007 May;212(1):102-11.

Transcriptional upregulation and unmethylation of the promoter region of p16 in
invasive basal cell carcinoma cells and partial co-localization with the gamma 2 
chain of laminin-332.

Svensson Månsson S(1), Reis-Filho J, Landberg G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University,
UMAS, SE-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

Basal cell carcinoma cells show low proliferation rates at the invasive front and
a concordant upregulation of the cdk-inhibitor p16, limiting proliferative
capacity. Little is known about the mechanisms of p16 regulation in normal and
malignant cells apart from that many transcription factors such as Ets1, Ets2,
SP1, SP3, JunB and the polycomb protein Bmi1 have the potential to induce or
repress p16 expression. Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine how p16
is regulated in basal cell carcinoma with special focus on its upregulation in
invasive cells. By analysing various microdissected areas of basal cell carcinoma
using real-time quantitative PCR we observed upregulation of p16 mRNA in invasive
tumour cells compared to centrally localized tumour cells. The methylation status
of the p16 promoter, analysed by methylation-specific PCR, also showed diminished
methylation in tumour cells at the invasive front, supporting the hypothesis that
promoter methylation can affect the transcriptional activation of p16 in vivo.
There was only sporadic co-localization of Ets, or ERK1/2 phosphorylation with
p16 upregulation at the invasive front, suggesting that these factors were not
directly involved in the regulation of p16. Furthermore, the gamma 2 chain of
laminin-332 has been reported to be increased at the invasive front compared to
the central areas of many tumours. Interestingly, in basal cell carcinoma we
observed partial co-localization between p16 and the gamma 2 chain of laminin-332
in tumour cells towards areas of ulceration and in the majority of clearly
infiltrative tumour cells but not in p16 positive tumour cells with a more
pushing invasive growth pattern. These data suggest that concurrent p16
upregulation and decreased proliferation are more general phenomena in different 
types of invasive growth patterns in basal cell carcinomas and that these only
partially overlap with the gamma 2 chain of laminin-332 associated invasion
patterns.

Copyright (c) 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17370299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 18;282(20):15090-102. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

Transcriptional signature of epidermal keratinocytes subjected to in vitro
scratch wounding reveals selective roles for ERK1/2, p38, and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling pathways.

Fitsialos G(1), Chassot AA, Turchi L, Dayem MA, LeBrigand K, Moreilhon C,
Meneguzzi G, Buscà R, Mari B, Barbry P, Ponzio G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U634, 28 Avenue de Valombrose, F-06107 Nice cedex 2, France.

Covering denuded dermal surfaces after injury requires migration, proliferation, 
and differentiation of skin keratinocytes. To clarify the major traits
controlling these intermingled biological events, we surveyed the genomic
modifications occurring during the course of a scratch wound closure of cultured 
human keratinocytes. Using a DNA microarray approach, we report the
identification of 161 new markers of epidermal repair. Expression data, combined 
with functional analysis performed with specific inhibitors of ERK, p38(MAPK) and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), demonstrate that kinase pathways exert very
selective functions by precisely controlling the expression of specific genes.
Inhibition of the ERK pathway totally blocks the wound closure and inactivates
many early transcription factors and EGF-type growth factors. p38(MAPK)
inhibition only delays "healing," probably in line with the control of genes
involved in the propagation of injury-initiated signaling. In contrast, PI3K
inhibition accelerates the scratch closure and potentiates the scratch-dependent 
stimulation of three genes related to epithelial cell transformation, namely
HAS3, HBEGF, and ETS1. Our results define in vitro human keratinocyte wound
closure as a repair process resulting from a fine balance between positive
signals controlled by ERK and p38(MAPK) and negative ones triggered by PI3K. The 
perturbation of any of these pathways might lead to dysfunction in the healing
process, similar to those observed in pathological wounding phenotypes, such as
hypertrophic scars or keloids.

PMID: 17363378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(9):3353-66. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

Thymomegaly, microsplenia, and defective homeostatic proliferation of peripheral 
lymphocytes in p51-Ets1 isoform-specific null mice.

Higuchi T(1), Bartel FO, Masuya M, Deguchi T, Henderson KW, Li R,
Muise-Helmericks RC, Kern MJ, Watson DK, Spyropoulos DD.

Author information: 
(1)Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC
29425, USA.

Ets1 is a member of the Ets transcription factor family. Alternative splicing of 
exon VII results in two naturally occurring protein isoforms: full-length Ets1
(p51-Ets1) and Ets1(DeltaVII) (p42-Ets1). These isoforms bear key distinctions
regarding protein-protein interactions, DNA binding kinetics, and transcriptional
target specificity. Disruption of both Ets1 isoforms in mice results in the loss 
of detectable NK and NKT cell activity and defects in B and T lymphocytes. We
generated mice that express only the Ets1(DeltaVII) isoform. Ets1(DeltaVII)
homozygous mice express no p51-Ets1 and elevated levels of the p42-Ets1 protein
relative to the wild type and display increased perinatal lethality, thymomegaly,
and peripheral lymphopenia. Proliferation was increased in both the thymus and
the spleen, while apoptosis was decreased in the thymus and increased in the
spleen of homozygotes. Significant elevations of CD8(+) and CD8(+)CD4(+)
thymocytes were observed. Lymphoid cell (CD19(+), CD4(+), and CD8(+)) reductions 
were predominantly responsible for diminished spleen cellularity, with fewer
memory cells and a failure of homeostatic proliferation to maintain peripheral
lymphocytes. Collectively, the Ets1(DeltaVII) mutants demonstrate lymphocyte
maturation defects associated with misregulation of p16(Ink4a), p27(Kip1), and
CD44. Thus, a balance in the differential regulation of Ets1 isoforms represents 
a potential mechanism in the control of lymphoid maturation and homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC1899970
PMID: 17339335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Mar 30;268(1-2):75-84. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

PTHrP P3 promoter activity in breast cancer cell lines: role of Ets1 and CBP
(CREB binding protein).

Hamzaoui H(1), Rizk-Rabin M, Gordon J, Offutt C, Bertherat J, Bouizar Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS, (UMR 8104), France.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is produced by many tumors including 
breast cancer. We have reported that Ets1 factor activates P3 PTHrP promoter in
our model of tumorigenic breast cancer cell and not in pre- or non-tumorigenic
cell lines, thus contributing to an increased PTHrP production. In this study,
gel retardation assays revealed that Etsl and its promoter binding site (EBS)
specifically formed complexes whose abundance correlates with Ets1 levels in the 
three cell lines. Coexpression of Etsl and CBP induced a synergistic activation
of the P3 promoter only in the tumorigenic cell line. This synergism required the
integrity of the EBS and was abrogated by E1A. All breast cancer cell lines
showed high basal concentrations of phosphorylated CREB. Moreover a CRE-like
sequence was also required for Ets1/CBP synergy and, finally, CREB expression was
found to enhance the PTHrP P3 promoter activity. Thus a multipartite complex of
transcription factors and coactivators seems to regulate PTHrP transcription and 
contribute to the alterations that promote tumorigenic behavior in breast
epithelial cells.

PMID: 17321669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(8):3980-91. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus promotes angiogenesis by inducing
angiopoietin-2 expression via AP-1 and Ets1.

Ye FC(1), Blackbourn DJ, Mengel M, Xie JP, Qian LW, Greene W, Yeh IT, Graham D,
Gao SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Virology Program, Children's Cancer Research Institute, The University
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

Infection by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is required for the
development of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), a highly inflammatory angiogenic tumor of
endothelial cells commonly found in untreated AIDS patients. Angiopoietin 2
(Ang-2) modulates the vasculature during inflammation and angiogenesis, but the
mechanism by which KSHV regulates Ang-2 expression has not been investigated.
Here, we show that KSHV infection of primary human umbilical vein endothelial
cells induced the expression and release of Ang-2, which in turn was required for
KSHV-induced paracrine-dependent angiogenesis in vivo. Ang-2 was strongly
expressed in small vessels and spindle tumor cells in KS tumors. Mechanistically,
KSHV activated the Ang-2 promoter via AP-1 and Ets1 transcriptional factors,
which were mediated by ERK, JNK, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
pathways. Our findings demonstrate the importance of Ang-2 in KS angiogenesis and
define a novel role for AP-1 and MAPK pathways in regulating angiogenesis. This
study also illustrates a distinct mechanism by which a tumor virus modulates
vasculature to promote tumorigenesis and exemplifies the convergence of
oncogenesis and angiogenesis pathways in tumor development.

PMCID: PMC1866109
PMID: 17287278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Nov;41(11):813-7.

[Relationship between the expressions of KaI1, nm23, ETS-1, VEGF and
microvascular density and clinical significance in nasopharyngeal carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

He SQ(1), Zhang WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Guiyang Medical College, Guiyang 550004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between the expressions of KAI1, nm23,
ETS-1, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and microvascular density (MVD) 
and lymph node metastasis and prognosis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
METHODS: The Envision immunohistochemical method was used to detect the
expressions of KAI1, nm23, ETS-1 and VEGF in 50 cases of non-keratinizing
carcinoma (NKC) with cervical lymph node metastasis, 30 cases of NKC without
cervical lymph node metastasis at the primary diagnoses and 30 cases of non-tumor
nasopharyngeal tissues (NP). The microvascular density was counted by
immunostaining with CD34.
RESULTS: (1) The expression rates of KAI1 and nm23 protein in NKC with cervical
lymph node metastasis group and without cervical lymph node metastasis group and 
NP group increased successively , the difference being significant (P < 0.05);
The expression rates of ETS-1 and VEGF protein in NKC with cervical lymph node
metastasis group and without cervical lymph node metastasis group and NP group
increased successively, the difference being significant (P < 0.05). (2) In 80
NKC cases, the MVD was respectively lower in KAI1 and nm23 protein positive
groups than those in the negative groups (P < 0.05); the MVD was respectively
higher in ETS-1 and VEGF protein positive groups than those in the negative
groups (P < 0.05 ). (3) There was significant difference between the MVD, the
number of NKC without cervical lymph node metastasis cases in the single
expression of KAI1 or nm23 protein and in common expression of KAI1 and nm23
protein (P < 0.05), in the same as between the single expression of ETS-1 or VEGF
protein and in common expressions of ETS-1 and VEGF protein (P < 0.05). (4) There
was positive correlation between the expressions of KAI1 and nm23 protein (P <
0.01), as well as between the expressions of ETS-1 and VEGF protein (P < 0.01).
(5) the 5-year survival rates of the patients correlated with cervical lymph node
metastasis and the expressions of KAI1, nm23, ETS-1 and VEGF proteins in NKC (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The expressions of KAI1, nm23, ETS-1 and VEGF proteins were highly
related to MVD in NPC,cervical lymph node metastasis and prognosis. They might be
considered to be reference indicator for evaluating the cervical lymph node
metastasis and prognosis of NPC.

PMID: 17283532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 30;282(13):9492-504. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Transcriptional repression of matrix metalloproteinase gene expression by the
orphan nuclear receptor NURR1 in cartilage.

Mix KS(1), Attur MG, Al-Mussawir H, Abramson SB, Brinckerhoff CE, Murphy EP.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Veterinary Sciences Centre, University College
Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. kimberlee.mix@ucd.ie

The NR4A orphan receptors (Nur77, NURR1, and NOR-1) are emerging as key
regulators of cytokine and growth factor action in chronic inflammatory diseases.
In this study, we address the role of these receptors in cartilage homeostasis
during inflammatory joint disease. We document for the first time expression of
the NR4A receptors in osteoarthritic cartilage. Relative to Nur77 and NOR-1,
NURR1 is expressed at the highest level and correlates with cyclooxygenase-2
levels in cartilage. Consistent with this observation, cyclooxygenase-2-derived
prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) rapidly and potently induces NURR1 expression in
chondrocytes, suggesting that this receptor may regulate PGE(2)-mediated
processes in cartilage. We demonstrate that PGE(2) represses
interleukin-1beta-induced matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 and that transient
overexpression of NURR1 is sufficient to antagonize expression of this gene.
Furthermore, MMP-1 promoter activity is potently suppressed by NURR1, resulting
in a significant reduction in endogenous MMP-1 mRNA and secreted pro-MMP-1
protein. In addition, NURR1 selectively antagonizes cytokine-induced MMP-3 and -9
expression with minimal effects on MMP-2 and -13 and tissue inhibitor of matrix
metalloproteinases-1 and -2. To explore the molecular mechanisms of NURR1
transrepression, we reveal that this receptor targets a critical region of the
MMP-1 promoter (-1772 to -1546 bp) and that repression does not require consensus
binding sites for NURR1. We confirm that NURR1 targets a 40-bp promoter sequence 
that is also positively regulated by ETS transcription factors. Finally,
functional studies indicate that transcriptional antagonism exists between NURR1 
and ETS1 on the MMP-1 promoter. We propose a protective function for NURR1 in
cartilage homeostasis by selectively repressing MMP gene expression during
inflammation.

PMID: 17283078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Mol Biol. 2007 Mar 2;366(4):1064-73. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

Systematic RNAi studies on the role of Sp/KLF factors in globin gene expression
and erythroid differentiation.

Hu JH(1), Navas P, Cao H, Stamatoyannopoulos G, Song CZ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, 1705 NE Pacific Street, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Sp/KLF family of factors regulates gene expression by binding to the CACCC/GC/GT 
boxes in the DNA through their highly conserved three zinc finger domains. To
investigate the role of this family of factors in erythroid differentiation and
globin gene expression, we first measured the expression levels of selected
Sp/KLF factors in primary cells of fetal and adult stages of erythroid
development. This quantitative analysis revealed that their expression levels
vary significantly in cells of either stages of the erythroid development.
Significant difference in their expression levels was observed between fetal and 
adult erythroid cells for some Sp/KLF factors. Functional studies using RNA
interference revealed that the silencing of Sp1 and KLF8 resulted in elevated
level of gamma globin expression in K562 cells. In addition, K562 cells become
visibly red after Sp1 knockdown. Benzidine staining revealed significant
hemoglobinization of these cells, indicating erythroid differentiation. Moreover,
the expression of PU.1, ETS1 and Notch1 is significantly down-regulated in the
cells that underwent erythroid differentiation following Sp1 knockdown.
Overexpression of PU.1 or ETS1 efficiently blocked the erythroid differentiation 
caused by Sp1 knockdown in K562 cells. The expression of c-Kit, however, was
significantly up-regulated. These data indicate that Sp1 may play an important
role in erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1907364
PMID: 17224162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Periodontal Res. 2007 Feb;42(1):53-61.

Roxithromycin inhibits tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced matrix
metalloproteinase-1 expression through regulating mitogen-activated protein
kinase phosphorylation and Ets-1 expression.

Oyama T(1), Matsushita K, Sakuta T, Tokuda M, Tatsuyama S, Nagaoka S, Torii M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Dentistry and Endodontology, Kagoshima University
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan.
oyatohru@dentc.hal.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: In periodontitis, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are 
upregulated in response to locally released inflammatory cytokines, resulting in 
pathologic processes. Roxithromycin is a 14-membered ring macrolide antibiotic
with broad-spectrum antibacterial effects against oral pathogens and
immunomodulatory effects. Recently, we reported that roxithromycin inhibits tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-induced vascular endothelial growth factor expression
in human periodontal ligament (HPDL) cell cultures. In the present study, we
examined the effect of roxithromycin on TNF-alpha-induced MMP-1 production by
HPDL cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Cultured cells were incubated with 1% fetal bovine serum
for 24 h, followed by treatment with 10 ng/ml TNF-alpha, 10 microM roxithromycin,
and mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor at various concentrations. Culture
supernatants and sediments were collected at different time-points and used for
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, and northern and western blot analyses.
RESULTS: In HPDL cell cultures, roxithromycin strongly inhibited
TNF-alpha-induced MMP-1 mRNA expression and production. The inhibition of MMP-1
gene expression by roxithromycin was dependent on de novo protein synthesis and
was regulated at the transcriptional level. Roxithromycin significantly inhibited
TNF-alpha-induced c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation (JNP) and marginally
inhibited extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 activation, but not p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. Furthermore, roxithromycin reduced
the induction of Ets-1, one of the critical factors in MMP-1 transcription.
CONCLUSION: Roxithromycin inhibits TNF-alpha-mediated MMP-1 induction through the
downregulation of ERK1/2 and JNK activation and the subsequent reduction of
Ets-1, suggesting that roxithromycin may have therapeutic use in periodontitis
and other chronic inflammatory conditions involving MMP-1 induction.

PMID: 17214640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Oncogene. 2007 May 24;26(24):3541-50. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Cooperative interaction between ETS1 and GFI1 transcription factors in the
repression of Bax gene expression.

Nakazawa Y(1), Suzuki M, Manabe N, Yamada T, Kihara-Negishi F, Sakurai T, Tenen
DG, Iwama A, Mochizuki M, Oikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Genetics, Sasaki Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

The proto-oncoproteins ETS1 and growth factor independent-1 (GFI1) are implicated
in cell growth and differentiation in various types of cells, and their
deregulated expression is involved in malignant transformation. Here, we report
that ETS1 and GFI1 interact and affect gene expression through their cross-talk. 
Co-immunoprecipitation analyses and glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays
revealed that ETS1 bound directly to GFI1 via its Ets domain, and GFI1 bound to
ETS1 via its zinc-finger domain. Luciferase (Luc) assays using artificial
reporters showed that GFI1 repressed ETS1-mediated transcriptional activation and
ETS1 repressed GFI1-mediated transcriptional activation, in a dose-dependent
manner. However, in the Bax promoter where the Ets- and Gfi-binding sites (EBS
and GBS) are adjacent, ETS1 and GFI1 cooperatively reduced activation.
Site-directed mutagenesis on the EBS and GBS of the Bax promoter showed that both
binding sites were necessary for full repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analyses confirmed that an ETS1-GFI1 complex formed on the Bax promoter even when
either EBS or GBS was mutated. Introduction of small interfering RNA against ETS1
and/or GFI1 enhanced endogenous Bax gene expression. Our results suggest that the
interaction between ETS1 and GFI1 facilitates their binding to specific sites on 
the Bax promoter and represses Bax expression in vivo.

PMID: 17213822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Invest New Drugs. 2007 Jun;25(3):271-6. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

Evidence for the involvement of p38 MAP kinase in the action of the vascular
disrupting agent 5,6-dimethylxanthenone-4-acetic acid (DMXAA).

Zhao L(1), Marshall ES, Kelland LR, Baguley BC.

Author information: 
(1)Auckland Cancer Society Research Centre, Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

AIMS: DMXAA (AS1404), a small-molecule vascular disrupting agent that has now
completed Phase II clinical trial, induces endothelial cell apoptosis, increased 
vascular permeability and decreased tumour blood flow in vivo. Its action is
incompletely understood and we wished to develop an in vitro system to study its 
effects.
METHODS: Human tumour cell lines developed from aggressive tumours were grown on 
Matrigel to simulate a tumour microenvironment. Cells were analysed by light
microscopy and by gene expression profiling.
RESULTS: Several cell lines formed networks when grown on Matrigel and the NZM7
melanoma cell line was chosen for further study. Addition of DMXAA at a
clinically achievable concentration (30 microg/mL) prevented network formation,
but co-addition of SB203580 (10 microM), a selective inhibitor of p38 MAP kinase,
reversed the effect of DMXAA and restored network formation. Analysis of
expression genes for endothelial and related functions showed that cells growing 
on Matrigel expressed a pattern similar to that of NZM7 cells growing as
xenografts in vivo but different from that of cells grown on standard tissue
culture plates. Addition of DMXAA resulted in the inhibition of expression of
several genes including the transcriptional activator Ets1 and matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2), but co-addition of SB203580 did not reverse these
effects of DMXAA on gene expression.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that p38 MAP kinase plays an important role in
the action of DMXAA and that growth of tumour cells on Matrigel provides a
promising model for further studies on the action of this drug.

PMID: 17203401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 16;353(3):786-92. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

Carbamylated erythropoietin protects the kidneys from ischemia-reperfusion injury
without stimulating erythropoiesis.

Imamura R(1), Isaka Y, Ichimaru N, Takahara S, Okuyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita,
Japan.

Several studies have shown that erythropoietin (EPO) can protect the kidneys from
ischemia-reperfusion injury and can raise the hemoglobin (Hb) concentration.
Recently, the EPO molecule modified by carbamylation (CEPO) has been identified
and was demonstrated to be able to protect several organs without increasing the 
Hb concentration. We hypothesized that treatment with CEPO would protect the
kidneys from tubular apoptosis and inhibit subsequent tubulointerstitial injury
without erythropoiesis. The therapeutic effect of CEPO was evaluated using a rat 
ischemia-reperfusion injury model. Saline-treated kidneys exhibited increased
tubular apoptosis with interstitial expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin
(alpha-SMA), while EPO treatment inhibited tubular apoptosis and alpha-SMA
expression to some extent. On the other hand, CEPO-treated kidneys showed minimal
tubular apoptosis with limited expression of alpha-SMA. Moreover, CEPO
significantly promoted tubular epithelial cell proliferation without
erythropoiesis. In conclusion, we identified a new therapeutic approach using
CEPO to protect kidneys from ischemia-reperfusion injury.

PMID: 17196938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Virology. 2007 Apr 25;361(1):174-84. Epub 2006 Dec 18.

Exploring the contribution of distal P4 promoter elements to the oncoselectivity 
of Minute Virus of Mice.

Paglino J(1), Burnett E, Tattersall P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University Medical School, 333 Cedar
Street, New Haven, CT 067510, USA.

Minute Virus of Mice (MVM) shares inherent oncotropic properties with other
members of the genus Parvovirus. Two elements responsible, at least in part, for 
this oncoselectivity have been mapped to an Ets1 binding site adjacent to the P4 
TATA box of the initiating promoter, P4, and to a more distal cyclic AMP
responsive element (CRE), located within the telomeric hairpin stem. Here the CRE
overlaps one half-site for the binding of parvoviral initiation factor (PIF),
which is essential for viral DNA replication. We used a degenerate
oligonucleotide selection approach to show that CRE binding protein (CREB)
selects the sequence ACGTCAC within this context, rather than its more generally 
accepted palindromic TGACGTCA recognition site. We have developed strategies for 
manipulating these sequences directly within the left-end palindrome of the MVM
infectious clone and used them to clone mutants whose CRE either matches the
symmetric consensus sequence or is scrambled, or in which the PIF binding site is
incrementally weakened with respect to the CRE. The panel of mutants were tested 
for fitness relative to wildtype in normal murine fibroblasts A9 or transformed
human fibroblasts 324 K, through multiple rounds of growth in co-infected
cultures, using a differential real-time quantitative PCR assay. We confirmed
that inactivating the CRE substantially abrogates oncoselectivity, but found that
improving its fit to the palindromic consensus is somewhat debilitating in either
cell type. We also confirmed that reducing the PIF half-site spacing by one
basepair enhances oncoselectivity, but found that a further basepair deletion
significantly reduces this effect.

PMCID: PMC1853334
PMID: 17175002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mod Rheumatol. 2006;16(6):364-71. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Antifibrotic effects of hepatocyte growth factor on scleroderma fibroblasts and
analysis of its mechanism.

Sherriff-Tadano R(1), Ohta A, Morito F, Mitamura M, Haruta Y, Koarada S, Tada Y, 
Nagasawa K, Ozaki I.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science, Saga Medical School, Saga, Japan.

We investigated the effect of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) on collagen
metabolism in cultured fibroblasts from scleroderma (SSc) patients and discussed 
the possible mechanism of its effect. Synthesis of matrix metalloproteinase-1
(MMP-1) and collagen and mRNA levels of various cytokines were examined by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and real-time polymerase chain reaction,
respectively. Hepatocyte growth factor enhanced MMP-1 production and mRNA levels 
of MMP-1 and Ets-1 (a transcriptional factor of MMPs). In addition, HGF
suppressed collagen synthesis and mRNA levels of procollagenalpha1(I) and
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in SSc fibroblasts. Expression of
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 was not inhibited significantly in SSc or 
control fibroblasts. Hepatocyte growth factor also increased interferon
(IFN)-gamma mRNA significantly in SSc and control fibroblasts. Addition of
anti-HGF antibody neutralized these effects of HGF on MMP-1 and collagen
synthesis. The results suggest that HGF can suppress collagen accumulation in SSc
fibroblasts by increasing MMP-1 levels possibly via activation of Ets-1 and also 
by decreasing collagen synthesis, which may be partly related to inhibition of
CTGF, and increasing IFN-gamma levels rather than the effect on TGF-beta1. The
present study indicates that HGF may be a promising therapeutic agent for this
intractable disease.

PMID: 17164998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Front Biosci. 2007 Jan 1;12:2269-78.

Ets-1 participates in and facilitates developmental expression of hypoxia-induced
mitogenic factor in mouse lung.

Li B(1), Lager J, Wang D, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and
Sleep Medicine, Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Hypoxia-induced mitogenic factor (HIMF) possesses mitogenic, vasoconstrictive,
angiogenic, and antiapoptotic effects. While HIMF is known to be expressed in
developmental mouse lung, its gene expression regulation during this period is
completely unknown. Genomic sequencing of HIMF gene has shown that there is an
Ets-1 binding site in its 5'-promoter-region. To test the hypothesis that Ets-1
protein expressed in developing mouse lung may participate in the process of HIMF
gene expression regulation via direct involvement or facilitation, we
characterized the proximal promoter of HIMF gene (409-bp long fragment that
includes the -347-bp promoter region from transcription start site), and
investigated HIMF and Ets-1 expression with western blot and
immunohistochemistry, electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) for Ets-1, HIMF
promoter luciferase reporter gene assays, and chromatin-immunoprecipitation
(CHIP). Western blots revealed that both Ets-1 and HIMF proteins were
developmentally expressed in the lung. Immunohistochemical localization revealed 
Ets-1 signals in the nucleus of HIMF-expressing airway epithelial cells and
alveolar type II cells, whereas HIMF was localized in cytoplasm. Presence of
Ets-1 protein within E16, E20, and adult lung nuclear extract was demonstrated by
EMSA. Co-transfection of Ets-1 expression plasmid with HIMF promoter construct
increased luciferase activity in NIH3T3 cells, but mutation or deletion of Ets-1 
site eliminated HIMF promoter luciferase activity. CHIP with anti-Ets-1 antibody 
revealed Ets-1 binding to HIMF promoter region in E20 and P1 but not in E15 lung.
We conclude that Ets-1 participates in the process of HIMF gene expression and
Ets-1-mediated HIMF expression may play an important role in lung development and
maturation.

PMID: 17127463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Dev Biol. 2007 Mar 15;303(2):772-83. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Combinatorial function of ETS transcription factors in the developing
vasculature.

Pham VN(1), Lawson ND, Mugford JW, Dye L, Castranova D, Lo B, Weinstein BM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development/NIH, Building 6B, Room 309, 6 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Members of the ETS family of transcription factors are among the first genes
expressed in the developing vasculature, but loss-of-function experiments for
individual ETS factors in mice have not uncovered important early functional
roles for these genes. However, multiple ETS factors are expressed in spatially
and temporally overlapping patterns in the developing vasculature, suggesting
possible functional overlap. We have taken a comprehensive approach to exploring 
the function of these factors during vascular development by employing the
genetic and experimental tools available in the zebrafish to analyze four ETS
family members expressed together in the zebrafish vasculature; fli1, fli1b,
ets1, and etsrp. We isolated and characterized an ENU-induced mutant with defects
in trunk angiogenesis and positionally cloned the defective gene from this
mutant, etsrp. Using the etsrp morpholinos targeting each of the four genes, we
show that the four ETS factors function combinatorially during vascular and
hematopoietic development. Reduction of etsrp or any of the other genes alone
results in either partial or no defects in endothelial differentiation, while
combined reduction in the function of all four genes causes dramatic loss of
endothelial cells. Our results demonstrate that combinatorial ETS factor function
is essential for early endothelial specification and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1859867
PMID: 17125762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Arthritis Res Ther. 2006;8(6):R172.

The proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta and TNF-alpha induce the expression of
Synoviolin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, in mouse synovial fibroblasts via the
Erk1/2-ETS1 pathway.

Gao B(1), Calhoun K, Fang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Missouri
School of Medicine, One Hospital Drive, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.
GaoB@missouri.edu

The overgrowth of synovial tissues is critical in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). The expression of Synoviolin (SYN), an E3 ubiquitin ligase, is
upregulated in arthritic synovial fibroblasts and is involved in the overgrowth
of synovial cells during RA. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in the
elevated SYN expression are not known. Here, we found that SYN expression is
elevated in the synovial fibroblasts from mice with collagen-induced arthritis
(CIA). The proinflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-1beta and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) induce SYN expression in mouse synovial fibroblasts.
Cultivation of mouse synovial fibroblasts with IL-1beta activates
mitogen-activated protein kinases, including extra-cellular signal-regulated
kinase (Erk), JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase), and p38, while only Erk-specific
inhibitor blocks IL-1beta-induced SYN expression. Expression of transcription
factor ETS1 further enhances IL-1beta-induced SYN expression. The dominant
negative ETS1 mutant lacking the transcription activation domain inhibits SYN
expression in a dose-dependent manner. The activation of both Erk1/2 and ETS1 is 
increased in the CIA synovial fibroblasts. Inhibition of Erk activation reduces
ETS1 phosphorylation and SYN expression. Our data indicate that the
proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta and TNF-alpha induce the overgrowth of
synovial cells by upregulating SYN expression via the Erk1/-ETS1 pathway. These
molecules or pathways could therefore be potential targets for the treatment of
RA.

PMCID: PMC1794516
PMID: 17105652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biochemistry. 2006 Nov 21;45(46):13719-33.

Properties and regulation of a transiently assembled ERK2.Ets-1 signaling
complex.

Callaway KA(1), Rainey MA, Riggs AF, Abramczyk O, Dalby KN.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry, University of Texas, Austin, Texas
78712-0252, USA.

ERK2 is a proline-directed protein kinase that displays a high specificity for a 
single threonine (Thr-38) on the substrate Ets-1, which lies within the consensus
sequence 36phi-chi-Thr-Pro39 (where phi is typically a small hydrophobic residue 
and chi appears to be unrestricted). Thr-38 lies in a long flexible N-terminal
tail (residues 1-52), which also contains a second potential phosphorylation
site, Ser-26. How Ets-1 binds ERK2 to promote the phosphorylation of Thr-38 while
simultaneously discriminating against the phosphorylation of Ser-26 is unclear.
To delineate the details of the molecular recognition of Ets-1 by ERK2, the
binding of various mutants and truncations of Ets-1 were analyzed by fluorescence
anisotropy. The data that were obtained support the notion that the N-terminal
tail contains a previously unrecognized docking site that promotes the
phosphorylation of Thr-38. This new docking site helps assemble the complex of
Ets-1 and ERK2 and makes a similar contribution to the stabilization of the
complex as does the pointed domain of Ets-1. The in vitro activation of ERK2 by
MKK1 induces a large conformational transition of the activation segment
(DFG-APE), but neither induces self-association of ERK2 nor destabilizes the
stability of the ERK2.Ets-1 complex. This latter observation suggests that
interactions intrinsic to the active site are not important for complex assembly,
a notion further supported by the observation that the substitution of a number
of different amino acids for Pro-39 does not destabilize the complex. Mutagenesis
of ERK2 within loop 13 suggests that Ets-1 binds the substrate-binding groove.
These data suggest that ERK2 uses two weak docking interactions to specifically
assemble the complex, perhaps in doing so denying Ser-26 access to the active
site. Displacement of residues 1-138 of Ets-1 (EtsDelta138) from ERK2 by the
peptide N-QKGKPRDLELPLSPSL-C, derived from Elk-1, suggests that Ets-1 engages the
D-recruitment site (beta7-beta8 reverse turn and the alphaD-alphaE helix) of
ERK2. Displacement of EtsDelta138 from ERK2 by the peptide N-AKLSFQFPS-C derived 
from Elk-1 shows that EtsDelta138 communicates with the F-recruitment site of
ERK2 also.

PMID: 17105191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jan;27(2):579-94. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Distinct promoters mediate the regulation of Ebf1 gene expression by
interleukin-7 and Pax5.

Roessler S(1), Györy I, Imhof S, Spivakov M, Williams RR, Busslinger M, Fisher
AG, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Early differentiation of B lymphocytes requires the function of multiple
transcription factors that regulate the specification and commitment of the
lineage. Loss- and gain-of-function experiments have provided important insight
into the transcriptional control of B lymphopoiesis, whereby E2A was suggested to
act upstream of EBF1 and Pax5 downstream of EBF1. However, this simple hierarchy 
cannot account for all observations, and our understanding of a presumed
regulatory network, in which transcription factors and signaling pathways
operate, is limited. Here, we show that the expression of the Ebf1 gene involves 
two promoters that are differentially regulated and generate distinct protein
isoforms. We find that interleukin-7 signaling, E2A, and EBF1 activate the distal
Ebf1 promoter, whereas Pax5, together with Ets1 and Pu.1, regulates the stronger 
proximal promoter. In the absence of Pax5, the function of the proximal Ebf1
promoter and accumulation of EBF1 protein are impaired and the replication timing
and subcellular localization of the Ebf1 locus are altered. Taken together, these
data suggest that the regulation of Ebf1 via distinct promoters allows for the
generation of several feedback loops and the coordination of multiple
determinants of B lymphopoiesis in a regulatory network.

PMCID: PMC1800812
PMID: 17101802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Int J Oncol. 2006 Dec;29(6):1533-9.

Hypoxia accelerates cancer invasion of hepatoma cells by upregulating MMP
expression in an HIF-1alpha-independent manner.

Miyoshi A(1), Kitajima Y, Ide T, Ohtaka K, Nagasawa H, Uto Y, Hori H, Miyazaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Saga University Faculty of Medicine, Saga 849-8501,
Japan.

Tumor hypoxia has been reported to induce tumor progression in several
carcinomas. Current studies have shown that hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha) is stabilized under hypoxic conditions and transactivates various
genes related to cancer aggressiveness. In the present study, we examined whether
hypoxia affects cancer invasion in hepatocellular carcinoma. We aimed to solve
the molecular mechanism of tumor invasion under the hypoxic condition. We showed 
that tumor hypoxia accelerated cancer invasion in two hepatoma cell lines. Using 
Western blot and RT-PCR analyses we demonstrated striking evidence that the
expression of HIF-1alpha, ETS-1, MMP-7 and MT1-MMP was strongly upregulated by
hypoxic stimulation. To examine whether these invasion-related genes are
regulated by HIF-1alpha, we treated hepatoma cells with TX-402, which was
reported to repress HIF-1alpha expression. HIF-1alpha expression was strongly
repressed by the TX-402 treatment. In contrast, the expression of ETS-1, MMP-7
and MT1-MMP mRNA was not affected by TX-402 treatment. We further established
stable transfectants in which HIF-1alpha dominant negative vector was introduced 
into Hep3B cells (pHIF-1alphaDN). In the pHIF-1alphaDN cells, the expression of
ETS-1, MMP-7 and MT1-MMP was not repressed. Moreover, the invasion activity of
pHIF-1alphaDN was not altered, compared with that of the mock. In hepatoma cells,
we provided evidence that hypoxic stress accelerates cancer invasion by
upregulating ETS-1 and the MMP family by an HIF-1alpha-independent pathway.

PMID: 17088993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Genetics. 2006 Dec;174(4):1729-36. Epub 2006 Oct 8.

Double-strand break repair in bacteriophage T4: recombination effects of 3'-5'
exonuclease mutations.

Shcherbakov VP(1), Kudryashova EA, Shcherbakova TS, Sizova ST, Plugina LA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics RAS, Chernogolovka, Moscow Region
142432, Russia. svp@icp.ac.ru

The role of 3'-5' exonucleases in double-strand break (DSB)-promoted
recombination was studied in crosses of bacteriophage T4, in which DSBs were
induced site specifically within the rIIB gene by SegC endonuclease in the DNA of
only one of the parents. Frequency of rII+ recombinants was measured in
two-factor crosses of the type i x ets1, where ets1 designates an insertion in
the rIIB gene carrying the cleavage site for SegC and i's are rIIB or rIIA point 
mutations located at various distances (12-2040 bp) from the ets1 site. The
frequency/distance relationship was obtained in crosses of the wild-type phage
and dexA1 (deficiency in deoxyribonuclease A), D219A (deficiency in the
proofreading exonuclease of DNA polymerase), and tsL42 (antimutator allele of DNA
polymerase) mutants. In all the mutants, recombinant frequency in crosses with
the i-markers located at 12 and 33 bp from ets1 was significantly enhanced,
implying better preservation of 3'-terminal sequences at the ends of the broken
DNA. The effects of dexA1 and D219A were additive, suggesting an independent
action of the corresponding nucleases in the DSB repair pathway. The
recombination enhancement in the dexA1 mutant was limited to short distances
(<100 bp from ets1), whereas in the D219A mutant a significant enhancement was
seen at all the tested distances. From the character of the frequency/distance
relationship, it is inferred that the synthesis-dependent strand-annealing
pathway may operate in the D219A mutant. The recombination-enhancing effect of
the tsL42 mutation could be explained by the hypothesis that the antimutator
43Exo removes a shorter stretch of paired nucleotides than the wild-type enzyme
does during hydrolysis of the unpaired terminus in the D-loop intermediate. The
role of the proofreading exonuclease in the formation of a robust replicative
fork is discussed.

PMCID: PMC1698623
PMID: 17028319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Med Sci (Paris). 2006 Oct;22(10):865-71.

[Regulation of p16INK4a, senescence and oncogenesis].

[Article in French]

Chien WW(1), Ffrench M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de cytologie analytique, Faculte de medecine, France.

The transcriptional regulation of p16INK4a is essential for cellular aging and
oncogenic stress response. This regulation involves p16INK4a transcriptional
activators such as proteins Ets1 and 2 or E47. The binding of these proteins to
INK4a promoter can be inhibited by proteins Id-1 or -4 after heterodimer
formation. The transcriptional inhibition of p16INK4a includes also the
transcriptional repression by Bmi-1, and an epigenetic regulation which appears
complex and remains incompletely understood. Actually, INK4a promoter and exon1
present a CpG island which can be methylated on cytosines by DNA
methyltransferases. This DNA methylation is preceded by the lysine 9 histone H3
methylation and by the deacetylation of histone H4 both involved in gene
silencing. Indeed, RNA Helicase A might protect INK4a against methylation of CpG 
island. Furthermore, chromatin remodelling involving SWI/SNF complex, antagonist 
to Bmi-1, might activate INK4a expression. The analysis of INK4a regulation
mechanisms and the comprehension of the epigenetic modulation of its expression
may allow us to develop a rational use of new anti-neoplastic agents.

PMID: 17026941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Genes Dev. 2006 Oct 1;20(19):2728-38.

FGF signaling delineates the cardiac progenitor field in the simple chordate,
Ciona intestinalis.

Davidson B(1), Shi W, Beh J, Christiaen L, Levine M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Division of Genetics and
Development, Center for Integrative Genomics, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA. bandl@berkeley.edu

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2006 Oct 1;20(19):2634-8.

Comprehensive gene networks in Ciona intestinalis embryos provide a foundation
for characterizing complex developmental processes, such as the initial phases of
chordate heart development. The basic helix-loop-helix regulatory gene Ci-Mesp is
required for activation of cardiac transcription factors. Evidence is presented
that Ci-Ets1/2, a transcriptional effector of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
signaling, acts downstream from Mesp to establish the heart field. Asymmetric
activation of Ets1/2, possibly through localized expression of FGF9, drives heart
specification within this field. During gastrulation, Ets1/2 is expressed in a
group of four cells descended from two Mesp-expressing founder cells (the B7.5
cells). After gastrulation, these cells divide asymmetrically; the smaller
rostral daughters exhibit RTK activation (phosphorylation of ERK) and form the
heart lineage while the larger caudal daughters form the anterior tail muscle
lineage. Inhibition of RTK signaling prevents heart specification. Targeted
inhibition of Ets1/2 activity or FGF receptor function also blocks heart
specification. Conversely, application of FGF or targeted expression of
constitutively active Ets1/2 (EtsVp16) cause both rostral and caudal B7.5
lineages to form heart cells. This expansion produces an unexpected phenotype:
transformation of a single-compartment heart into a functional multicompartment
organ. We discuss these results with regard to the development and evolution of
the multichambered vertebrate heart.

PMCID: PMC1578698
PMID: 17015434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 29;26(14):2058-70. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Identification of an histone H3 acetylated/K4-methylated-bound intragenic
enhancer regulatory for urokinase receptor expression.

Wang H(1), Yan C, Asangani I, Allgayer H, Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

The transcriptionally regulated urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor
(u-PAR) contributes to cancer progression. Although previous studies have
identified multiple 5' regulatory elements, these cis motifs cannot fully account
for u-PAR expression prompting a search for hitherto uncharacterized regulatory
elements. DNase I hypersensitivity and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays using
u-PAR-expressing colon cancer cells indicated a hypersensitive region
(+665/+2068) in intron 1 enriched with acetylated histone 3 (H3) and H3
methylated at lysine 4, markers of regulatory regions. The +665/+2068 region
increased transcription from a u-PAR-promoter in an orientation- and
distance-independent manner fulfilling the criteria of an enhancer. Optimal
stimulation of the u-PAR promoter by phorbol ester required this enhancer.
Systematic truncations combined with DNase I footprinting revealed two protected 
regions (+1060/+1099 and +1123/+1134) with deletion of the latter practically
abolishing enhancer activity. The +1123/+1134 region harbored non-consensus
activator protein-1 and Ets1 binding sites bound with c-Jun (and/or the related
JunD/JunB) and c-Fos (and/or the related FosB/Fra-1/Fra-2) as revealed with
chromatin immunoprecipitation. Further, nuclear extract from resected colon
cancers showed elevated protein binding to a +1123/+1134-spanning probe
coordinate with elevated u-PAR protein. Thus, we have defined a novel intragenic 
enhancer in the u-PAR gene required for constitutive and inducible expression.

PMID: 17001307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Dev Biol. 2006 Dec 1;300(1):35-48. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Identification and developmental expression of the ets gene family in the sea
urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus).

Rizzo F(1), Fernandez-Serra M, Squarzoni P, Archimandritis A, Arnone MI.

Author information: 
(1)Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Villa Comunale, 80121 Naples, Italy.

A systematic search in the available scaffolds of the Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus genome has revealed that this sea urchin has 11 members of the ets
gene family. A phylogenetic analysis of these genes showed that almost all
vertebrate ets subfamilies, with the exception of one, so far found only in
mammals, are each represented by one orthologous sea urchin gene. The temporal
and spatial expression of the identified ETS factors was also analyzed during
embryogenesis. Five ets genes (Sp-Ets1/2, Sp-Tel, Sp-Pea, Sp-Ets4, Sp-Erf) are
also maternally expressed. Three genes (Sp-Elk, Sp-Elf, Sp-Erf) are ubiquitously 
expressed during embryogenesis, while two others (Sp-Gabp, Sp-Pu.1) are not
transcribed until late larval stages. Remarkably, five of the nine sea urchin ets
genes expressed during embryogenesis are exclusively (Sp-Ets1/2, Sp-Erg, Sp-Ese) 
or additionally (Sp-Tel, Sp-Pea) expressed in mesenchyme cells and/or their
progenitors. Functional analysis of Sp-Ets1/2 has previously demonstrated an
essential role of this gene in the specification of the skeletogenic mesenchyme
lineage. The dynamic, and in some cases overlapping and/or unique, developmental 
expression pattern of the latter five genes suggests a complex, non-redundant
function for ETS factors in sea urchin mesenchyme formation and differentiation.

PMID: 16997294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 22;348(2):768-74. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Ets transcription factors regulate AIRE gene promoter.

Murumägi A(1), Silvennoinen O, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere University 
Hospital, Tampere, Finland. ltasmu@uta.fi

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) directs the expression of self-antigens in thymus.
Defects in AIRE gene cause an organ-specific autoimmune disease called autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). AIRE protein is
mainly expressed in thymic medullary epithelial cells, thus implying a strict
control over its expression pattern. To date, only limited information is
available on mechanisms responsible for the regulation of AIRE gene. Here, we
show that Ets transcription factor family members Ets-1, Ets-2, and ESE-1 have
positive effect on AIRE transcription. Site-directed mutagenesis and transfection
studies revealed that two of the three Ets binding sites in AIRE promoter are
functional and this finding has been confirmed by the electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. The AIRE promoter activity could be stimulated by phorbol myristate 
acetate (PMA) and this activation was further enhanced by Ets transcription
factors. Our results demonstrate for the first time that AIRE gene is a
downstream target for the Ets family of transcription factors.

PMID: 16890195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Immunol. 2006 Aug 15;177(4):2651-61.

CCL2 regulates angiogenesis via activation of Ets-1 transcription factor.

Stamatovic SM(1), Keep RF, Mostarica-Stojkovic M, Andjelkovic AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI 48109, USA.

Although recent studies have suggested that CC chemokine CCL2 may directly affect
the angiogenesis, the signaling events involved in such regulation remain to be
determined. This study investigated a potential signal mechanism involved in
CCL2-induced angiogenesis. Our in vitro and in vivo (hemangioma model of
angiogenesis) experiments confirmed earlier findings that CCL2 can induce
angiogenesis directly. Using a gene array analysis, CCL2 was found to induce
expression of several angiogenic factors in brain endothelial cells. Among the
most prominent was an up-regulation in Ets-1 transcription factor. CCL2 induced a
significant increase in Ets-1 mRNA and protein expression as well as Ets-1
DNA-binding activity. Importantly, Ets-1 antisense oligonucleotide markedly
abrogated in vitro CCL2-induced angiogenesis, suggesting that Ets-1 is critically
involved in this process. Activation of Ets-1 by CCL2 further regulated some of
Ets-1 target molecules including beta(3) integrins. CCL2 induced significant
up-regulation of beta(3) mRNA and protein expression, and this effect of CCL2 was
prevented by the Ets-1 antisense oligonucleotide. The functional regulation of
Ets-1 activity by CCL2 was dependent on ERK-1/2 cascade. Inhibition of ERK1/2
activity by PD98509 prevented CCL2-induced increases in Ets-1 DNA-binding
activity and Ets-1 mRNA expression. Based on these findings, we suggest that
Ets-1 transcription factor plays a critical role in CCL2 actions on brain
endothelial cells and CCL2-induced angiogenesis.

PMID: 16888027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 29;281(39):28731-6. Epub 2006 Aug 2.

Identification and characterization of the CD226 gene promoter.

Jian JL(1), Zhu CS, Xu ZW, Ouyang WM, Ma DC, Zhang Y, Chen LJ, Yang AG, Jin BQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an City,
Shannxi Province 710032, China.

CD226 is one of the main activating receptors on natural killer cells, and it can
induce cytotoxicity to target cells through interaction with its ligands CD155 or
CD112. CD226 is also involved in T cell differentiation, activation, and
cytotoxicity. The expression of CD226 on natural killer cells and T cells can be 
regulated by cytokines and chemical stimuli; however, the mechanism of the
regulation of the CD226 gene is still unknown. In this study, we have identified 
two promoters in the human CD226 gene named P1 and P2, which are located at -810 
to -287 bp and +33 to +213 bp, respectively, and a negative regulation element
between P1 and P2. Both P1 and P2 can be regulated by phorbol ester
(12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate) and calcium ionophore (A23187).
Bioinformatics analysis shows that, within this CD226 gene region, there are
putative binding sites for transcription factors AP-1, Sp1, PEA3, and Ets-1. We
have found that transcription factor activating protein-1 (AP-1) can up-regulate 
CD226 promoters P1 and P2 in human hepatocarcinoma cells, a hepatocarcinoma cell 
line with low expression of endogenous AP-1 and Ets-1. Interestingly, the
transcription factor Ets-1 promotes AP-1-induced P2 activity but inhibits
AP-1-induced P1 activity for which a 10-bp AP-1/Ets-1 composite site (CCTTCCTTCC)
in P1 may be responsible.

PMID: 16887814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Hum Pathol. 2006 Aug;37(8):1111-6. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Prognostic value of cell motility activation factors in patients with tongue
squamous cell carcinoma.

Endo K(1), Shirai A, Furukawa M, Yoshizaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Kouseiren Takaoka Hospital, Toyama, Japan.

Cell motility plays a crucial role in invasion and metastasis of malignant
tumors. Both AMFR and c-Met, known as key factors in up-regulation of cell
motility, are overexpressed in a variety of malignant solid tumors. This study
was designed to analyze the role of cell motility and its prognostic value in
tongue squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). In addition, the expression of Ets-1, known
as a transcription factor that regulates cell motility, was also studied to
elucidate its relationship with c-Met and AMFR expression. The expression of
c-Met, AMFR, and Ets-1 protein was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in 99
patients with tongue SCC. Then, the expression score of these proteins and their 
association with clinical factors was retrospectively evaluated. The expression
level of both c-Met and AMFR was significantly correlated with local and distant 
metastatic tumor recurrence. Moreover, patients with increased expression of both
c-Met and AMFR had significantly worse disease-free survival. The expression
score of Ets-1 was also strongly correlated with that of c-Met, whereas it was
weakly correlated with AMFR. Pathologically advanced tumor status (pT4), advanced
node (pN2 and pN3), stage IV, c-Met and AMFR were significant hazards in
univariate analysis. In multivariate analysis among stage IV, c-Met, and AMFR,
AMFR expression remained a significant prognostic factor. This study suggests
that Ets-1 contributes to the invasive phenotype through overexpression of c-Met.
The evaluation of AMFR and c-Met in tongue SCC is valuable in identifying
patients at high risk for recurrences and who should be treated as more advanced 
cases.

PMID: 16867875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 22;281(38):28113-21. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

Ets-1-dependent expression of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors is
activated by latency-associated nuclear antigen of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus through interaction with Daxx.

Murakami Y(1), Yamagoe S, Noguchi K, Takebe Y, Takahashi N, Uehara Y, Fukazawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioactive Molecules, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 
Tokyo 162, Japan.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors are highly expressed 
in Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) lesion and play a key role in angiogenesis.
Latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV8) has multiple functions related to viral latency and
KSHV-induced oncogenesis. In this report, we have identified Daxx as a
LANA-binding protein by co-immunoprecipitation analysis of HeLa cells stably
expressing LANA. LANA associated with Daxx in a PEL cell line infected with KSHV.
LANA and Daxx also bound in vitro, suggesting direct interaction. From the
results of binding assays, a region containing the Glu/Asp-rich domain within
LANA, and a central region including the second paired amphipathic helix within
Daxx contributed to the interaction. To address the physiological significance of
this interaction, we focused on a Daxx-mediated VEGF receptor gene regulation. We
found that Daxx repressed Ets-1-dependent Flt-1/VEGF receptor-1 gene expression, 
and that LANA inhibited the repression by Daxx in a reporter assay. Analyses of
flow cytometry and real-time PCR revealed that expression of VEGF receptor-1 and 
-2 in LANA-expressing human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs)
significantly increased. Co-immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting experiments
suggested that LANA-bound Daxx to inhibit the interaction between Daxx and Ets-1.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that Daxx associated with VEGF
receptor-1 promoter in HUVECs, and that LANA expression reduced this association.
These results suggested that LANA contributes to a high expression of VEGF
receptors in KS lesion by interfering with the interaction between Daxx and
Ets-1.

PMID: 16861237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer Sci. 2006 Sep;97(9):875-82. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

Expression of Ets-1 in human clear cell renal cell carcinomas: implications for
angiogenesis.

Mikami S(1), Oya M, Mizuno R, Murai M, Mukai M, Okada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diagnostic Pathology, School of Medicine, Keio University
Hospital, 35 Shinanomachi, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.

Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has been reported in
renal cell carcinoma (RCC), a highly angiogenic carcinoma. However, little or no 
information is available on the expression of Ets-1, which is one of the target
molecules of VEGF. In the present study, we examined the expression of Ets-1 and 
VEGF in RCC by immunohistochemistry and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), and correlations between expression and the microvessel
density (MVD) were evaluated. Ets-1 was immunolocalized to carcinoma cells and
endothelial cells of the microvessels in clear cell RCC, but not in papillary
RCC. Immunohistochemical Ets-1 expression and MVD were significantly higher in
clear cell RCC than in papillary RCC. Predominant mRNA expression of Ets-1 in
clear cell RCC was confirmed by RT-PCR. The expression of Ets-1 correlated
directly with MVD in clear cell RCC. Hypoxic treatment upregulated the mRNA
expression of Ets-1 and VEGF in cell lines derived from clear cell RCC,
suggesting that hypoxia is a key regulator for these molecules. These results
demonstrate the expression of Ets-1 in human clear cell RCC and suggest the
possibility that Ets-1 is involved in angiogenesis in clear cell RCC.

PMID: 16856880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Methods Mol Biol. 2006;329:327-38.

Ultraviolet-induced apoptosis in embryonic stem cells in vitro.

Xu D(1), Wilson TJ, Hertzog PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells, and the inner cell mass from which they are derived,
are hypersensitive to DNA damage and appear to have specific cellular defense
systems for DNA repair and the elimination of damaged cells. These mechanisms
differ from somatic cells and are vital to minimize developmental defects that
would potentially result from the continued proliferation and differentiation of 
abnormal cells into adult cell lineages. Although the DNA damage-induced
signaling cascades activated in these cells are known to include p38 and c-Jun
N-terminal protein kinase mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways and
activation of a variety of transcription factors, including p53, nuclear
factor-kappaB, and activator protein-1, the nature of the specific mechanisms
unique to these cells remains to be elucidated. Here, we describe the use of
homozygous knockout ES cells to investigate the role of Ets1 in the response to
DNA damage in these cells. These studies demonstrate that Ets1 is required for
optimal p53 function in this response and further demonstrate the potential for
knockout ES cells to elucidate the role of specific genes in early embryonic cell
responses.

PMID: 16846002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Feb;28(2):267-79. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

HGF induces CXCR4 and CXCL12-mediated tumor invasion through Ets1 and NF-kappaB.

Maroni P(1), Bendinelli P, Matteucci E, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology, School of Medicine University of Milan, via
Luigi Mangiagalli, 31-20133 Milan, Italy.

CXCR4 is a chemokine receptor probably involved in the homing of metastatic
breast cancer, and its expression is modulated by tumor environmental stimuli
such as hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and hypoxia. Here, we demonstrate that,
depending on the stimulus, different transcription factors can cooperate in
enhancing CXCR4 transcription in MCF-7 breast cancer cell line. In HGF-treated
MCF-7 cells, the DNA binding of Ets1 activated by MAPK1/ERK1/2 transduction
pathway as well as the DNA binding of NF-kappaB played a critical role in CXCR4
transcription and protein induction. Under HGF stimulation, the blockade of these
transcription factors by dominant negatives and inhibitors prevented the
expression of CXCR4 receptor, the activity of a gene reporter driven by CXCR4
promoter sequence and the chemoinvasion toward the CXCL12 ligand. NF-kappaB was
activated also by hypoxia and contributed, with HIF-1, to the increase in CXCR4
expression. The results suggest that Ets1, specifically activated by HGF, might
cooperate with NF-kappaB activity to enhance the invasive/metastatic phenotype of
breast carcinoma cells.

PMID: 16840440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 1;281(35):25259-69. Epub 2006 Jul 6.

Fli1 and Ets1 have distinct roles in connective tissue growth factor/CCN2 gene
regulation and induction of the profibrotic gene program.

Nakerakanti SS(1), Kapanadze B, Yamasaki M, Markiewicz M, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

CCN2 (connective tissue growth factor), an important regulator of angiogenesis,
chondrogenesis, and wound healing, is overexpressed in a majority of fibrotic
diseases and in various tumors. This study investigated regulation of CCN2 gene
expression by Ets family of transcription factors, focusing on two members, Fli1 
and Ets1, with deregulated expression during fibrosis and tumorigenesis. We show 
that Ets1 and Fli1 have opposite effects on CCN2 gene expression. Ets1 functions 
as an activator of CCN2 transcription, whereas Fli1 acts as a repressor. A
functional Ets binding site was mapped at -114 within the CCN2 promoter. This
site not only mediates stimulation by Ets factors, including Ets1, Ets2, and
GABPalpha/beta, but is also required for the transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta response. The contrasting functions of Ets1 and Fli1 in regulation of 
the CCN2 gene were confirmed by suppressing their endogenous levels using
adenoviral vectors expressing specific small interfering RNAs. Additional
experiments using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays have revealed that in
fibroblasts both Ets1 and Fli1 occupy the CCN2 promoter. TGF-beta stimulation
resulted in displacement of Fli1 from the CCN2 promoter and a transient
inhibition of Fli1 synthesis. Moreover, reduction of Fli1 expression resulted in 
up-regulation of COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes and down-regulation of the MMP1 gene.
Thus, inhibition of Fli1 recapitulated some of the key effects of TGF-beta,
suggesting that Fli1 suppression is involved in activation of the profibrotic
gene program in fibroblasts. On the other hand, activation of the CCN2 gene
downstream of Ets1 is consistent with its role in angiogenesis and extracellular 
matrix remodeling. This study strongly supports a critical role of Fli1 and Ets1 
in the pathological extracellular matrix regulation during fibrosis and cancer.

PMID: 16829517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 15;177(2):905-12.

Impaired generation of CD8+ thymocytes in Ets-1-deficient mice.

Clements JL(1), John SA, Garrett-Sinha LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm & Carlton
Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. james.clements@roswellpark.org

The Ets family of transcription factors function as key regulators of multiple
aspects of immune cell development and function. To date, Ets-1 has been
implicated in regulating early stages of thymic maturation and lymphocyte
function and homeostasis. This report describes a novel role for Ets-1 in
supporting later stages of thymic selection, in that positive selection of MHC
class I-restricted CD4+CD8+ double-positive thymocytes is markedly inhibited in
mice expressing a hypomorphic allele of Ets-1. This effect is thymocyte
intrinsic, as Ets-1 mutant thymocytes fail to efficiently generate CD8+
single-positive thymocytes in mixed bone marrow chimeric backgrounds. Although
peripheral CD8+ T cells are present in Ets-1 mutant mice, both CD4+ and CD8+
subsets contain an elevated proportion of cells with an effector memory
(CD62L-CD44+) phenotype. In addition, while thymic expression of Thy1 is
relatively normal, peripheral T cells isolated from Ets-1 mutant mice display a
striking loss of Thy1 expression. These data identify Ets-1 as a key
transcription factor regulating thymocyte positive selection and lineage
commitment of MHC class I-restricted thymocytes.

PMID: 16818745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Bioinformatics. 2006 Sep 15;22(18):2210-6. Epub 2006 Jun 29.

A mixture model-based discriminate analysis for identifying ordered transcription
factor binding site pairs in gene promoters directly regulated by estrogen
receptor-alpha.

Li L(1), Cheng AS, Jin VX, Paik HH, Fan M, Li X, Zhang W, Robarge J, Balch C,
Davuluri RV, Kim S, Huang TH, Nephew KP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Medicine, Indiana University School
of Medicine Indianapolis, IN 47405, USA. lali@iupui.edu

MOTIVATION: To detect and select patterns of transcription factor binding sites
(TFBSs) which distinguish genes directly regulated by estrogen receptor-alpha
(ERalpha), we developed an innovative mixture model-based discriminate analysis
for identifying ordered TFBS pairs.
RESULTS: Biologically, our proposed new algorithm clearly suggests that TFBSs are
not randomly distributed within ERalpha target promoters (P-value < 0.001). The
up-regulated targets significantly (P-value < 0.01) possess TFBS pairs, (DBP,
MYC), (DBP, MYC/MAX heterodimer), (DBP, USF2) and (DBP, MYOGENIN); and
down-regulated ERalpha target genes significantly (P-value < 0.01) possess TFBS
pairs, such as (DBP, c-ETS1-68), (DBP, USF2) and (DBP, MYOGENIN). Statistically, 
our proposed mixture model-based discriminate analysis can simultaneously perform
TFBS pattern recognition, TFBS pattern selection, and target class prediction;
such integrative power cannot be achieved by current methods.
AVAILABILITY: The software is available on request from the authors.
CONTACT: lali@iupui.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMID: 16809387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Jul;18(1):153-9.

Expression pattern of matrix metalloproteinase and TIMP genes in fibroblasts
derived from Ets-1 knock-out mice compared to wild-type mouse fibroblasts.

Hahne JC(1), Fuchs T, El Mustapha H, Okuducu AF, Bories JC, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, 53011 Bonn, Germany.

Matrix-degrading proteases play a key role in normal development, wound healing, 
many diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and, in particular, tumour invasion.
In invasive tumours, these enzymes are expressed by fibroblasts of the tumour
stroma. Their expression and activity are tightly regulated at several levels, an
important one being transcription. Previous in vitro and in vivo findings pointed
to a major role of the Ets-1 transcription factor for this level of regulation.
In the present study, we tried to prove this role in fibroblasts. We stimulated
wild-type mouse fibroblasts with physiological doses of basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF, known to induce different proteases and expressed by tumour cells) 
and compared the results to those obtained in Ets-1 -/- fibroblasts derived from 
Ets-1 knock-out mice. We found that basal Ets-1 levels are necessary not only for
a fast induction of MMPs 2, 3 and 13 by bFGF but also for maintenance of the
bFGF-induced expression of tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) 1, 2
and 3, which are known not only to inhibit but also participate as activators of 
certain pro-MMPs.

PMID: 16786167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genome Biol. 2006;7(6):R48.

Systems analysis of circadian time-dependent neuronal epidermal growth factor
receptor signaling.

Zak DE(1), Hao H, Vadigepalli R, Miller GM, Ogunnaike BA, Schwaber JS.

Author information: 
(1)Daniel Baugh Institute for Functional Genomics and Computational Biology,
Department of Pathology, Thomas Jefferson University, Locust St, Philadelphia, PA
19107, USA.

BACKGROUND: Identifying the gene regulatory networks governing physiological
signal integration remains an important challenge in circadian biology. Epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been implicated in circadian function and is
expressed in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), the core circadian pacemaker. The 
transcription networks downstream of EGFR in the SCN are unknown but, by analogy 
to other SCN inputs, we expect the response to EGFR activation to depend on
circadian timing.
RESULTS: We have undertaken a systems-level analysis of EGFR circadian
time-dependent signaling in the SCN. We collected gene-expression profiles to
study how the SCN response to EGFR activation depends on circadian timing.
Mixed-model analysis of variance (ANOVA) was employed to identify genes with
circadian time-dependent EGFR regulation. The expression data were integrated
with transcription-factor binding predictions through gene group enrichment
analyses to generate robust hypotheses about transcription-factors responsible
for the circadian phase-dependent EGFR responses.
CONCLUSION: The analysis results suggest that the transcriptional response to
EGFR signaling in the SCN may be partly mediated by established
transcription-factors regulated via EGFR transcription-factors (AP1, Ets1,
C/EBP), transcription-factors involved in circadian clock entrainment (CREB), and
by core clock transcription-factors (Ror alpha). Quantitative real-time PCR
measurements of several transcription-factor expression levels support a model in
which circadian time-dependent EGFR responses are partly achieved by circadian
regulation of upstream signaling components. Our study suggests an important role
for EGFR signaling in SCN function and provides an example for gaining
physiological insights through systems-level analysis.

PMCID: PMC1779538
PMID: 16784547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Kidney Int. 2006 Jul;70(2):298-305. Epub 2006 May 31.

Transcription factor Ets-1 is essential for mesangial matrix remodeling.

Mizui M(1), Isaka Y, Takabatake Y, Sato Y, Kawachi H, Shimizu F, Takahara S, Ito 
T, Imai E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine (A8),
Suita, Japan.

Most advanced glomerular diseases are characterized by abnormal extracellular
matrix (ECM) accumulation in the glomeruli, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 
play a pivotal role in ECM remodeling in various glomerular diseases. The
proto-oncogene, ets-1, is a transcription factor regulating the expression of
various matrix proteinases, including MMP-1, MMP-3, and MMP-9. The goal of the
present study was to characterize the role of Ets-1 in the progression of
glomerular diseases. Overexpression of Ets-1 in cultured mesangial cells
prevented transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta-induced inhibition of DNA-binding
activity and TGF-beta-induced type I collagen production. In addition, exogenous 
Ets-1 abolished TGF-beta-induced collagen gel contraction. The in vivo
transfection of the ets-1 gene into nephritic kidney resulted in the increases in
glomerular MMP-1, MMP-3, and MMP-9 mRNA, decreases in mesangial ECM deposition,
and attenuation of fibronectin extradomain A (EDA) and type I collagen
expression. In contrast, knockdown of Ets-1 in glomeruli resulted in severe ECM
deposition in diseased glomeruli. In conclusion, Ets-1 promotes degradation of
ECM proteins and is critical for integral glomerular reorganization.

PMID: 16738537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jul 14;345(4):1536-46. Epub 2006 May 19.

PIASy-mediated repression of the Ets-1 is independent of its sumoylation.

Nishida T(1), Terashima M, Fukami K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science,
Hachioji, Japan. nishida@ls.toyaku.ac.jp

The transcription factor Ets-1 is involved in many physiological processes,
including angiogenesis, hematopoietic development, and tumor progression, and its
activity can be regulated by interactions with other proteins and
post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation. Here, we show that
Ets-1 is a target for SUMO modification both in vivo and in vitro. Mutational
analysis reveals that sumoylation of Ets-1 occurs at two lysine residues at amino
acid positions 15 and 227, which lie within previously identified synergy control
motifs. Replacement of sumoylation site lysines with arginine or overexpression
of SENP1, a desumoylation enzyme, enhances the transactivation ability of Ets-1. 
Furthermore, we identify PIASy as a novel interaction partner and a specific
SUMO-E3 ligase of Ets-1. PIASy represses the Ets-1-dependent transcription, and
its repression is independent of the sumoylation status of Ets-1, but it is
dependent on the sumoylation of other factors.

PMID: 16729975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 14;281(28):18973-82. Epub 2006 May 1.

Ets-1 and runx2 regulate transcription of a metastatic gene, osteopontin, in
murine colorectal cancer cells.

Wai PY(1), Mi Z, Gao C, Guo H, Marroquin C, Kuo PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 
27710, USA. philip.wai@yale.edu

Osteopontin (OPN) is a sialic acid-rich phosphoprotein secreted by a wide variety
of cancers. We have shown previously that OPN is necessary for mediating hepatic 
metastasis in CT26 colorectal cancer cells. Although a variety of stimuli can
induce OPN, the molecular mechanisms that regulate OPN gene transcription in
colorectal cancer are unknown. We hypothesized that cis- and trans-regulatory
elements determine OPN transcription in CT26 cells. OPN transcription was
analyzed in CT26 cancer cells and compared with YAMC (young adult mouse colon)
epithelial cells. Clonal deletion analysis of OPN promoter-luciferase constructs 
identified cis-regulatory regions. A specific promoter region, nucleotide (nt)
-107 to -174, demonstrated a >8.0-fold increase in luciferase activity in CT26
compared with YAMC. Gel-shift assays sublocalized two cis-regulatory regions, nt 
-101 to -123 and nt -121 to -145, which specifically bind CT26 nuclear proteins. 
Competition with unlabeled mutant oligonucleotides revealed that the regions nt
-115 to -118 and nt -129 to -134 were essential for protein binding. Subsequent
supershift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed the corresponding
nuclear proteins to be Ets-1 and Runx2. Functional relevance was demonstrated
through mutations in the Ets-1 and Runx2 consensus binding sites resulting in
>60% decrease in OPN transcription. Ets-1 and Runx2 protein expression in CT26
was ablated using antisense oligonucleotides and resulted in a >7-fold decrease
in OPN protein expression. Ets-1 and Runx2 are critical transcriptional
regulators of OPN expression in CT26 colorectal cancer cells. Suppression of
these transcription factors results in significant down-regulation of the OPN
metastasis protein.

PMID: 16670084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2006 May-Jun;54(3):149-63. Epub 2006 May 2.

ETS transcription factors and regulation of immunity.

Gallant S(1), Gilkeson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatolog, Medical University of South
Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas St. Suite 912, PO Box 250637, Charleston, SC 29425,
USA. gallant@musc.edu

The ETS family is a diverse group of transcription factors that control the
expressions of genes that participate in an array of cellular activities, ranging
from mitosis to apoptosis. As a consequence of regulating these processes, most
ETS factors are oncogenic. However, there is growing evidence that ETS factors
are also essential to regulation of the immune system. Of the 29 recognized ETS
factors, nine are known to regulate genes involved in immunity, including Ets1,
Ets2, GABP, Fli1, Elf1, MEF, ESE1, PU.1, and SpiB. These ETS factors typically
activate the transcription of genes associated with pathogen and tumor defense,
but several also demonstrate ability to repress transcription. Ets1 and PU.1
appear to have the greatest impact on immunity, primarily through their control
of immune cell development. Alterations of Fli1 and Elf1 expression are
associated with autoimmunity, emphasizing the role of ETS factors as not only
positive, but also negative regulators of immunity. This review summarizes the
roles of ETS factors in development of the immune system, defense against
pathogens and malignancies, and self-tolerance.

PMID: 16652219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Mar 21;12(11):1743-6.

Expression of Ets-1 proto-oncoprotein in gastrointestinal stromal tumors,
leiomyomas and schwannomas.

Nakayama T(1), Yoshizaki A, Naito S, Wen CY, Alipov G, Yakata Y, Sekine I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.
toshi-n@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

AIM: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are rare. GISTs differ from other
mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract (e.g. leiomyomas and
schwannomas). The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of Ets-1 in
the growth and differentiation of GISTs.
METHODS: Twenty-eight GISTs, nine leiomyomas and six schwannomas were examined by
immunohistochemical staining method for Ets-1 in this study. Specimens were
selected from surgical pathology archival tissues at Nagasaki University
Hospital.
RESULTS: Ets-1 protein was expressed in the cytoplasm of cells in all of these
tumors. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that 27 GISTs (96.4%), six
leiomyomas (66.7%), and five schwannomas (83.3%) were positive for Ets-1. Ets-1
expression was statistically different between GISTs and leiomyomas (P<0.005).
However, there was no correlation between Ets-1 expression and clinical risk
categories.
CONCLUSION: Ets-1 plays an important role in the growth and differentiation of
GISTs, leiomyomas and schwannomas.

PMCID: PMC4124350
PMID: 16586544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Dev Biol. 2006 May 15;293(2):555-64. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

cis-Regulatory control of cyclophilin, a member of the ETS-DRI skeletogenic gene 
battery in the sea urchin embryo.

Amore G(1), Davidson EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

The Strongylocentrotus purpuratus cyclophilin1 gene (Sp-cyp1) is expressed
exclusively in skeletogenic mesenchyme cells of the embryo, beginning in the
micromere lineage of the early blastula stage and continuing after gastrulation
during the syncytial deposition of the skeleton. This gene encodes a protein
which is a member of the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) family.
Sp-cyp1 is among the differentiation genes activated in the skeletogenic
territory as a terminal function of the endomesodermal gene regulatory network.
Network perturbation analysis had predicted the skeletogenic regulators Ets1 and 
Deadringer (Dri) to be its driver inputs. Here, we show that a 218-bp
cis-regulatory DNA fragment recapitulates skeletogenic Sp-cyp1 expression; that
elimination of either Ets1 or Dri inputs severely depresses the activity of
expression constructs containing this DNA fragment; and that Ets1 and Dri target 
sites within the 218 bp fragment are required for normal expression. This
indicates that the predicted inputs are direct. Other studies indicate that the
same inputs are evidently necessary for expression of several other skeletogenic 
differentiation genes, and these genes probably constitute a skeletogenic gene
battery, defined by its Ets plus Dri regulatory inputs.

PMID: 16574094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 May 12;343(3):904-9. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

Potential regulatory elements of the constitutive up-regulated alpha2(I) collagen
gene in scleroderma dermal fibroblasts.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Mimura Y, Asano Y, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

The promoter activity of the full-length alpha2(I) collagen gene is higher in
scleroderma fibroblasts, when compared to normal fibroblasts. In this study, to
investigate the molecular mechanisms up-regulating the expression of the
alpha2(I) collagen gene in scleroderma dermal fibroblasts more clearly, we
compared promoter activities of serial 5'-deletion mutants and the substitution
mutants of the alpha2(I) collagen promoter constructs between normal and
scleroderma fibroblasts. The transient transfection assays using a series of
5'-deletions of the promoter revealed that the up-regulated fold-increase in
scleroderma fibroblasts relative to that in normal fibroblasts was significantly 
decreased by the removal of bp -353 to -264 fragment or bp -264 to -186 fragment.
The substitution mutations introduced into binding sites of Sp1 (bp -303 and
-271), Ets1 (bp -285 and -282), as well as Smad (bp -263 and -258) also abrogated
the fold-increase in promoter activity in scleroderma fibroblasts
synergistically. A DNA affinity precipitation assay showed that the binding
activity of Ets1 as well as Smad3 to their binding sites was increased in
scleroderma fibroblasts compared with normal cells. Taken together, our promoter 
analysis emphasized that Ets1 form a transcriptionally active complex with Smad
and Sp1 by autocrine transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta signaling, leading to 
the intrinsic up-regulation of alpha2(I) collagen promoter activity in
scleroderma fibroblasts. The blockade of autocrine TGF-beta signaling is thought 
to be one of the most reliable approaches in the treatment of scleroderma, and
further study targeting Ets1, Smad or Sp1 may contribute to this blockade.

PMID: 16564026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2006;17(1-2):57-68. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

High ambient glucose levels modulates the production of MMP-9 and alpha5(IV)
collagen by cultured podocytes.

Bai Y(1), Wang L, Li Y, Liu S, Li J, Wang H, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.

Recent evidences have demonstrated an important role for glomerular visceral
epithelial cell (podocyte) in the development and progression of diabetic
nephropathy. We investigated the high-glucose (HG)-triggered signaling pathway
and its role in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) production in murine podocytes.
The activity of 92-kDa (MMP-9) gelatinase, but not of 72 kDa (MMP-2), in an HG
medium significantly increased during incubation of 2 to 3 days and decreased
during incubation of more than 5 days revealed by Gelatin zymography. Opposite to
the increases in MMP-9 activity, HG medium produced significant decreases in the 
protein levels of alpha5(IV) collagen. Changes in MMP-9 activity were associated 
with the same pattern as MMP-9 mRNA levels in podocytes exposed to HG media. HG
medium rapidly activated ERK1/2 MAPK in podocytes. Moreover, ERK1/2 activation
was required for HG-induced enhancement of MMP-9 activity and a decrease in the
level of alpha5(IV) collagen. HG incubation rapidly induced an increase in the
nuclear accumulation of Ets-1 protein. Blocking the ERK pathway suppressed
HG-induced expression and nuclear accumulation of transcriptional factor Ets-1,
and MMP-9 mRNA expression. We suggest that short- or long-term exposure to HG
concentrations increases or decreases MMP-9 production and alpha5(IV) collagen
expression in podocytes, this may contribute to the GBM abnormality caused by an 
imbalance in extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis and degradation, and may play a
critical role in the pathogenesis of proteinuria in diabetic nephropathy.

PMID: 16543722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 5;281(18):12664-72. Epub 2006 Mar 8.

BTB domain-containing speckle-type POZ protein (SPOP) serves as an adaptor of
Daxx for ubiquitination by Cul3-based ubiquitin ligase.

Kwon JE(1), La M, Oh KH, Oh YM, Kim GR, Seol JH, Baek SH, Chiba T, Tanaka K, Bang
OS, Joe CO, Chung CH.

Author information: 
(1)NRL of Protein Biochemistry, School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

Daxx is a multifunctional protein that regulates a variety of cellular processes,
including transcription, cell cycle, and apoptosis. SPOP is a BTB
(Bric-a-brac/Tramtrack/Broad complex) protein that constitutes Cul3-based
ubiquitin ligases. Here we show that SPOP serves as an adaptor of Daxx for the
ubiquitination by Cul3-based ubiquitin ligase and subsequent degradation by the
proteasome. Expression of SPOP with Cul3 markedly reduced Daxx level, and this
degradation was blocked by SPOP-specific short hairpin RNAs. Inhibition of the
proteasome by MG132 caused the prevention of Daxx degradation in parallel with
the accumulation of ubiquitinated Daxx. Expression of SPOP with Cul3 reversed
Daxx-mediated repression of ETS1- and p53-dependent transcription, and short
hairpin RNA-mediated knock down of SPOP blocked the recovery of their
transcriptional activation. Furthermore, Daxx degradation led to the cleavage of 
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and the increase in the number of terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-fluorescein nick end-labeling-positive 
apoptotic cells. These results suggest that SPOP/Cul3-ubiquitin ligase plays an
essential role in the control of Daxx level and, thus, in the regulation of
Daxx-mediated cellular processes, including transcriptional regulation and
apoptosis.

PMID: 16524876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006 Jul;291(1):G26-34. Epub 2006 Feb
23.

Shear stress induces hepatocyte PAI-1 gene expression through cooperative
Sp1/Ets-1 activation of transcription.

Nakatsuka H(1), Sokabe T, Yamamoto K, Sato Y, Hatakeyama K, Kamiya A, Ando J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive and General Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Niigata University, Niigata, Japan.

Partial hepatectomy causes hemodynamic changes that increase portal blood flow in
the remaining lobe, where the expression of immediate-early genes, including
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), is induced. We hypothesized that a
hyperdynamic circulatory state occurring in the remaining lobe induces
immediate-early gene expression. In this study, we investigated whether the
mechanical force generated by flowing blood, shear stress, induces PAI-1
expression in hepatocytes. When cultured rat hepatocytes were exposed to flow,
PAI-1 mRNA levels began to increase within 3 h, peaked at levels significantly
higher than the static control levels, and then gradually decreased. The
flow-induced PAI-1 expression was shear stress dependent rather than shear rate
dependent and accompanied by increased hepatocyte production of PAI-1 protein.
Shear stress increased PAI-1 transcription but did not affect PAI-1 mRNA
stability. Functional analysis of the 2.1-kb PAI-1 5'-promoter indicated that a
278-bp segment containing transcription factor Sp1 and Ets-1 consensus sequences 
was critical to the shear stress-dependent increase of PAI-1 transcription.
Mutations of both the Sp1 and Ets-1 consensus sequences, but not of either one
alone, markedly prevented basal PAI-1 transcription and abolished the response of
the PAI-1 promoter to shear stress. EMSA and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
showed binding of Sp1 and Ets-1 to each consensus sequence under static
conditions, which increased in response to shear stress. In conclusion,
hepatocyte PAI-1 expression is flow sensitive and transcriptionally regulated by 
shear stress via cooperative interactions between Sp1 and Ets-1.

PMID: 16500919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 Feb;12(2):71-6. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Transcription factor ETS1 is critical for human uterine decidualization.

Kessler CA(1), Schroeder JK, Brar AK, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH
45229-3039, USA.

The aim of this study was to examine whether the transcription factor ETS1 plays 
a critical role in the regulation of human decidualization. Decidual fibroblast
cells were decidualized in vitro by treatment with medroxyprogesterone, estradiol
(E(2)) and dibutyryl cyclic AMP or prostaglandin E(2) in the absence or presence 
of an ETS1 antisense oligonucleotide (oligo) that blocks the translation of ETS1 
mRNA. Control experiments were performed using a control oligo that did not
affect ETS1 expression and the induction of specific marker genes for
decidualization. The ETS1 antisense oligo markedly inhibited ETS1 protein
expression and significantly inhibited downstream targets of ETS1 action. On day 
6 of culture, the decidualized fibroblast cells that had been exposed to the ETS1
antisense oligo contained 40-90% less mRNAs for prolactin, insulin growth factor 
binding protein 1 (IGFBP-1) and other decidualization-specific markers (laminin, 
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-3 [TIMP3], endometrial bleeding associated 
factor [EBAF] and decorin) than those of control cells that had not been exposed 
to the ETS1 antisense oligo. GAPDH mRNA levels, which do not change during
decidualization, were unaffected by either the ETS1 antisense or the control
oligo. The cells decidualized in the presence of the ETS1 antisense oligo also
released significantly less prolactin, EBAF and IGFBP-1 protein, determined by
western blot analyses, than the control cells. Taken together, these findings
strongly suggest that ETS1 plays a critical role in the induction of human
decidualization.

PMID: 16455618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell. 2006 Jan 13;124(1):47-59.

Genome-wide prediction of mammalian enhancers based on analysis of
transcription-factor binding affinity.

Hallikas O(1), Palin K, Sinjushina N, Rautiainen R, Partanen J, Ukkonen E,
Taipale J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cancer Biology Program, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of
Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Jan 13;124(1):21-3.

Understanding the regulation of human gene expression requires knowledge of the
"second genetic code," which consists of the binding specificities of
transcription factors (TFs) and the combinatorial code by which TF binding sites 
are assembled to form tissue-specific enhancer elements. Using a novel
high-throughput method, we determined the DNA binding specificities of GLIs 1-3, 
Tcf4, and c-Ets1, which mediate transcriptional responses to the Hedgehog (Hh),
Wnt, and Ras/MAPK signaling pathways. To identify mammalian enhancer elements
regulated by these pathways on a genomic scale, we developed a computational
tool, enhancer element locator (EEL). We show that EEL can be used to identify Hh
and Wnt target genes and to predict activated TFs based on changes in gene
expression. Predictions validated in transgenic mouse embryos revealed the
presence of multiple tissue-specific enhancers in mouse c-Myc and N-Myc genes,
which has implications for organ-specific growth control and tumor-type
specificity of oncogenes.

PMID: 16413481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2005;26(6):589-98.

Characterisation of the promoter region of the human DNA-repair gene Rad51.

Hasselbach L(1), Haase S, Fischer D, Kolberg HC, Stürzbecher HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Clinic Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Luebeck, 
Germany.

PURPOSE OF INVESTIGATION: Regulatory elements of the 5'-flanking region of the
DNA-repair gene Rad51 were analysed to characterise pathological alterations of
Rad51 mRNA expression during tumour development.
METHODS: Various fragments of the Rad51 promoter were cloned into the pGL3
reporter vector and the respective promoter activity was determined by luciferase
assays in transfected U2-OS cells. Transcription factor binding was identified
using Protein/DNA arrays.
RESULTS: The region encompassing base pairs -204 to -58 was identified as crucial
for Rad51 gene transcription. Down regulator sequences are present upstream (-305
to -204) and downstream (-48 and +204) of this core promoter element. Promoter
activity is significantly enhanced by substituting G at the polymorphic positions
+135 and +172 for C and T, respectively. Transcription factors Ets1/PEA3, E2F1,
p53, EGR1, and Stat5 were identified as relevant for regulating expression of
Rad51.
CONCLUSION: We identified three separate cis-sequence elements within the Rad51
transcriptional promoter, one ensuring basal levels of expression and two
elements limiting expression to relatively low levels. The characterisation of
transcription factor binding might help to explain high-level expression of Rad51
in a variety of solid tumours. The polymorphic sites appear important for the
increased risk of breast and/or ovarian cancer for BRCA2 mutation carriers.

PMID: 16398215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int Immunol. 2006 Feb;18(2):313-23. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

A role for Ets1, synergizing with AP-1 and GATA-3 in the regulation of IL-5
transcription in mouse Th2 lymphocytes.

Wang J(1), Shannon MF, Young IG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Mills Road, Acton, ACT 0200 Australia.

IL-5 is a key regulator of eosinophilic inflammation and is selectively expressed
by antigen-activated Th2 lymphocytes. An important role for the proximal AP-1 and
GATA sites in regulating IL-5 transcription is generally accepted but the
significance of an adjacent Ets/NFAT site has remained unclear. We have
investigated its role using the mouse Th2 clone D10.G4.1. Transcription of IL-5
reporter gene plasmids could be induced in D10 cells by phorbol myristate
acetate/cyclic adenosine monophosphate (PMA/cAMP) stimulation and significantly
further enhanced by activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase
pathways. Strong induction of IL-5 mRNA was also induced by PMA/cAMP. Mutagenesis
showed that the Ets/NFAT site is of critical importance along with the AP-1 and
GATA sites in regulating IL-5 transcription stimulated by PMA/cAMP and MAP kinase
activation. Transactivation was used to investigate the transcription factors
which could function at the three sites and possible synergistic interactions.
AP-1 (c-Fos/c-Jun) strongly induced IL-5 transcription and dominant negative AP-1
constructs confirmed that AP-1 plays an important role in regulating IL-5
expression. Ets1, unlike other members of the Ets/NFAT family, synergized
strongly with AP-1 suggesting that Ets1 is the family member which functions at
the Ets/NFAT site. AP-1/Ets1 transactivation also stimulated IL-5 mRNA
expression. Ets1 binding to the proximal promoter region, demonstrated by
chromatin immunoprecipitation, was stimulated by PMA/cAMP. The absolute
dependence on the binding sites for Ets1, AP-1 and GATA-3 together with the
strong synergy between Ets1 and AP-1 suggest close cooperative interactions
between the three transcription factors in the regulation of IL-5 expression in
mouse T cells.

PMID: 16373364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS Biol. 2006 Jan;4(1):e10.

Ets1-related protein is a key regulator of vasculogenesis in zebrafish.

Sumanas S(1), Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, USA.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2006 Jan;4(1):e24.

During embryonic development, multiple signaling pathways control specification, 
migration, and differentiation of the vascular endothelial cell precursors,
angioblasts. No single gene responsible for the commitment of mesenchymal cells
to the angioblast cell fate has been identified as yet. Here we report
characterization and functional studies of Etsrp, a novel zebrafish ETS domain
protein. etsrp embryonic expression is only restricted to vascular endothelial
cells and their earliest precursors. Morpholino knockdown of Etsrp protein
function resulted in the complete absence of circulation in zebrafish embryos.
Angioblasts in etsrp-morpholino-injected embryos (morphants) failed to undergo
migration and differentiation and did not coalesce into functional blood vessels.
Expression of all vascular endothelial molecular markers tested was severely
reduced in etsrp morphants, whereas hematopoietic markers were not affected.
Overexpression of etsrp RNA caused multiple cell types to express vascular
endothelial markers. etsrp RNA restored expression of vascular markers in cloche 
mutants, defective in hematopoietic and endothelial cell formation, arguing that 
etsrp functions downstream of cloche in angioblast formation. etsrp gene function
was also required for endothelial marker induction by the vascular endothelial
growth factor (vegf) and stem cell leukemia (scl/tal1). These results demonstrate
that Etsrp is necessary and sufficient for the initiation of vasculogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1310653
PMID: 16336046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell Biochem. 2005 Jun;274(1-2):91-101.

The catalytic subunit alpha' gene of human protein kinase CK2 (CSNK2A2): genomic 
organization, promoter identification and determination of Ets1 as a key
regulator.

Ackermann K(1), Neidhart T, Gerber J, Waxmann A, Pyerin W.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemical Cell Physiology (A135), German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany. k.ackermann@dkfz.de

The human genome contains four protein kinase CK2 loci, enclosing three active
genes coding for the catalytic subunits alpha and alpha' and the regulatory
subunit beta, and a processed alpha subunit pseudogene. Extensive structure and
transcriptional control data of the genes are available, except for the CK2alpha'
gene (CSNK2A2). Using in silico and experimental approaches, we find CSNK2A2 to
be located on the long arm of chromosome 16 (in contrast to published data), to
span 40kb and to consist of 12 exons, with the translational start in Exon 1 and 
the stop in Exon 11. Exon/intron boundaries conform to the gt/ag rule, and
various potential polyadenylation signals determine transcript species with
lengths of 1.7-5.7 kb. The upstream region of the gene displays housekeeping
characteristics, lacking a TATA box and possessing several GC boxes as well as a 
CpG island around Exon 1. According to reporter gene assay results, the promoter 
activity ranges from -1308 to 197 with the highest activity in region -396 to
-129. This region contains binding motifs for various transcription factors,
including NFkappaB, Sp and Ets family members. Site-directed mutagenesis
indicates that the Ets motifs play, in cooperation with Sp motif clusters, a
central role in regulating CK2alpha' gene transcription. A similar control has
been described for the transcription of the CK2alpha and CK2beta genes so that
the presented data are compatible with the assumption of a coordinate
transcriptional regulation of all three active human CK2 genes decisively
determined by Ets family members.

PMID: 16335532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Br J Cancer. 2006 Jan 16;94(1):176-7.

Does a truncated form of the transcription factor Ets1 exist in breast cancer
cells?

Dittmer J.

Comment on
    Br J Cancer. 2004 Oct 4;91(7):1308-15.

PMCID: PMC2361070
PMID: 16333304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 17;281(7):4164-72. Epub 2005 Nov 29.

Beads-on-a-string, characterization of ETS-1 sumoylated within its flexible
N-terminal sequence.

Macauley MS(1), Errington WJ, Schärpf M, Mackereth CD, Blaszczak AG, Graves BJ,
McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Sumoylation regulates the activities of several members of the ETS transcription 
factor family. To provide a molecular framework for understanding this
regulation, we have characterized the conjugation of Ets-1 with SUMO-1. Ets-1 is 
modified in vivo predominantly at a consensus sumoylation motif containing
Lys-15. This lysine is located within the unstructured N-terminal segment of
Ets-1 preceding its PNT domain. Using NMR spectroscopy, we demonstrate that the
Ets-1 sumoylation motif associates with the substrate binding site on the
SUMO-conjugating enzyme UBC9 (K(d) approximately 400 microm) and that the PNT
domain is not involved in this interaction. Ets-1 with Lys-15 mutated to an
arginine still binds UBC9 with an affinity similar to the wild type protein, but 
is no longer sumoylated. NMR chemical shift and relaxation measurements reveal
that the covalent attachment of mature SUMO-1, via its flexible C-terminal
Gly-97, to Lys-15 of Ets-1 does not perturb the structure or dynamic properties
of either protein. Therefore sumoylated Ets-1 behaves as "beads-on-a-string" with
the two proteins tethered by flexible polypeptide segments containing the
isopeptide linkage. Accordingly, SUMO-1 may mediate interactions of Ets-1 with
signaling or transcriptional regulatory macromolecules by acting as a
structurally independent docking module, rather than through the induction of a
conformational change in either protein upon their covalent linkage. We also
hypothesize that the flexibility of the linking polypeptide sequence may be a
general feature contributing to the recognition of SUMO-modified proteins by
their downstream effectors.

PMID: 16319071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Biochem. 2006 Jan;282(1-2):89-99.

Collagen binding alpha2beta1 and alpha1beta1 integrins play contrasting roles in 
regulation of Ets-1 expression in human liver myofibroblasts.

Znoyko I(1), Trojanowska M, Reuben A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical University of South
Carolina, 96, Jonathan Lucas St., Suite 210, Charleston, 29425, USA.

Activation of hepatic stellate cells from quiescence to myofibroblast-like cells 
(MFBs) is a pivotal event in hepatic fibrogenesis. Plastic-cultured stellate
cells (an established in vitro model of the activated phenotype) recultured on
Matrigel revert to quiescence. In the present study we analyzed the molecular
mechanism underlying this process, focusing on the effect of collagen receptors
alpha(2)beta(1) and alpha(1)beta(1) integrin signaling on the expression of Ets-1
transcription factor and its target gene MMP1 in cultured human MFBs. Cells grown
in 3-dimensional (3D) substrates (Matrigel) or collagen type I gel) markedly
upregulated Ets-1 and MMP1 messages, in comparison to cells cultured on plastic. 
A similar effect but less intense was mimicked by stimulation of alpha(2)beta(1) 
or blocking of alpha(1)beta(1) integrin in cells grown on plastic. We observed
increased expression of MMP1 transcripts with parallel changes in MMP1 promoter
activity, and in mRNA and protein levels of upstream transcription factors Ets-1 
and c-Jun. Interference with alpha(2)beta(1) and alpha(1)beta(1) integrin
function in cells cultured in a 3D collagen substrate resulted in an even greater
effect. Morphologically, stimulation of alpha(2)beta(1) integrin resulted in
formation of multicellular networks, probably by facilitation of cell migration. 
Thus, we report the novel observation that in cultured human MFBs reverting to
quiescence, the expression of transcription factor Ets-1 and its downstream
target MMP1 can be modulated by changes in the microenvironment, which are
mediated, at least in part, by the balance between collagen receptor integrin
alpha(2)beta(1) and alpha(1)beta(1) activities.

PMID: 16317516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2005;16(4-6):207-16.

ERK-dependent signaling pathway and transcriptional factor Ets-1 regulate matrix 
metalloproteinase-9 production in transforming growth factor-beta1 stimulated
glomerular podocytes.

Liu S(1), Liang Y, Huang H, Wang L, Li Y, Li J, Li X, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.

The unregulated synthesis of glomerular basement membrane (GBM) components,
extracelluar matrix (ECM) proteins, or the secretion of ECM-degradation enzymes, 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), by podocytes under pathological conditions
might be major factors in GBM damage. The present study examined the effects and 
the underlying molecular mechanism of transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1)
on the production of gelatinase in cultured murine podocytes. Our results showed 
that TGFbeta1 is the most potent inducer of MMP-9 secretion in both a dose- and
time-dependent manner, but has very little effect on MMP-2 secretion. TGFbeta1
upregulated MMP-9 mRNA levels, but did not affect the expression of matrix
mettaloproteinases TIMP-1 mRNA. TGFbeta1 induced activation of both Smad2 and
extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK1/2). However, blockade of Smad2
signaling pathway by Staurosporine did not affect the TGFbeta1-stimulated
secretion of MMP-9, whereas inhibition of activation of ERK1/2 by PD98059
abolished TGFbeta1-stimulated secretion of MMP-9 and expression of MMP-9 mRNA.
Protein levels of the transcriptional factor Ets-1 increased and were sustained
for 12 h by TGFbeta1-stimulation. Our data also showed that blockage of ERK1/2
activation by PD98059 led to a reduction in the level of Ets-1 protein and to a
consequent decrease in MMP-9 mRNA levels. These results demonstrate that TGFbeta1
can induce the production of MMP-9 in podocytes through the ERK1/2 MAPK pathway, 
and suggested that an increase in MMP-9 enzymatic activities may be involved in
the damage of the GBM in response to inflammatory factors, ultimately leading to 
glomerulosclerosis.

(c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 16301820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Matrix Biol. 2006 Mar;25(2):118-29. Epub 2005 Nov 18.

Tandem Sp1/Sp3 sites together with an Ets-1 site cooperate to mediate alpha11
integrin chain expression in mesenchymal cells.

Lu N(1), Heuchel R, Barczyk M, Zhang WM, Gullberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Division of Physiology, University of Bergen, Jonas
Lies vei 91, 5009 Bergen, Norway.

Alpha11beta1 integrin is a collagen receptor, which is expressed in a highly
regulated manner in a specific subset of ectomesenchymally and mesodermally
derived cells. We previously established that a 3 kb region upstream of the
transcription start site of the ITGA11 gene efficiently induced alpha11
transcription in a cell-type specific manner. Using the human fibrosarcoma cell
line HT1080 and human skin fibroblasts, we now report that the majority of the
activity in the proximal promoter resides in a region spanning nt +25 to nt -176.
Mutation and deletion analyses using luciferase reporter assays showed that
tandem low affinity Sp1/Sp3 binding sites, together with an Ets-1-like binding
site, were needed for the proximal promoter activity in mesenchymal cells. EMSAs 
and supershift assays showed that Sp1 and Sp3 both bind to the Sp1/Sp3 binding
sites, whereas occupation of the Ets-1 binding site appears to be Sp3-dependent. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays verified that Sp1, Sp3 and Ets-1 can bind
the promoter in vivo. In heterologous Drosophila SL2 cells, Sp1, Sp3 and Ets-1
all transactivated the alpha11 promoter, with Sp1 being the most efficient
activator. The lack of any synergistic effect of Sp1/Sp3 and Ets-1 in SL2 cells
indicates that an Ets family member other than Ets-1 might be involved in
regulating alpha11 transcription in mesenchymal cells. The central role of Sp1 in
regulating alpha11 RNA transcription was further verified by the ability of the
Sp1 inhibitor mithramycin A to efficiently attenuate alpha11 RNA and protein
levels in primary fibroblasts. The proximal promoter itself was able to confer
cell-type specific transcription on HT1080 cells and embryonic fibroblasts but
not on U2OS and JAR cells. We speculate that the "mesenchymal signature" of
alpha11 integrin gene expression is controlled by the activity of Sp1/Sp3,
fibroblast-specific combinations of Ets family members and yet unidentified
enhancer-binding transcription factors.

PMID: 16300938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Jul;13(7):1064-74. Epub 2005 Nov 18.

Overexpression of Ets-1 in human hematopoietic progenitor cells blocks erythroid 
and promotes megakaryocytic differentiation.

Lulli V(1), Romania P, Morsilli O, Gabbianelli M, Pagliuca A, Mazzeo S, Testa U, 
Peschle C, Marziali G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Ets-1 is a widely expressed transcription factor implicated in development,
tumorigenesis and hematopoiesis. We analyzed Ets-1 gene expression during human
erythroid and megakaryocytic (MK) differentiation in unilineage cultures of CD34+
progenitor cells. During erythroid maturation, Ets-1 is downmodulated and
exported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm through an active mechanism mediated
by a leucine-rich nuclear export signal. In contrast, during megakaryocytopoiesis
Ets-1 increases and remains localized in the nucleus up to terminal maturation.
Overexpression of Ets-1 in erythroid cells blocks maturation at the
polychromatophilic stage, increases GATA-2 and decreases both GATA-1 and
erythropoietin receptor expression. Conversely, Ets-1 overexpressing
megakaryocytes are characterized by enhanced differentiation and maturation,
coupled with upmodulation of GATA-2 and megakaryocyte-specific genes. We show
that Ets-1 binds to and activates the GATA-2 promoter, in vitro and in vivo,
indicating that one of the pathways through which Ets-1 blocks erythroid and
promotes MK differentiation is via upmodulation of GATA-2 expression.

PMID: 16294212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 2006 Apr 6;25(15):2273-84.

Gene expression profiling of breast cell lines identifies potential new basal
markers.

Charafe-Jauffret E(1), Ginestier C, Monville F, Finetti P, Adélaïde J, Cervera N,
Fekairi S, Xerri L, Jacquemier J, Birnbaum D, Bertucci F.

Author information: 
(1)Marseille Cancer Institute, Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Inserm/Institut 
Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

A better molecular characterization of breast cell lines (BCL) may help discover 
new markers to apply to tumour samples. We performed gene and protein expression 
profiling of 31 BCL using whole-genome DNA microarrays and immunohistochemistry
(IHC) on 'cell microarrays' (CMA), respectively. Global hierarchical clustering
discriminated two groups of BCL: group I corresponded to luminal cell lines,
group II to basal and mesenchymal cell lines. Correlations with centroids
calculated from a published 'intrinsic 500-gene set' assigned 15 cell lines as
luminal, eight as basal and four as mesenchymal. A set of 1.233 genes was
differentially expressed between basal and luminal samples. Mesenchymal and basal
subtypes were rather similar and discriminated by only 227 genes. The expression 
of 10 proteins (CAV1, CD44, EGFR, MET, ETS1, GATA3, luminal cytokeratin CK19,
basal cytokeratin CK5/6, CD10, and ERM protein moesin) encoded by luminal vs
basal discriminator genes confirmed the subtype classification and the validity
of the identified markers. Our BCL basal/luminal signature correctly
re-classified the published series of tumour samples that originally served to
identify the molecular subtypes, suggesting that the identified markers should be
useful for tumour classification and might represent promising targets for
disease management.

PMID: 16288205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. FASEB J. 2006 Jan;20(1):184-6. Epub 2005 Nov 8.

Dihydrosphingosine 1-phosphate stimulates MMP1 gene expression via activation of 
ERK1/2-Ets1 pathway in human fibroblasts.

Bu S(1), Yamanaka M, Pei H, Bielawska A, Bielawski J, Hannun YA, Obeid L,
Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Sphingosine kinase (SphK) is a conserved lipid kinase that catalyzes formation of
important regulators of inter- and intracellular signaling, sphingosine-1
phosphate (S1P), and dihydrosphingosine 1-phosphate (dhS1P). In this study, we
investigated the role of SphK1 in the regulation of expression of matrix
metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) in dermal fibroblasts, a key event in regulation of
extra cellular matrix. We show that overexpression of SphK1 up-regulated MMP1
protein, MMP1 mRNA, and MMP1 promoter activity, and this action of SphK1 required
activation of the ERK1/2-Ets1 and NF-kappaB pathways. Furthermore, experiments
using SphK1 specific siRNA demonstrated that SphK1 is required for the TNF-alpha 
stimulation of MMP1. Additional data revealed a specific role of dhS1P, and not
S1P, as a mediator of SphK1-dependent activation of ERK1/2 and up-regulation of
MMP1. The stimulatory effect of dhS1P was sensitive to pertussis toxin,
suggesting a possible involvement of a G-protein-coupled receptor. In contrast,
S1P, but not dhS1P, stimulated the induction of COX-2, which demonstrated
selective actions of these two closely related bioactive lipids. In conclusion,
this study describes a novel mode of SphK1 signaling through generation of dhS1P 
with a key role in mediating transcriptional responses to TNF-alpha. This is the 
first report of selective function of dhS1P as compared with the better studied
S1P.

PMID: 16278291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 30;280(52):43264-71. Epub 2005 Nov 1.

c-Myb and members of the c-Ets family of transcription factors act as molecular
switches to mediate opposite steroid regulation of the human glucocorticoid
receptor 1A promoter.

Geng CD(1), Vedeckis WV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Stanley S. Scott Cancer
Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana
70112, USA.

Steroid auto-regulation of the human glucocorticoid receptor (hGR) 1A promoter in
lymphoblast cells resides largely in two DNA elements (footprints 11 and 12). We 
show here that c-Myb and c-Ets family members (Ets-1/2, PU.1, and Spi-B) control 
hGR 1A promoter regulation in T- and B-lymphoblast cells. Two T-lymphoblast
lines, CEM-C7 and Jurkat, contain high levels of c-Myb and low levels of PU.1,
whereas the opposite is true in IM-9 B-lymphoblasts. In Jurkat cells,
overexpression of c-Ets-1, c-Ets-2, or PU.1 effectively represses
dexamethasone-mediated up-regulation of an hGR 1A promoter-luciferase reporter
gene, as do dominant negative c-Myb (c-Myb DNA-binding domain) or Ets proteins
(Ets-2 DNA-binding domain). Overexpression of c-Myb in IM-9 cells confers
hormone-dependent up-regulation to the hGR 1A promoter reporter gene. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays show that hormone treatment causes the recruitment of 
hGR and c-Myb to the hGR 1A promoter in CEM-C7 cells, whereas hGR and PU.1 are
recruited to this promoter in IM-9 cells. These observations suggest that the
specific transcription factor that binds to footprint 12, when hGR binds to the
adjacent footprint 11, determines the direction of hGR 1A promoter
auto-regulation. This leads to a "molecular switch" model for auto-regulation of 
the hGR 1A promoter.

PMID: 16263717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Mar;206(3):718-27.

Platelet derived growth factor induced tenascin-C transcription is
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt-dependent and mediated by Ets family transcription 
factors.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Asano Y, Yamane K, Trojanowska M, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

Previous studies have identified several cytokines as inducers of tenascin-C
(TN-C) expression in various tissue culture systems. However, the signaling
pathways of the regulation of TN-C expression are almost unknown. In this study, 
we clarified the molecular mechanism(s) underlying the regulation of the TN-C
gene by platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) in cultured human dermal
fibroblasts. PDGF induced the expression of TN-C protein as well as mRNA in a
dose-dependent manner. Actinomycin D, an RNA synthesis inhibitor, significantly
blocked the PDGF-mediated upregulation of TN-C mRNA expression, whereas
cycloheximide, a protein synthesis inhibitor, did not. The PDGF-mediated
induction of TN-C expression was inhibited by the treatment of fibroblasts with a
selective phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, wortmannin, or LY294002.
These results suggest that PDGF induced the expression of TN-C at a
transcriptional level via phosphoinositide3-kinase/Akt signaling pathways. We
performed serial 5' deletions and a transient transfection analysis to define the
region in the TN-C promoter mediating the responsiveness to PDGF. Overexpression 
of Sp1, Ets1, or Ets2 activated the TN-C promoter and superinduced TN-C promoter 
activity stimulated by PDGF, whereas overexpression of Fli1 inhibited the effects
of PDGF on TN-C expression. Mutation of the Sp1/3 binding sites or Ets binding
sites in the TN-C promoter region responsible to PDGF abrogated the
PDGF-inducible promoter activity. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that Sp1,
Ets1, and Ets2 form a transcriptionally active complex. On the other hand, the
interaction of Fli1 with Sp1 decreased after PDGF treatment. These results
suggest that the upregulation of TN-C expression by PDGF involves Ets family
transcription factors, co-operating with Sp1.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16245312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Head Neck. 2005 Dec;27(12):1068-72.

The effect of nimesulide, a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, on Ets-1 and
Ets-2 expression in head and neck cancer cell lines.

Lamm W(1), Vormittag L, Turhani D, Erovic BM, Czembirek C, Eder-Czembirek C,
Thurnher D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University
of Vienna, Waehringer Gürtel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The protooncogenes Ets-1 and Ets-2 are involved in carcinogenesis of 
different tumors. Nimesulide, a selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor, has
antiproliferative effects on tumor cells. The question arises whether nimesulide 
influences Ets-1 and Ets-2 synthesis in head and neck tumors.
METHODS: Expression of Ets-1 and Ets-2 was analyzed in tumor tissues by
immunohistochemistry. The influence of nimesulide and an extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) inhibitor on cell proliferation of two head and
neck cancer cell lines and Ets-1 and Ets-2 expression was determined by automated
cell counting and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry showed a high expression of Ets-1 and Ets-2 in
tumor tissues. In both cell lines, Ets-1 and Ets-2 expression were reduced after 
24 and 48 hours by nimesulide.
CONCLUSION: Both Ets-1 and Ets-2 are overexpressed in head and neck cancer
specimens. Inhibition of Ets-1 and Ets-2 expression in head and neck cancer cell 
lines by nimesulide might explain the proapoptotic property of this COX-2
inhibitor.

(c) 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 16240325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Oncol Rep. 2005 Nov;14(5):1351-5.

Comparative genomics on SLIT1, SLIT2, and SLIT3 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

SLIT1 gene at human chromosome 10q24.1, SLIT2 gene at 4p15.31, and SLIT3 gene at 
5q34-q35.1 encode large secreted proteins functioning as ligands for Roundabout
(Robo) receptors. SLIT-ROBO signaling pathway is implicated in neurogenesis,
angiogenesis, and immune response through the regulation of axonal guidance,
endothelial cell migration, and denderitic cell migration, respectively. GREMLIN 
(CKTSF1B1 or GREM1) and DANTE (CKTSF1B3 or GREM3) are secreted antagonists for
BMPs and SLITs. Here, comparative integromics analyses on SLIT1, SLIT2, and SLIT3
orthologs were performed by using bioinformatics. Rat Slit2 gene, consisting of
36 exons, was located within rat genome sequences AC098362.4 and AC111627.6.
Mouse Slit3 complete coding sequence was determined by assembling BB634238 EST,
AF144629 cDNA, and AK129223 cDNA. Leucine-rich repeats with nine conserved
cysteine (LRRCC) domains and SLIT C-terminal cysteine-rich (SLITCCR) domain were 
identified in this study. CPxxCxCxxxxVxCxxxxLxxxPxxxPx(10~58)
Nx(19,20)LxxNx(9)Fx(8)LxLxxNxxxCxxxxxFxxLxxx
xxLxLxxNx(9)Fx(13)NxxxCxCxxxWLx(15)CxxPx(17)C was the consensus sequence of LRRCC
domain. Mammalian SLIT1, SLIT2 and SLIT3 orthologs were large secreted proteins
with four LRRCC domains, nine EGF domains, Laminin G (LamG) domain, and SLITCCR
domain. SLIT1 mRNA was expressed in fetal brain, infant brain, anaplastic
oligodendroglioma, and Jurkat T cells. SLIT2 and SLIT3 mRNAs were co-expressed in
embryonic stem (ES) cells with embryoid body formation, and diffuse type gastric 
cancer with signet ring cell features. Double TCF/LEF and bHLH-binding sites were
conserved among mammalian SLIT1 promoters. FOXJ2, E47, ETS1, and FOXA2-binding
sites and CCAAT box were conserved among mammalian SLIT3 promoters. Mammalian
SLIT1 orthologs were identified as evolutionarily conserved targets of the
WNT/beta-catenin signaling pathway.

PMID: 16211308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncol Rep. 2005 Nov;14(5):1231-8.

Classification of neural differentiation-associated genes in P19 embryonal
carcinoma cells by their expression patterns induced after cell aggregation
and/or retinoic acid treatment.

Teramoto S(1), Kihara-Negishi F, Sakurai T, Yamada T, Hashimoto-Tamaoki T, Tamura
S, Kohno S, Oikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Genetics, Sasaki Institute, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.

Expression of neural differentiation-associated genes was examined by RT-PCR and 
macroarray analyses during neural differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma
cells induced by cell aggregation and/or retinoic acid (RA) treatment. Results
revealed that the neural genes examined could be classified into 4 groups based
on their expression patterns. The 1st group included the Wnt-1, Id-1, Id-3 and
cdc42 genes, expression of which was altered by cell aggregation alone, but not
by RA treatment alone. The 2nd group included the alphaN-catenin, Neuro D and
GDNFRbeta genes, expression of which was altered by RA treatment alone, but not
by cell aggregation. The 3rd group consisted of the Brn-2, TrkA, bcl-X,
N-cadherin, E-cadherin and Otx-2 genes, expression of which was altered by either
treatment. The 4th group included the ACTH, D4DR, NGC and Oct-3 genes, the
expression of which changed only when both treatments were applied
simultaneously. Expression of the Ets-1 and Fli-1 transcription factor genes was 
up-regulated by either treatment alone at initial stages of neural
differentiation of P19 cells, although overexpression of these genes alone could 
not induce cell differentiation. Our results suggest that although both
treatments are required for complete neural differentiation of P19 cells, cell
aggregation or RA treatment alone drive differentiation to a certain extent at
the gene expression level.

PMID: 16211290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Perinat Med. 2005;33(4):314-9.

The transcription factor Ets-1 is expressed in human amniochorionic membranes and
is up-regulated in term and preterm premature rupture of membranes.

Michaelis SA(1), Okuducu AF, Sarioglu NM, von Deimling A, Dudenhausen JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Campus
Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany. silke.michaelis@charite.de

OBJECTIVE: The major tensile strength of fetal membranes is provided by their
extracellular matrix (ECM) components. The transcription factor Ets-1 is a
critical mediator of ECM remodelling. The purpose of this study was to examine
whether Ets-1 is expressed in human fetal membranes and whether it is implicated 
in premature membrane rupture.
STUDY DESIGN: Amniochorionic membranes from 52 women in the following categories 
were analyzed for Ets-1 expression: preterm and term premature rupture of
membranes, preterm and term labor and delivery, and preterm and term cesarean
sections without previous onset of labor. Ets-1 protein was localized with the
use of immunohistochemistry. Ets-1 levels were determined with a histoscore.
RESULTS: Ets-1 protein was localized to the trophoblast as well as to the stromal
layers. Ets-1 protein expression was up-regulated in the stroma of term and
preterm prematurely ruptured membranes.
CONCLUSION: Ets-1 is expressed in human fetal membranes and its expression is
up-regulated with premature rupture of membranes, suggesting a role for Ets-1 in 
ECM remodelling of the membranes.

PMID: 16207116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):9073-81.

GCF2/LRRFIP1 represses tumor necrosis factor alpha expression.

Suriano AR(1), Sanford AN, Kim N, Oh M, Kennedy S, Henderson MJ, Dietzmann K,
Sullivan KE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) is an important mediator of inflammation,
apoptosis, and the development of secondary lymphoid structures. Multiple
polymorphic microsatellites have been identified in and around the gene, and
there are also multiple single-base pair biallelic polymorphisms in the introns
and promoter. The TNF-alpha -308 promoter polymorphism is a G-to-A transition
which has been statistically associated with various autoimmune disorders. Some
studies have found that it may directly mediate the increased transcription of
TNF-alpha in some circumstances. This study characterizes proteins interacting at
the polymorphic promoter site. Affinity purification of binding proteins and
confirmatory chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were used to identify the
proteins. Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses and surface plasmon resonance
were used to define binding characteristics. Proteins interacting at this site
include GCF2/LRRFIP1 and Ets-1. GCF2/LRRFIP1 appears to act as a repressor and
occupies the -308 site in cells that do not make TNF-alpha. Cells competent to
produce TNF-alpha have Ets-1 bound to the -308 promoter site. Active
transcription is accompanied by NF-kappaB and c-Jun binding to the proximal
promoter. Thus, dynamic changes on the TNF-alpha promoter, particularly at the
-308 site, accompany the transition from repressed to active transcription.
GCF2/LRRFIP1 is the first TNF-alpha repressor identified.

PMCID: PMC1265793
PMID: 16199883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Pathol. 2005 Oct;167(4):1149-59.

Peroxide-inducible Ets-1 mediates platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha
gene transcription in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Bonello MR(1), Bobryshev YV, Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, Department of Pathology, The University of New
South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
vascular occlusive disorders such as atherosclerosis and restenosis in part due
to its regulation of smooth muscle cell phenotype. The molecular mechanisms
regulating the expression of PDGF-Ralpha, which binds all known dimeric forms of 
PDGF except PDGF-DD, are poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that the winged
helix-turn-helix proto-oncogene Ets-1 controls PDGF-Ralpha transcription and mRNA
expression in smooth muscle cells. Mutational analysis, electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay, and chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed the existence of a
reverse Ets binding motif (-45TTCC-42) in the proximal region of the PDGF-Ralpha 
promoter, which bound both recombinant and endogenous Ets-1. Ets-1-inducible
PDGF-Ralpha expression depended on the integrity of both the -45TTCC-42 motif and
the -61G10(-52) element, which resides upstream of -45TTCC-42 and mediates Sp1
induction. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) at nanomolar concentrations stimulated levels
of Ets-1 and increased PDGF-Ralpha transcription and mRNA expression without
affecting Sp1 expression. H2O2 activation of the PDGF-Ralpha promoter was
abolished by disrupting -45TTCC-42 or -61G10(-52). These studies identify a
functional Ets motif in the PDGF-Ralpha promoter that plays a pivotal role in
agonist-inducible PDGF-Ralpha transcription.

PMCID: PMC1603673
PMID: 16192649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Blood. 2006 Mar 15;107(6):2322-9. Epub 2005 Sep 27.

Inducible platelet-derived growth factor D-chain expression by angiotensin II and
hydrogen peroxide involves transcriptional regulation by Ets-1 and Sp1.

Liu MY(1), Eyries M, Zhang C, Santiago FS, Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, Department of Pathology, University of New South
Wales, Sydney NSW 2052 Australia.

Platelet-derived growth factor D-chain (PDGF-D) is the newest member of the PDGF 
family of mitogens and chemoattractants expressed in a wide variety of cell
types, including vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs). The molecular mechanisms
regulating PDGF-D transcription are not known. Primer extension analysis mapped a
single transcriptional start site to the ccAGCGC motif with several potential Ets
motifs located upstream. Ets-1, but not Ets-1 bearing only the DNA-binding
domain, activates the PDGF-D promoter and mRNA expression in SMCs. Ets site D3
((-470)GGAT(-467)) is singly required for basal and Ets-1-inducible PDGF-D
promoter-dependent expression. D3 supports the interaction of endogenous and
recombinant Ets-1 and Sp1. Sp1, like Ets-1, induces PDGF-D transcription and mRNA
expression, which is blocked by mutant Ets-1. H2O2 stimulates Ets-1, but not Sp1,
and activates D3-dependent PDGF-D transcription. Ets-1 and Sp1 siRNA block
peroxide-inducible PDGF-D expression. Angiotensin II (ATII) induction of PDGF-D
and Ets-1 was blocked by prior incubation of the cells with PEG-catalase, but not
BSA, indicating that ATII-inducible Ets-1 and PDGF-D expression is mediated via
H2O2. Thus, 2 separate trans-acting factors regulate PDGF-D transcription, alone 
and in response to oxidative stress.

PMID: 16189269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Sci STKE. 2005 Sep 13;2005(301):pe44.

Can you hear me now? Regulating transcriptional activators by phosphorylation.

Gardner KH(1), Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9038, USA.

Extracellular signals often modulate the expression of specific genetic programs 
by triggering the phosphorylation of relevant transcription factors (TFs).
Phosphorylation in turn regulates such TFs by altering their cellular
localization, DNA binding affinity, or transcriptional activity. Structural
approaches have revealed how phosphorylation turns some TFs on or off; but less
is known about how phosphorylation regulates other transcription factors in a
graded manner that depends on signal intensity. A recent paper by Graves and
colleagues reveals how a group of phosphorylation sites in Ets-1 regulates its
DNA binding activity. Their studies provide new insight into the importance of
multisite phosphorylation for the graded regulation of transcription and
highlight the involvement of allosteric mechanisms in this process.

PMID: 16160121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 9;280(49):40857-66. Epub 2005 Sep 12.

Sp1 is a co-activator with Ets-1, and Net is an important repressor of the
transcription of CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha.

Sugimoto H(1), Okamura K, Sugimoto S, Satou M, Hattori T, Vance DE, Izumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biochemistry, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, Maebashi 371-8511, Japan.

Phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis via the CDP-choline pathway is primarily
regulated by CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CT) encoded by the Pcyt1a
and Pcyt1b genes. Previously, we identified an Ets-1-binding site located at
-49/-47 in the promoter of Pcyt1a as an important transcriptional element
involved in basal CTalpha transcription (Sugimoto, H., Sugimoto, S., Tatei, K.,
Obinata, H., Bakovic, M., Izumi, T., and Vance, D. E. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 
19716-19722). In this study, we determined whether or not there were other
important elements and binding proteins for basal CTalpha transcription in the
Pcyt1a promoter, and if other Ets family proteins bind to the Ets-1-binding site.
The results indicate the formation of a ternary complex with Ets-1 binding at
-49/-47 and Sp1 binding at -58/-54 of the Pcyt1a promoter that is important for
activating CTalpha transcription. When nuclear extracts of COS-7 cells expressing
various Ets family repressors were incubated with DNA probes, binding of Net to
the probes was observed. Net dose-dependently depressed the promoter-luciferase
activity by 98%, even when co-expressed with Ets-1. RNA interference targeting
Net caused an increase of endogenous CTalpha mRNA. After synchronizing the cell
cycle in NIH3T3 cells, CTalpha mRNA increased at the S-M phase corresponding to
an increase of Ets-1 mRNA and a decrease of Net mRNA. These results indicated
that Net is an important endogenous repressor for CTalpha transcription.

PMID: 16157598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Clin Invest. 2005 Sep;115(9):2508-16.

Ets-1 is a critical regulator of Ang II-mediated vascular inflammation and
remodeling.

Zhan Y(1), Brown C, Maynard E, Anshelevich A, Ni W, Ho IC, Oettgen P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Institutes of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2005 Sep;115(9):2319-22.

Ang II is a central mediator of vascular inflammation and remodeling. The
transcription factor Ets-1 is rapidly induced in vascular smooth muscle and
endothelial cells of the mouse thoracic aorta in response to systemic Ang II
infusion. Arterial wall thickening, perivascular fibrosis, and cardiac
hypertrophy are significantly diminished in Ets1-/- mice compared with control
mice in response to Ang II. The induction of 2 known targets of Ets-1,
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21CIP and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
(PAI-1), by Ang II is markedly blunted in the aorta of Ets1-/- mice compared with
wild-type controls. Expression of p21CIP in VSMCs leads to cellular hypertrophy, 
whereas expression of p21CIP in endothelial cells is associated with cell cycle
arrest, apoptosis, and endothelial dysfunction. PAI-1 promotes the development of
perivascular fibrosis. We have identified monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
(MCP-1) as a novel target for Ets-1. Expression of MCP-1 is similarly reduced in 
Ets1-/- mice compared with control mice in response to Ang II, which results in
significantly diminished recruitment of T cells and macrophages to the vessel
wall. In summary, our results support a critical role for Ets-1 as a
transcriptional mediator of vascular inflammation and remodeling in response to
Ang II.

PMCID: PMC1193876
PMID: 16138193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2006;61(1):15-20. Epub 2005 Aug 25.

Expression of c-Ets1 protein in normal human placenta.

Takai N(1), Ueda T, Narahara H, Miyakawa I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, 
Japan. takai@med.oita-.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The proto-oncogene product c-Ets1 is a transcriptional factor that
controls the expression of a number of genes involved in extracellular matrix
remodeling such as stromelysin-1 (matrix metalloproteinase-3; MMP-3),
collagenase-1, and urokinase-type plasminogen activator (u-PA). To elucidate the 
involvement of c-Ets1 in the invasive pathway of the trophoblasts, we analyzed
c-Ets1 protein expression in placentas by fluorescent immunohistochemistry and
Western blot analysis.
METHODS: We analyzed serial frozen sections for c-Ets1 protein expression of the 
chorionic villi and cell column in the first trimester and the basal plate of
placenta and amniotic membranes in the third trimester by fluorescent
immunohistochemistry. Moreover, we examined the expression of c-Ets1 in the first
and the third trimester by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: In the first trimester, c-Ets1 was strongly expressed in the cytoplasm
of cytotrophoblasts. Moreover, the cell column that invaded the endometrium had
the strongest expression of c-Ets1. In the third trimester, c-Ets1 was detected
in both cytoplasm and nucleus of the invading trophoblasts in the basal plate.
Furthermore, c-Ets1 was expressed in both cytoplasm and nucleus of the
trophoblasts in amniotic membrane. Western blotting revealed that c-Ets1
expressions in the first trimester were stronger than those in the third
trimester.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that c-Ets1 expression in normal human
placenta correlates to the invasive behavior of the trophoblasts, probably by
activating the transcription of matrix-degrading MMPs, including MMP-3,
collagenase-1, and u-PA.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16127276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):35904-13. Epub 2005 Aug 24.

Characterizing sterol defect suppressors uncovers a novel transcriptional
signaling pathway regulating zymosterol biosynthesis.

Germann M(1), Gallo C, Donahue T, Shirzadi R, Stukey J, Lang S, Ruckenstuhl C,
Oliaro-Bosso S, McDonough V, Turnowsky F, Balliano G, Nickels JT Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

erg26-1ts cells harbor defects in the 4alpha-carboxysterol-C3 dehydrogenase
activity necessary for conversion of 4,4-dimethylzymosterol to zymosterol. Mutant
cells accumulate toxic 4-carboxysterols and are inviable at high temperature. A
genetic screen aimed at cloning recessive mutations remediating the temperature
sensitive growth defect has resulted in the isolation of four complementation
groups, ets1-4 (erg26-1ts temperature sensitive suppressor). We describe the
characterization of ets1-1 and ets2-1. Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry
analyses demonstrate that erg26-1ts ets1-1 and erg26-1ts ets2-1 cells do not
accumulate 4-carboxysterols, rather these cells have increased levels of squalene
and squalene epoxide, respectively. ets1-1 and ets2-1 cells accumulate these same
sterol intermediates. Chromosomal integration of ERG1 ERG7 at their loci in
erg26-1ts ets1-1 and erg26-1ts and ets2-1 mutants, respectively, results in the
loss of accumulation of squalene and squalene epoxide, re-accumulation of
4-carboxysterols and cell inviability at high temperature. Enzymatic assays
demonstrate that mutants harboring the ets1-1 allele have decreased squalene
epoxidase activity, while those containing the ets2-1 allele show weakened
oxidosqualene cyclase activity. Thus, ETS1 and ETS2 are allelic to ERG1 and ERG7,
respectively. We have mapped mutations within the erg1-1/ets1-1 (G247D) and
erg7-1/ets2-1 (D530N, V615E) alleles that suppress the inviability of erg26-1ts
at high temperature, and cause accumulation of sterol intermediates and decreased
enzymatic activities. Finally using erg1-1 and erg7-1 mutant strains, we
demonstrate that the expression of the ERG25/26/27 genes required for zymosterol 
biosynthesis are coordinately transcriptionally regulated, along with ERG1 and
ERG7, in response to blocks in sterol biosynthesis. Transcriptional regulation
requires the transcription factors, Upc2p and Ecm22p.

PMID: 16120615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Immunol. 2005 Sep 1;175(5):3123-32.

Characterization of the murine C3a receptor enhancer-promoter: expression control
by an activator protein 1 sequence and an Ets-like site.

Martin CB(1), Martin BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

The complement anaphylatoxins, C3a and C5a, exert their effects by binding to
their respective receptors. A number of studies have implicated these proteins in
human disease, yet little is known about anaphylatoxin receptor gene regulation. 
In this report, we demonstrate that most of the regulatory functions in the
murine C3aR gene lie within 50 bp of the transcription start site. This region is
critical for macrophage expression but does not have activity in a non-expressing
melanoma cell line. Within this small region are putative consensus binding sites
for AP-1, NF-kappaB, Ets, and GATA transcription factors. Lack of a corresponding
NF-kappaB site in the human sequence and lack of DNA binding activity in
macrophage nuclear extracts suggests that the NF-kappaB site is nonfunctional.
Luciferase data demonstrate that the GATA site functions as a negative regulatory
element in RAW 264.7 macrophages. The AP-1 and Ets sites are critical for C3aR
reporter gene expression, such that when each is mutated, a significant loss of
activity is observed. Furthermore, we demonstrate that these sequences cooperate 
to mediate both basal and LPS-induced expression of C3aR. Interestingly, EMSA
analyses demonstrate that the AP-1 site binds to c-Jun, and in vivo footprinting 
shows a typical footprint in this site, but the Ets site does not have a
"typical" Ets footprint and does not bind to Ets-1/2 proteins in RAW 264.7
extracts. These data suggest that, although the control region for C3aR is small,
interaction of several transcription factors can lead to complex patterns of gene
regulation.

PMID: 16116202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 15;65(16):7205-13.

Caspase-1 is a direct target gene of ETS1 and plays a role in ETS1-induced
apoptosis.

Pei H(1), Li C, Adereth Y, Hsu T, Watson DK, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 1;65(23):11228.

ETS1, the founding member of Ets transcriptional factor family, plays an
important role in cell proliferation, differentiation, lymphoid cell development,
transformation, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. Previous work has shown that ETS1
represses tumorigenicity of colon carcinoma cells in vivo, and that the p42-ETS1 
protein bypasses a defect in apoptosis in colon carcinoma cells through the
up-regulation of caspase-1 expression. In this report, we show that expression of
p42-ETS1 inhibits tumorigenicity of colon cancer DLD-1 cells through induction of
apoptosis in vivo. In support of the hypothesis that caspase-1 might be a target 
involved in the sensitization of DLD-1 cells to Fas-induced apoptosis by ETS1,
overexpression of caspase-1 bypasses Fas-induced apoptosis in these cells as
well. Furthermore, ETS1-mediated apoptosis was observed in MOP8 cells, a
transformed mouse NIH3T3 cell line. To determine whether ETS1 activates the
transcription of caspase-1, luciferase reporters driven by the wild-type and
mutant caspase-1 promoters were generated. Both p51-ETS1 and p42-ETS1
transactivated the caspase-1 transcription and a functional Ets binding site is
identified in the caspase-1 promoter. Wild-type caspase-1 promoter (pGL3-ICE) was
strongly transactivated by ETS1 and this transactivation was dramatically
diminished by the mutation of the potential Ets binding site (-525 bp). In
addition, electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assay showed complex formation between this binding site and ETS1 proteins. Taken
together, ETS1 transcriptionally induces the expression of caspase-1; as such,
the regulatory control of caspase-1 expression by ETS1 may underlie the apoptotic
susceptibility modulated by ETS1 in specific tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC2265436
PMID: 16103071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Int J Oncol. 2005 Sep;27(3):861-5.

Comparative genomics on SFRP1 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

SFRP1, SFRP2, SFRP3, SFRP4, SFRP5, WIF1, DKK1, DKK2, DKK3, DKK4 are secreted-type
WNT signaling modulators. SFRP1 tumor suppressor gene at human chromosome 8p11.21
is inactivated in colorectal cancer and other tumors by deletion and by
epigenetic CpG hypermethylation. Here, we identified and characterized the rat
Sfrp1 gene by using bioinformatics. Rat Sfrp1 gene, consisting of three exons,
was located within AC112899.4 genome sequence. Complete coding sequence of rat
Sfrp1 was determined by assembling AC112899.4 genome sequence, CK838748 EST, and 
BF417482 EST. Rat Sfrp1 (314 aa) consisted of a signal peptide (codon 1-31),
Frizzled domain with ten conserved Cys residues (codon 49-168), and Netrin (NTR) 
domain with six conserved Cys residues (codon 186-314). Rat Sfrp1 showed 98.7%,
95.2%, 94.3%, 82.5% and 58.3% total-amino-acid identity with mouse Sfrp1, human
SFRP1, cow Sfrp1, chicken sfrp1 and zebrafish sfrp1, respectively. SFRP1 mRNA was
expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells, neuroblastoma, liver adeno-carcinoma, and
skin squamous cell carcinoma. Match program revealed that AP1, COMP1, and double 
ETS1-binding sites were conserved between human SFRP1 and rat Sfrp1 promoters.
This is the first report on comparative integromics analyses on Sfrp1 orthologs.

PMID: 16077939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Int Immunol. 2005 Sep;17(9):1179-91. Epub 2005 Jul 28.

Ets-1 deficiency leads to altered B cell differentiation, hyperresponsiveness to 
TLR9 and autoimmune disease.

Wang D(1), John SA, Clements JL, Percy DH, Barton KP, Garrett-Sinha LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, 3435 Main
Street, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

It has been shown that mice with a targeted mutation in the Ets-1 gene exhibit
increased B cell terminal differentiation to IgM-secreting plasma cells. Here, we
show that mice, formerly described to lack Ets-1 protein, actually express low
levels of an internally deleted Ets-1 protein. Mice harboring this Ets-1
hypomorphic allele possess very few marginal zone B cells and have increased
expression of activation markers on follicular B cells. Adoptive transfer
experiments indicate that this activated phenotype can be reversed upon transfer 
of Ets-1-deficient B cells to a wild-type host, suggesting a role for B
cell-extrinsic factors in regulating the activated state. Supporting this
observation, the reverse transfer experiment of wild-type B cells into an
Ets-1-deficient host resulted in increased expression of activation markers on
the transferred B cells. However, there are also cell-intrinsic changes in
Ets-1-deficient B cells as demonstrated by their increased differentiation to
plasma cells in vitro in response to stimulation with cytosine-phosphate-guanine 
DNA sequence-containing oligodeoxynucleotide [CpG DNA, a Toll-like receptor (TLR)
9 ligand]. Consistent with the activated phenotype and increased terminal
differentiation of Ets-1-deficient B cells, Ets-1 mutant mice develop autoimmune 
disease. Hence, our studies establish Ets-1 as an important regulator of
peripheral B cell differentiation and B cell responses to TLR9 activation.

PMID: 16051621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Dev Biol. 2005 Sep 15;285(2):524-32. Epub 2005 Jul 26.

Ets identified as a trans-regulatory factor of amphioxus Hox2 by transgenic
analysis using ascidian embryos.

Wada H(1), Kobayashi M, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba 305-8572, Japan. 98champ@msg.biglobe.ne.jp

Although the functions of Hox genes in anterior-posterior patterning and their
clustered organization are well conserved among metazoans, some Hox genes have
lost their original function, as exemplified by zen, ftz and bicoid in
Drosophila. The Hox2 gene of amphioxus has also lost its original function and
instead is expressed specifically in the preoral pit. As new cis-elements
governing its expression in the preoral pit must have been essential for
retention of AmphiHox2, we analyzed the transcriptional regulation of AmphiHox2. 
Although it is possible to make transgenic amphioxus, several technical
limitations restrict their practical use; thus, we analyzed the cis-regulatory
region surrounding AmphiHox2 in transgenic ascidians (Ciona intestinalis). We
found that Ets binding sites of AmphiHox2 functioned in the ascidian embryo. As
the amphioxus Ets1/2 homologue is expressed in the preoral pit, we concluded that
AmphiHox2 is activated by Ets1/2 in the preoral pit. These analyses demonstrate
the utility of Ciona embryos as a transgenic system for analyses of cis-elements 
from animals whose embryos are relatively inaccessible, such as amphioxus and
hemichordates.

PMID: 16051213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2005 Nov;20(11):2333-48. Epub 2005 Jul 26.

Expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 associated with ets-1 proto-oncogene in 
rat tubulointerstitial cells.

Naito T(1), Tanihata Y, Nishimura H, Tanaka T, Higuchi C, Taguchi T, Sanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tokyo Women's Medical University Daini Hospital,
Arakawaku, Tokyo, Japan. takashi020304@yahoo.co.jp

BACKGROUND: Ets-1 proto-oncogene exhibits multiple activities in the
transcriptional regulation of numerous genes including metalloproteinase (MMP)-1,
-3 and -9. MMPs play an important role in the remodelling of extracellular matrix
in various renal diseases. However, the role of the Ets-1-MMP axis in advanced
renal diseases is uncertain. In the present study, we investigated whether Ets-1 
is involved in interleukin (IL)-1-mediated expression of MMPs in
tubulointerstitial cells.
METHODS: Rat renal fibroblasts (NRK-49F) and tubular epithelial cells (NRK-52E)
were cultured and allocated to an IL-1beta-treated group (10 ng/ml), a
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB-treated group (25 ng/ml) and a control
group. Protein and mRNA were extracted after 1, 6, 12 and 24 h of treatment.
Parallel flasks were treated with 2 muM ets-1 antisense oligodeoxynucleotides
(ODNs) before exposure to IL-1beta. The expression of Ets-1 protein was evaluated
by western blotting. The activities of MMPs were evaluated by gelatin zymography.
The expression of ets-1 and/or MMP-9 mRNA was evaluated semiquantitatively by
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: In NRK-49F cells, Ets-1 protein increased significantly by 6.8-fold at 6
h, and MMP-9 activity increased significantly by 9.9-fold at 12 h in the
IL-1beta-treated group compared with controls. MMP-2 and -3 activities also
increased significantly in the IL-1beta-treated group. In NRK-52E cells, Ets-1
protein was 3.1 times higher at 1 h, and the latent form of MMP-9 activity
increased 3.4-fold at 6 h in the IL-1beta group compared with controls. However, 
MMP-2 or MMP-3 activities were not markedly altered by IL-1beta treatment
compared with controls. When the cells were treated with ets-1 antisense ODNs
before IL-1beta treatment, Ets-1 protein expression decreased at least 50%, and
MMP-9 activity was clearly inhibited in both cells. We also confirmed that MMP-9 
activity was upregulated on days 21 and 28 in renal cortex of rat crescentic
glomerulonephritis.
CONCLUSIONS: The Ets-1 transcriptional factor may participate in
IL-1beta-mediated MMP-9 expression in tubulointerstitial cells.

PMID: 16046515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. BMC Chem Biol. 2005 Jul 5;5:1.

Development of ERK Activity Sensor, an in vitro, FRET-based sensor of
Extracellular Regulated Kinase activity.

Green HM(1), Alberola-Ila J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, M/C 147-75, 1200 E,
California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. harryg@cco.caltech.edu

BACKGROUND: Study of ERK activation has thus far relied on biochemical assays
that are limited to the use of phospho-specific antibodies and radioactivity in
vitro, and analysis of whole cell populations in vivo. As with many systems,
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) can be utilized to make highly
sensitive detectors of molecular activity. Here we introduce FRET-based ERK
Activity Sensors, which utilize variants of Enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein
fused by an ERK-specific peptide linker to detect ERK2 activity.
RESULTS: ERK Activity Sensors display varying changes in FRET upon
phosphorylation by active ERK2 in vitro depending on the composition of
ERK-specific peptide linker sequences derived from known in vivo ERK targets,
Ets1 and Elk1. Analysis of point mutations reveals specific residues involved in 
ERK binding and phosphorylation of ERK Activity Sensor 3. ERK2 also shows high in
vitro specificity for these sensors over two other major MAP Kinases, p38 and
pSAPK/JNK.
CONCLUSION: EAS's are a convenient, non-radioactive alternative to study ERK
dynamics in vitro. They can be utilized to study ERK activity in real-time. This 
new technology can be applied to studying ERK kinetics in vitro, analysis of ERK 
activity in whole cell extracts, and high-throughput screening technologies.

PMCID: PMC1180429
PMID: 15998468  [PubMed]


141. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jul 18;579(18):3941-6.

STAT1 and Nmi are downstream targets of Ets-1 transcription factor in MCF-7 human
breast cancer cell.

Jung HH(1), Lee J, Kim JH, Ryu KJ, Kang SA, Park C, Sung K, Nam DH, Kang WK, Park
K, Im YH.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, 50 Ilwon-dong Kangnam-gu, Seoul 135-710, Korea.

Ets-1 is a cellular homologue of the product of the viral ets oncogene of the E26
virus, and it functions as a tissue-specific transcription factor. It plays an
important role in cell proliferation, differentiation, lymphoid cell development,
transformation, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. Ets-1 controls the expression of
critical genes involved in these processes by binding to ets binding sites
present in the transcriptional regulatory regions. Here, we transiently
overexpressed Ets-1 in MCF-7 and comprehensively searched for potential
downstream targets of Ets-1 by cDNA microarray analysis. The expressions of
several interferon-related genes including STAT1 and Nmi were augmented by the
overexpression of Ets-1. RT-PCR and Western blotting confirmed the increase in
the levels of STAT1 and Nmi mRNA and protein. In contrast, Ets-1 siRNA decreased 
the expression of STAT1 and Nmi proteins. As in our transient transfection
experiments, stable overexpression of Ets-1, also increased the protein
expression of STAT1 and Nmi in MCF-7 cells. Taken together, our results indicate 
that STAT1 and Nmi are downstream targets of Ets-1 in MCF-7 human breast cancer
cells.

PMID: 15996661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Science. 2005 Jul 1;309(5731):142-5.

Variable control of Ets-1 DNA binding by multiple phosphates in an unstructured
region.

Pufall MA(1), Lee GM, Nelson ML, Kang HS, Velyvis A, Kay LE, McIntosh LP, Graves 
BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department of Oncological Sciences, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5550, USA.

Cell signaling that culminates in posttranslational modifications directs protein
activity. Here we report how multiple Ca2+-dependent phosphorylation sites within
the transcription activator Ets-1 act additively to produce graded DNA binding
affinity. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic analyses show that
phosphorylation shifts Ets-1 from a dynamic conformation poised to bind DNA to a 
well-folded inhibited state. These phosphates lie in an unstructured flexible
region that functions as the allosteric effector of autoinhibition. Variable
phosphorylation thus serves as a "rheostat" for cell signaling to fine-tune
transcription at the level of DNA binding.

PMID: 15994560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Blood. 2005 Oct 15;106(8):2680-7. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

Fli1, Elf1, and Ets1 regulate the proximal promoter of the LMO2 gene in
endothelial cells.

Landry JR(1), Kinston S, Knezevic K, Donaldson IJ, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Hills Rd, Cambridge, CB2 2XY, United Kingdom. bg200@cam.ac.uk.

Transcriptional control has been identified as a key mechanism regulating the
formation and subsequent behavior of hematopoietic stem cells. We have used a
comparative genomics approach to identify transcriptional regulatory elements of 
the LMO2 gene, a transcriptional cofactor originally identified through its
involvement in T-cell leukemia and subsequently shown to be critical for normal
hematopoietic and endothelial development. Of the 2 previously characterized LMO2
promoters, the second (proximal) promoter was highly conserved in vertebrates
ranging from mammals to fish. Real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) expression analysis identified this promoter as the predominant
source of transcription in hematopoietic tissue. Transient and stable
transfections indicated that the proximal promoter was active in hematopoietic
progenitor and endothelial cell lines and this activity was shown to depend on 3 
conserved Ets sites that were bound in vivo by E74-like factor 1 (Elf1), Friend
leukemia integration 1 (Fli1), and erythroblastosis virus oncogene homolog E
twenty-six-1 (Ets1). Finally, transgenic analysis demonstrated that the LMO2
proximal promoter is sufficient for expression in endothelial cells in vivo. No
hematopoietic expression was observed, indicating that additional enhancers are
required to mediate transcription from the proximal promoter in hematopoietic
cells. Together, these results suggest that the conserved proximal promoter is
central to LMO2 transcription in hematopoietic and endothelial cells, where it is
regulated by Ets factors.

PMID: 15994290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jun 21;33(11):3540-9. Print 2005.

Matrix metalloproteinase-1 up-regulation by hepatocyte growth factor in human
dermal fibroblasts via ERK signaling pathway involves Ets1 and Fli1.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Mimura Y, Asano Y, Yamane K, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

In this study, we clarified the molecular mechanism(s) underlying the regulation 
of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 gene by hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in
cultured human dermal fibroblasts. HGF induced MMP-1 protein as well as mRNA at a
transcriptional level via extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling
pathway. The region in the MMP-1 promoter mediating the inducible responsiveness 
to HGF, defined by the transient transfection analysis of the serial 5' deletion 
constructs, contained an Ets binding site. Mutation of this Ets binding site
abrogated the HGF-inducible promoter activity. Ets1 up-regulated the expression
of MMP-1 promoter activity, whereas Fli1 had antagonistic effects on them. After 
HGF treatment, the protein level and the binding activity of Ets1 was increased
and those of Fli1 was decreased, which were canceled by PD98059. These results
suggest that HGF up-regulates MMP-1 expression via ERK signaling pathway through 
the balance of Ets1 and Fli1, which may be a novel mechanism of regulating MMP-1 
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1156961
PMID: 15972796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2005 Apr;27(4):204-8.

[Cross-talk between c-Jun/Ets1 involved in EB virus-encoded latent membrane
protein 1 regulates expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zeng L(1), Liu YP, Tao YG, Ai MD, Zhao XR, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate effect of AP-1 and Ets binding site adjacent to matrix 
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) promoter on activation of MMP-9 transcription of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells transfected with EBV-encoded latent membrane
protein 1 (LMP1), and to ascertain if cross-talk between c-Jun and Ets1 is
involved in LMP1-regulating expression of MMP-9.
METHODS: Site-directed mutagenesis technique was used to establish a series of
mutants, including MMP-9-CAT-Ets(-540)mt, MMP-9-CAT-AP-1(-533)mt and
MMP-9-CAT-AP-1(-533)/Ets(-540)mt. After the mutants were transfected into
LMP1-expressing NPC HNE2 cells regulated by Tet-on system (pTet-on-LMP1 HNE2),
CAT activity of these mutants were assayed with induction of LMP1. With blockade 
of c-Jun or Ets1 antisense oligonucleotides, the activity of MMP-9 induced by
LMP1 was assayed with gelatin zymography.
RESULTS: The CAT activity of MMP-9-Ets(-540)mt-CAT, MMP-9-AP-1(-533)mt-CAT,
MMP-9-AP-1(-533)/Ets(-540) mt-CAT decreased significantly compared to MMP-9-CAT
wt. After blockade with c-Jun or Ets1 antisense oligonucleotides, activity of
MMP-9 induced by LMP1 decreased significantly, especially with combined blockade 
of c-Jun and Ets1.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that transcription factor AP-1 and Ets play an
crucial role in activation of MMP-9 transcription induced by LMP1, and cross-talk
between c-Jun/Ets1 is involved in expression of MMP-9 mediated by LMP1.

PMID: 15949416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Oncogene. 2005 Aug 11;24(34):5384-8.

Ets-1 expression promotes epithelial cell transformation by inducing migration,
invasion and anchorage-independent growth.

Hahne JC(1), Okuducu AF, Kaminski A, Florin A, Soncin F, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, PO Box 2120, 53011 Bonn, Germany.

Ets-1 is the prototype of the family of ETS transcription factors. In human
tumors, Ets-1 is expressed in endothelial cells and fibroblasts of the tumor
stroma and is proposed to play a role in tumor vascularization and invasion by
upregulating expression of matrix-degrading proteases. In human carcinomas, Ets-1
is also expressed by neoplastic cells, but little is known about the functional
implications of this observation. We have addressed the role of Ets-1 in
epithelial HeLa tumor cells by selecting stably Ets-1 over and underexpressing
HeLa cells. Ets-1 expression increases the transformed phenotype of HeLa cells,
by promoting cell migration, invasion and anchorage-independent growth, while
Ets-1 downregulation reduces cell attachment. In correlation with these results, 
Ets-1 upregulation increases integrinbeta2 expression but not that of other
integrins. These results suggest that, in addition to its role in the tumor
stroma, Ets-1 may also promote tumor development and progression by increasing
neoplastic transformation.

PMID: 15940256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Dev Biol. 2005 May 15;281(2):256-69.

Regulation of the lmo2 promoter during hematopoietic and vascular development in 
zebrafish.

Zhu H(1), Traver D, Davidson AJ, Dibiase A, Thisse C, Thisse B, Nimer S, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Boston, Department of 
Pediatrics, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Lmo2 transcription factor, a T-cell oncoprotein, is required for both
hematopoiesis and angiogenesis. To investigate the fate of lmo2-expressing cells 
and the transcriptional regulation of lmo2 in vivo, we generated stable
transgenic zebrafish that express green fluorescent protein (EGFP) or DsRed under
the control of an lmo2 promoter. A 2.5-kb fragment contains the cis-regulatory
elements required to recapitulate endogenous lmo2 expression in embryonic
hematopoietic and vascular tissues. We further characterized embryonic Lmo2+
cells through transplantation into vlad tepes (vlt), an erythropoietic mutant.
These Lmo2+ primitive wave donor cells differentiated into circulating
hematopoietic cells and extended the life span of vlt recipients, but did not
demonstrate long-term repopulation of the erythroid lineage. Promoter analysis
identified a 174-bp proximal promoter that was sufficient to recapitulate lmo2
expression. This element contains critical ETS-binding sites conserved between
zebrafish and pufferfish. Furthermore, we show that ets1 is coexpressed with
lmo2, and overexpression experiments indicate that ets1 can activate the lmo2
promoter through this element. Our studies elucidate the transcriptional
regulation of this key transcription factor, and provide a transgenic system for 
the functional analysis of blood and blood vessels in zebrafish.

PMID: 15893977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Leukemia. 2005 Jul;19(7):1175-83.

Transcriptional regulation of parathyroid hormone-related protein promoter P3 by 
ETS-1 in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.

Richard V(1), Nadella MV, Green PL, Lairmore MD, Feuer G, Foley JG, Rosol TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) plays a primary role in the
development of humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy seen in the majority of adult 
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) patients with human T-cell lymphotropic virus
type-1 (HTLV-1) infection. HTLV-1 Tax has been shown to complex with ETS-1 and
SP1 to transactivate the PTHrP P3 promoter. Previously, we established a SCID/bg 
mouse model of human ATL with RV-ATL cells and showed that PTHrP expression was
independent of Tax. In this study, we report an inverse correlation of PTHrP with
tax/rex mRNA in multiple HTLV-1-positive cell lines and RV-ATL cells. Stimulation
of Jurkat T cells with PMA/ionomycin upregulated the PTHrP P3 promoter by a
previously characterized Ets binding site and also induced protein/DNA complex
formation identical to that observed in RV-ATL cells. Further, we provide
evidence that cotransfection with Ets-1 and constitutively active Mek-1 in
HTLV-1-negative transformed T cells with stimulation by PMA/ionomycin not only
resulted in a robust induction of PTHrP P3 but also formed a complex with
ETS-1/P3 EBS similar to that in ATLL cells. Our data demonstrate that
transcriptional regulation of PTHrP in ATLL cells can be controlled by T-cell
receptor signaling and the ETS and MAPK ERK pathway in a Tax-independent manner.

PMCID: PMC2661941
PMID: 15889157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Head Neck. 2005 Jul;27(7):585-96.

Expression of ets-1 transcription factor in human head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma and effect of histamine on metastatic potential of invasive tumor
through the regulation of expression of ets-1 and matrix metalloproteinase-3.

Horváth B(1), Hegyesi H, Nagy P, Falus A, Schaff Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ear, Nose and Throat Diseases, National Medical Center 1135,
Szabolcs u. 35, Budapest, Hungary. bhorvath@ogyik.hu

BACKGROUND: Ets-1 controls the expression of critical genes involved in matrix
remodeling. The matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3) and urokinase type plasminogen
activator (uPA) are typical ets-1 responsive genes. Recent studies have shown an 
increase in histamine synthesis and content in various human neoplasias. We
hypothesized that the increased local histamine overproduction contributed to
activation of matrix remodeling through the activation of MMP-3 expression of
peritumoral fibroblasts by means of ets-1 regulation in head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas (HNSCCs).
METHODS: Paraffin-embedded sections of 30 HNSCCs were immunostained for ets-1.
The presence of ets-1 and MMP-3 mRNA in tumor samples was confirmed by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). To simulate stromal reaction in
vitro, cultured human mucosal fibroblast was used. The level of ets-1 and MMP-3
mRNA was compared by use of RT-PCR, as was their protein with flow-cytometry, in 
the presence or absence of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (10 ng/mL) and
histamine (1 microM).
RESULTS: Correlation between ets-1 expression and clinicopathologic background
was not significant. In all cases, expression of ets-1 was seen in the stroma. In
in vitro study, histamine upregulates production of ets-1 and MMP-3 in cultured
fibroblast, and bFGF can stimulate histamine expression in fibroblast.
Immunofluorescence staining supported the results of RT-PCR and flow cytometry.
CONCLUSIONS: Ets-1 expression in HNSCCs has no prognostic value; however, ets-1
plays an important role in tumor-host interaction. Histamine may accelerate the
spread of HNSCC through an ets-1-related mechanism.

PMID: 15887216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Eur J Endocrinol. 2005 May;152(5):785-90.

Evaluation of insulin-like growth factor II, cyclooxygenase-2, ets-1 and
thyroid-specific thyroglobulin mRNA expression in benign and malignant thyroid
tumours.

Fuhrer D(1), Eszlinger M, Karger S, Krause K, Engelhardt C, Hasenclever D, Dralle
H, Paschke R.

Author information: 
(1)III Medical Department, University of Leipzig, Ph-Rosenthal-Str. 27, 04103
Leipzig, Germany. fued@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

OBJECTIVE: We evaluated three markers (insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II),
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and ets-1) of thyroid growth stimulation and cell
transformation together with a thyroid-specific marker (thyroglobulin (Tg)) for
their potential to differentiate benign and malignant follicular thyroid
neoplasia (FN).
DESIGN AND METHODS: mRNA expression levels were determined by real-time PCR in
100 snap-frozen thyroid samples: 36 benign thyroid nodules with different
histology and function (19 cold (CTN) and 17 toxic thyroid nodules (TTN)), 36
corresponding normal thyroid tissues of the same patients, eight Graves' disease 
(GD) thyroids, 10 follicular thyroid carcinomas (FTC) and 10 papillary thyroid
carcinomas (PTC).
RESULTS: Mean IGF-II and COX-2 levels were not significantly altered between
benign and malignant thyroid nodules (IGF-II) or nodular (FTC, TTN, CTN) and
normal thyroid tissues (COX-2). In contrast, eight- to tenfold upregulation of
ets-1 was observed in PTC and three- to fourfold upregulation of ets-1 was
observed in FTC (and GD) compared with benign thyroid nodules and normal thyroid 
tissues. In addition, thyroglobulin mRNA expression was markedly downregulated
(50- to 100-fold) in FTC, PTC and GD samples compared with benign nodular and
normal thyroid tissues. Hence an ets-1/Tg ratio >20 distinguished differentiated 
thyroid cancer from benign nodular or normal thyroid tissue. We then studied
ets1- and Tg mRNA expression levels in fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC)
samples. However, in a consecutive series of 40 FNAC samples only equivocal
results were obtained on 38 benign and two malignant (FTC) thyroid tumour
samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Upregulation of ets-1 and downregulation of Tg mRNA expression occur
in differentiated thyroid cancer and may facilitate pre-operative identification 
of thyroid malignancy depending on further evaluation of these potentially
promising markers in a larger series of benign and malignant thyroid tumours and 
their FNAC samples.

PMID: 15879365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Br J Nutr. 2005 Mar;93(3):317-23.

Novel tempeh (fermented soyabean) isoflavones inhibit in vivo angiogenesis in the
chicken chorioallantoic membrane assay.

Kiriakidis S(1), Högemeier O, Starcke S, Dombrowski F, Hahne JC, Pepper M, Jha
HC, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
s.kiriakidis@imperial.ac.uk

Anti-angiogenic strategies are emerging as an important tool for the treatment of
cancer and inflammatory diseases. In the present investigation we isolated
several isoflavones from a tempeh (fermented soyabean) extract. The isolated
isoflavones were identified as 5,7,4'-trihydroxyisoflavone (genistein),
7,4'-dihydroxyisoflavone (daidzein), 6,7,4'-trihydroxyisoflavone (factor 2),
7,8,4'-trihydroxyisoflavone (7,8,4'-TriOH) and 5,7,3',4'-tetrahydroxyisoflavone
(orobol). The effects on angiogenesis of these isoflavones were evaluated in the 
chicken chorioallantoic membrane assay; their capacity to inhibit vascular
endothelial growth factor-induced endothelial cell proliferation and expression
of the Ets 1 transcription factor, known to be implicated in the regulation of
new blood vessel formation, were also investigated. We found that all isoflavones
inhibited angiogenesis, albeit with different potencies. Compared with negative
controls, which slightly inhibited in vivo angiogenesis by 6.30 %, genistein
reduced angiogenesis by 75.09 %, followed by orobol (67.96 %), factor 2 (56.77
%), daidzein (48.98 %) and 7,8,4'-TriOH (24.42 %). These compounds also inhibited
endothelial cell proliferation, with orobol causing the greatest inhibition at
lower concentrations. The isoflavones also inhibited Ets 1 expression, providing 
some insight into the molecular mechanisms of their action. Furthermore, the
chemical structure of the different isoflavones suggests a structure-activity
relationship. Our present findings suggest that the new isoflavones might be
added to the list of low molecular mass therapeutic agents for the inhibition of 
angiogenesis.

PMID: 15877870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Feb;93(2-5):161-5. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Sex steroid-dependent angiogenesis in uterine endometrial cancers.

Fujimoto J(1), Toyoki H, Jahan I, Alam SM, Sakaguchi H, Sato E, Tamaya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gifu University School of Medicine,
1-1 Yanagido, Gifu City 501-1194, Japan. jf@cc.gifu-u.ac.jp

In general, tumors induce angiogenic factors specific to them, which leads to
angiogenesis with advancement. However, angiogenesis in uterine endometrial
cancers is complicated because hormone dependency in growth also modifies the
angiogenic potential. Therefore, anti-angiogenic therapy for tumor dormancy in
uterine endometrial cancers must be thoroughly considered. The upstream of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene conserves estrogen-responsive
elements. Progesterone primed with estrogen induces thymidine phosphorylase (TP) 
in uterine endometrium. Sex steroid-dependent VEGF and TP are highly expressed in
cases of early stage and well-differentiated uterine endometrial cancers, and
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) in cases of advanced and poorly
differentiated uterine endometrial cancers. A transcriptional factor for
angiogenesis, ETS-1, is linked to VEGF in well-differentiated uterine endometrial
cancers, and to bFGF in poorly differentiated uterine endometrial cancers.
Therefore, even if dedifferentiation and angiogenic switching occur due to
advancement and long-term hormone therapy, the inhibition of ETS-1 along with
main angiogenic factors might be an effective strategy to suppress uterine
endometrial cancers as a novel anti-angiogenic therapy.

PMID: 15860258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Feb 2;85(5):328-31.

[Transforming growth factor-beta1 stimulates matrix metalloproteinase-9
production through ERK activation pathway and upregulation of Ets-1 protein].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang HC(1), Liu SY, Liang Y, Liu Y, Li JZ, Wang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Peking University First Hospital & Institute of
Nephrology, Beijing 100034, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular mechanism of transforming growth
factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) in regulating the production of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) protein.
METHODS: Mouse immortal podocyte cells were cultured. Different concentrations
(1, 2, and 5 ng/l) of TGF-beta1 were added into the culture medium. Cell culture 
without TGF-beta1 stimulation was used as control group. The activity of MMP-9 in
the supernatant of the culture medion was assayed by gelatin zymography,
expression of MMP-9 mRNA was assessed by RT-PCR; the activation of ERK pathway
and the level of a transcriptional factor Ets-1 protein was analyzed by Western
blotting. PD98059, a specific inhibitor of ERK1/2 activation, was added into the 
culture fluid of the podocytes for 30 minutes, than 2 ng/ml TGF-beta1 was added. 
The above mentioned tested were conducted to observe the influence of the
inhibitor of ERK1/2 activation.
RESULTS: The MMP-9 activity was very week in the supernatant of culture fluid of 
the control group and was increased in the TGF-beta1 groups dose-dependently.
After the podocytes were co-incubated with 1 ng/ml TGF-beta1 for 24 hours, the
MMP-9 activity was 26.86 times that of the control group (P < 0.01). Since the
12th hour after co-incubation with 2 ng/ml TGF-beta1 the MMP-9 activity in the
supernatant of culture fluid began to be significantly increased and remained at 
high level till the 48 th hour. RT-PCR showed that low-level MMP-9 mRNA
expression in the control group. After stimulation of 2 ng/ml TGF-beta1 for 6
hours the MMP-9 mRNA expression was 2.71 times that of the control group (P <
0.01) and the high-level expression lasted 24 hours. Western blotting showed
low-level Ets-1 protein in the control group. At the time point of 12 th hour
after stimulation of TGF-beta1 the Ets-1 protein expression was increased in all 
the three TGF-beta1 groups. After stimulation with 2 ng/ml TGF-beta1 for 4 hours 
the Ets-1 protein expression was 2.71 times that of the control group (P <0.01). 
After pretreatment of the podocyte with PD98059 for 30 minutes, the added 2 ng/ml
TGF-beta1 failed to increase the MMP-9 activity and up-regulate the MMP-9 mRNA
expression.
CONCLUSION: TGF-beta1 stimulates the production of MMP-9 by activation of
cytoplasmic ERK signaling pathway and upregulation of Ets-1 expression.

PMID: 15854510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. FEBS Lett. 2005 Apr 25;579(11):2475-9.

Histamine elevates the expression of Ets-1, a protooncogen in human melanoma cell
lines through H2 receptor.

Hegyesi H(1), Horváth B, Pállinger E, Pós Z, Molnár V, Falus A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell and Immunobiology, Budapest, Hungary.

Histamine is known to act, at least in part, as a growth factor for several cell 
types, and as production of this biogen amine has been found to accelerate the
rate of tissue proliferation in wound repair, embryogenesis and malignant growth.
Abundant experimental and clinical data suggest that histamine augments in vivo
tumour cell proliferation via histamine H2 receptors (H2R). Here, we report that 
exogenously added histamine stimulates Ets-1 (v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26
oncogene homolog 1) synthesis in human melanoma cells. Involvement of histamine
receptors in the histamine induced ets-1 expression has been also studied. Our
data show that these newly recognized actions of histamine are mediated by the
H2R. Modification of local protooncogen Ets-1 level is likely being involved in
the regulation of melanoma growth.

PMID: 15848191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2005;15(1):15-28.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein in prostate cancer.

Asadi F(1), Kukreja S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Chicago Health Care System, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago IL 60612, USA.

Although originally discovered as the peptide responsible for humoral
hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM), parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP)
has been shown to play a major role in fetal development. In the adult, it is
widely distributed in normal and various cancer tissues. In spite of the rarity
of HHM in prostate cancer, PTHrP is widely distributed in prostate cancer cells. 
PTHrP is a precursor molecule with generation of various fragments with distinct 
biological activities. More recent studies have shown that there is intranuclear 
localization of PTHrP and that intracrine effects of the peptide are involved in 
promoting processes that result in tumor progression (nall proliferation,
apoptosis, cell attachment and angiogenesis) in prostate cancer. PTHrP expression
is controlled by three distinct promoters, with P3 being used most often in
cancer cells. The factors that control PTHrP production via interaction with the 
promoters are growth factors, androgens, vitamin D analogs, and adenoviral
proteins. TGF-beta and its effector Smad3 activate the P3 promoter through an
AGAC box and an Ets binding site involving Ets1 and to some extent Ets2 proteins.
In addition, TGF-beta stimulates P3 promoter activity via Smad-independent
pathways that involve the p38 MAP kinase. Although the addition of PTHrP or
transfection with the PTHrP gene in prostate cells results in effects that
promote tumor development, studies that employ inhibition of PTHrP activity in
vitro and in vivo are needed to establish a definitive role of this peptide in
the pathogenesis of prostate cancer.

PMID: 15831076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Hepatogastroenterology. 2005 Mar-Apr;52(62):654-6.

Ets-1 expression in gastric cancer.

Tsutsumi S(1), Kuwano H, Nagashima N, Shimura T, Mochiki E, Asao T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgical Science (Surgery I), Gunma University, Graduate
School of Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan. chuchumi@showa.gunma-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Ets-1 protein is a transcription factor that has been implicated
in both tumor invasion and neovascularization. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the clinical significance of Ets-1 expression in gastric cancer.
METHODOLOGY: We examined the expression of Ets-1 protein by immunohistochemical
staining in tissues obtained from 124 primary gastric cancers. Ets-1 expression
was detected by automated immunodetection (Ventana Medical Systems Inc., Tucon,
AZ, USA).
RESULTS: Ets-1 was not expressed in normal gastric epithelium. Ets-1 staining was
defined as positive in 51.6% (64 of 124) of gastric cancer cases. There were no
significant differences in age, gender, or histopathological grading. With regard
to clinicopathological characteristics, significant differences were observed in 
the depth of tumor invasion, lymph node and distant metastases, increased tumor
stage, and histological lymphatic and venous invasion. Patients with Ets-1
expression demonstrated poorer survival rates than patients without Ets-1
expression, as determined by the log-rank test (p=0.017), but multivariable
analysis showed that the expression of Ets-1 was not an independent prognostic
indicator (p=0.370).
CONCLUSIONS: Ets-1 expression in gastric cancers is correlated with histological 
prognostic indicators and is a useful marker for predicting the outcome for
patients with gastric cancer.

PMID: 15816498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Int J Mol Med. 2005 May;15(5):771-6.

Inactivation of Ets 1 transcription factor by a specific decoy strategy reduces
rat C6 glioma cell proliferation and mmp-9 expression.

Sahin A(1), Velten M, Pietsch T, Knuefermann P, Okuducu AF, Hahne JC, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, 53011 Bonn, Germany.

Malignant gliomas represent the most aggressive tumours of the central nervous
system and are characterised by both extensive proliferation and invasive growth.
Matrix degrading proteases called matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), particularly 
MMP-9, play a crucial role in glioma infiltration. The activity of these enzymes 
is regulated at different levels. In this regard, the control of transcriptional 
activity by specific transcription factors is believed to be very important. In
the present study, we examined whether rat C6 glioma cells express the Ets 1
transcription factor and whether inhibition of Ets 1 by a specific decoy strategy
affects C6 glioma cell proliferation and mmp-9 expression. We found that C6
glioma cells express Ets 1 and can efficiently be transfected with an Ets
1-specific decoy oligodesoxynucleotide (ODN). This ODN significantly reduces cell
proliferation and mmp-9 expression, the latter in a dose-dependent manner. We
conclude that inhibition of transcription factors, which play a role for glioma
development and progression such as Ets 1 by specific decoy approaches, might
represent useful tools for experimental therapeutic strategies against malignant 
gliomas.

PMID: 15806297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Blood. 2005 Jul 15;106(2):534-41. Epub 2005 Mar 31.

Identification of novel vascular endothelial-specific genes by the microarray
analysis of the zebrafish cloche mutants.

Sumanas S(1), Jorniak T, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, 621 C. Young Dr South, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The zebrafish cloche (clo) mutation affects the earliest known step in
differentiation of blood and endothelial cells in vertebrates. We established
clo/gata1-GFP transgenic line with erythroid-specific green fluorescent protein
(GFP) expression, which allowed differentiation of clo and wild-type siblings at 
the midsomitogenesis stages before morphologically visible phenotypes appeared.
To discover novel genes potentially involved in hematopoietic and vascular
development, we performed microarray analysis of more than 15,000 zebrafish genes
or expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in clo mutant embryos. We isolated the
full-length sequences and determined the expression patterns for 8 novel cDNAs
that were significantly down-regulated in clo-/- embryos. Dual specificity
phosphatase 5 (dusp5), cadherin 5 (cdh5; VE-cadherin), aquaporin 8 (aqp8),
adrenomedullin receptor (admr), complement receptor C1qR-like (crl), scavenger
receptor class F, member 1 (scarf1), and ETS1-like protein (etsrp) were
specifically expressed in the vascular endothelial cells, while retinol binding
protein 4 (rbp4) was expressed in the yolk syncytial layer and the hypochord.
Further functional studies of these novel genes should help to elucidate critical
early steps leading to the formation of vertebrate blood vessels.

PMCID: PMC1895181
PMID: 15802528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20860-6. Epub 2005 Mar 25.

Activation of the rat renin promoter by HOXD10.PBX1b.PREP1, Ets-1, and the
intracellular domain of notch.

Pan L(1), Glenn ST, Jones CA, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263-0001, USA.

Renin gene expression is subject to complex developmental and tissue-specific
regulation. A comparison of the promoter sequences of the human, rat, and mouse
renin genes has revealed a highly conserved sequence homologous to the DNA
recognition sequence for CBF1 (CSL/RBP-Jkappa/Su(H)/LAG1/RBPSUH). Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays document that As4.1 cell nuclear protein complex binding to
the putative rat renin CBF1-binding site (-175 to -168 bp) contains CBF1.
Transient transfection analyses in COS-7 cells further document that a CBF1-VP16 
fusion protein and the intracellular domain of Notch1 robustly activate a
promoter containing multiple copies of the rat renin CBF1-binding site. An
Ets-binding site (-143 to -138 bp) has also been identified in the rat renin
promoter by sequence comparisons and electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
Transcription factor Ets-1 is capable of activating the rat renin promoter
through the Ets-binding site. Mutation of the CBF-binding site significantly
increases transcriptional activity of the rat renin promoter in Calu-6 and COS-7 
cells but not in As4.1 cells, whereas mutation of the Ets-binding site reduces
promoter activity of the rat renin gene in all three cell lines. Finally, we show
that the intracellular domain of Notch1, Ets-1, and HOXD10.PBX1b.PREP1 activate
the rat renin promoter cooperatively in COS-7 cells. These results strongly
suggest that the renin gene is a downstream target of the Notch signaling
pathway.

PMID: 15792957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 15;11(6):2272-84.

Stromelysin 3, Ets-1, and vascular endothelial growth factor expression in oral
precancerous and cancerous lesions: correlation with microvessel density,
progression, and prognosis.

Arora S(1), Kaur J, Sharma C, Mathur M, Bahadur S, Shukla NK, Deo SV, Ralhan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi 110-029, India.

PURPOSE: Identification of molecular changes characteristic of development and
progression of oral cancer are of paramount importance for effective
intervention. Stromelysin 3 (MMP11) is a unique matrix metalloproteinase shown to
have dual function during cancer progression. The transcription factor Ets-1 and 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) are important proangiogenic factors in 
cancer. This study was designed to test the hypothesis that concomitant
expression of stromelysin 3, Ets-1, and/or VEGF affects the development,
progression, and prognosis of oral cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemical analysis of stromelysin 3, Ets-1, VEGF,
and platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 (a marker for intratumoral
microvessel density) was carried out in serial paraffin embedded tissue sections 
of 220 oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC), 90 precancerous lesions (59
hyperplasias and 31 dysplasias), and 81 matched histologically normal oral
tissues.
RESULTS: Ets-1, VEGF, and stromelysin 3 expression independently correlated with 
increased intratumoral microvessel density in precancerous lesions (P = 0.05,
0.001, and 0.026, respectively) as well as in SCCs (P = 0.005, 0.01, and 0.031,
respectively). Logistic regression analysis revealed that concomitant expression 
of stromelysin 3 and Ets-1 (stromelysin 3(+)/ Ets-1(+) phenotype; odds ratio,
3.7; P = 0.001) was the most significant predictor for transition to precancerous
stage, whereas dual expression of stromelysin 3 and VEGF (stromelysin 3(+)/
VEGF(+) phenotype; odds ratio, 2.07; P = 0.004) was the most important predictor 
for progression from precancerous stage to frank malignancy. Intriguingly, Ets-1 
expression was significantly associated with VEGF expression and stromelysin 3
expression in precancerous tissues as well as OSCCs. Follow-up data for 144
patients for a maximum period of 115 months showed that VEGF [hazards ratio (HR),
4.532; P = 0.004] and Ets-1 (HR = 2.182; P = 0.049) expression significantly
correlated with reduced disease-free survival in univariate analysis. In
bivariate analysis, patients harboring Ets-1(+)/VEGF(+) phenotype had the worst
survival (median disease-free survival, 50 months; HR, 2.943; P = 0.003).
Multivariate analysis using Cox's proportional hazards model showed that
increased VEGF expression was the most significant adverse prognosticator in OSCC
patients (HR, 4.470; P = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this study provides the first evidence of concomitant
expression of stromelysin 3, VEGF, and Ets-1 in clinical specimens in different
stages of development of oral cancer. In early stages, concomitant expression of 
stromelysin 3 and Ets-1 favors the development of a precancerous state, whereas
dual expression of stromelysin 3 and VEGF is associated with progression from
precancerous to cancerous state. VEGF expression is an adverse prognosticator for
disease-free survival.

PMID: 15788677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 15;11(6):2111-22.

Associations and interactions between Ets-1 and Ets-2 and coregulatory proteins, 
SRC-1, AIB1, and NCoR in breast cancer.

Myers E(1), Hill AD, Kelly G, McDermott EW, O'Higgins NJ, Buggy Y, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Saint Vincent's University Hospital University College 
Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Erratum in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 1;21(9):2190-1.

PURPOSE: Associations between p160 coactivator proteins and the development of
resistance to endocrine treatment have been described. We hypothesized that
nuclear receptor coregulatory proteins may interact with nonsteroid receptors. We
investigated the mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated transcription
factors, Ets, as possible interaction proteins for the coactivators SRC-1 and
AIB1 and the corepressor NCoR in human breast cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression and coexpression of Ets and the coregulatory
proteins was investigated using immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence in a 
cohort of breast tumor patients (N = 134). Protein expression, protein-DNA
interactions and protein-protein interactions were assessed using Western blot,
electromobility shift, and coimmunoprecipitation analysis, respectively.
RESULTS: Ets-1 and Ets-2 associated with reduced disease-free survival (P <
0.0292, P < 0.0001, respectively), whereas NCoR was a positive prognostic
indicator (P < 0.0297). Up-regulation of Ets-1 protein expression in cell
cultures derived from patient tumors in the presence of growth factors associated
with tumor grade (P < 0.0013; n = 28). In primary breast tumor cell cultures and 
in the SKBR3 breast cell line, growth factors induced interaction between Ets and
their DNA response element, induced recruitment of coactivators to the
transcription factor-DNA complex, and up-regulated protein expression of HER2.
Ets-1 and Ets-2 interacted with the coregulators under basal conditions, and
growth factors up-regulated Ets-2 interaction with SRC-1 and AIB1. Coexpression
of Ets-2 and SRC-1 significantly associated with the rate of recurrence and HER
expression, compared with patients who expressed Ets-2 but not SRC-1 (P < 0.0001 
and P < 0.0001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These data describe associations and interactions between nonsteroid
transcription factors and coregulatory proteins in human breast cancer.

PMID: 15788656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Mar 1;33(4):1337-51. Print 2005.

Alpha2(I) collagen gene regulation by protein kinase C signaling in human dermal 
fibroblasts.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Yamane K, Mimura Y, Asano Y, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

We investigated the mechanisms by which protein kinase C (PKC) regulates the
expression of the alpha2(I) collagen gene in normal dermal fibroblasts. Reduction
of PKC-alpha activity by treatment with Gö697-6 or by overexpression of a
dominant negative (DN) mutant form decreased alpha2(I) collagen gene expression. 
This decrease required a sequence element in the collagen promoter that contains 
Sp1/Sp3 binding sites. Reduction of PKC-delta activity by rottlerin or
overexpression of DN PKC-delta also decreased alpha2(I) collagen gene expression.
This effect required a separate sequence element containing Sp1/Sp3-binding sites
and an Ets-binding site. In both cases, point mutations within the response
elements abrogated the response to PKC inhibition. Forced overexpression of Sp1
rescued the PKC inhibitor-mediated reduction in collagen protein expression. A
DNA affinity precipitation assay revealed that inhibition of PKC-delta by
rottlerin increased the binding activity of endogenous Fli1 and decreased that of
Ets1. On the other hand, TGF-beta1, which increased the expression of PKC-delta, 
had the opposite effect, increasing the binding activity of Ets1 and decreasing
that of Fli1. Our results suggest that PKC-delta is involved in the regulation of
the alpha2(I) collagen gene in the presence or absence of TGF-beta. Alteration of
the balance of Ets1 and Fli1 may be a novel mechanism regulating alpha2(I)
collagen expression.

PMCID: PMC552962
PMID: 15741186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Exp Med. 2005 Feb 21;201(4):615-26.

Ets-1, a functional cofactor of T-bet, is essential for Th1 inflammatory
responses.

Grenningloh R(1), Kang BY, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

To mount an effective type 1 immune response, type 1 T helper (Th1) cells must
produce inflammatory cytokines and simultaneously suppress the expression of
antiinflammatory cytokines. How these two processes are coordinately regulated at
the molecular level is still unclear. In this paper, we show that the
proto-oncogene E26 transformation-specific-1 (Ets-1) is necessary for T-bet to
promote interferon-gamma production and that Ets-1 is essential for mounting
effective Th1 inflammatory responses in vivo. In addition, Ets-1-deficient Th1
cells also produce a very high level of interleukin 10. Thus, Ets-1 plays a
crucial and unique role in the reciprocal regulation of inflammatory and
antiinflammatory Th responses.

PMCID: PMC2213045
PMID: 15728239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Mar 10;304(1):127-35. Epub 2004 Dec 13.

The RING finger protein RNF11 is expressed in bone cells during osteogenesis and 
is regulated by Ets1.

Gao Y(1), Ganss BW, Wang H, Kitching RE, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group in Matrix Dynamics, University of Toronto, Sunnybrook and Women's
College Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Maturation of MC3T3-E1 osteoblast cells in vitro can be divided into three major 
stages, namely, proliferation, differentiation, and mineralization. Our
microarray analysis identified genes differentially expressed between
proliferating and differentiated MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cells. Immunohistochemical
analyses of RNF11 protein encoded by one of the differentially expressed genes
revealed it as highly expressed in osteoblasts of multiple skeletal elements
during embryonic bone formation in mice. In contrast, cartilage, undifferentiated
mesenchymal tissue and osteocytes did not express detectable amounts of the RNF11
protein. The RNF11 mRNA was found to be abundant during the proliferation stage
of MC3T3-E1 osteoblast development with a short second peak of expression during 
the mineralization phase. This pattern of expression is similar to that of the
Ets1 transcription factor during osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells,
and we used immunohistochemistry to show that, in vivo, Ets1 protein is
coexpressed with RNF11 in osteoblasts. The human and mouse RNF11 promoters each
contain three Ets transcription factor binding sites (EBS) and we found that Ets1
binds specifically to one of them. The functionality of this site was tested in a
transcription-transactivation assay, indicating that RNF11 expression in bone
cells is regulated by the Ets1 factor.

PMID: 15707580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. DNA Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;24(2):126-32.

Ets1 was significantly activated by ERK1/2 in mutant K-ras stably transfected
human adrenocortical cells.

Chen YF(1), Shin SJ, Lin SR.

Author information: 
(1)MedicoGenomic Research Center, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

In our previous study on the tumorigenesis of human functional adrenal tumors, we
observed a high frequency of point mutation in the K-ras gene in clinical adrenal
tumors. Therefore, we analyzed gene profiles of mutant K-ras transfected
adrenocortical cells by DNA microarray to determine the expression pattern of
genes related to cell cycle, signal transduction, apoptosis, tumorigenesis,
steroidogenesis, and other expressed sequence tags (ESTs). Then we analyzed all
of the significant differentially expressed genes by bioinformatics tools,
"Matchminer" and "Gominer." The results revealed that expression of mutant K-ras 
gene induced by IPTG upregulated Ets1, which was mainly related to cell
proliferation. After carefully being analyzed by software "DAVID" and "Pathart," 
Ets1 was found to be activated by being phosphorylated at theronine 38 by ERK1/2,
and in turn, to regulate the following genes: uPA, MMP-3, and prolactin (Ling et 
al., 2003; Duffy and Daggan, 2004; Maupas-Schwalm et al., 2004; van Themsche et
al., 2004). The result of Western blotting analysis confirmed that Ets1 was
really phosphorylated when mutant K-ras was activated. On the other hand, the
membrane blotting analyses indicated that the expression levels of uPA, MMP-3,
and prolactin in human adrenocortical cells stably transfected with the mutant
K-ras gene were significantly higher than those in normal control cells. Compared
to control cells, the level of prolactin raised 1.4-fold, the level of MMP-3
raised 1.8-fold, and the level of uPA raised 2.1-fold in the transfected cells.
From the results of this study, we proposed a mechanism of Ets1 in human
adrenocortical cells expressing a mutated K-ras gene.

PMID: 15699632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 15;65(2):448-56.

Bone morphogenic proteins are overexpressed in malignant melanoma and promote
cell invasion and migration.

Rothhammer T(1), Poser I, Soncin F, Bataille F, Moser M, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Regensburg Medical School, Regensburg, Germany.

Malignant melanoma cells are known to have altered expression of growth factors
compared with normal human melanocytes. These changes probably favor tumor growth
and progression and influence the tumor environment. The induction of
transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1), TGF-beta2, and TGF-beta3 expression
in malignant melanoma has been reported before, whereas the expression of related
bone morphogenic protein (BMP) molecules has not been analyzed in melanomas until
now. Here, we show that BMP4 and BMP7 are up-regulated in nine melanoma cell
lines, whereas BMP2 is overexpressed in only two of the analyzed cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry of primary and metastatic melanoma also shows increased BMP4
and BMP7 expression compared with nevi. Promoter studies reveal that expression
is controlled at the transcriptional level. The transcription factor Ets-1 was
identified as a positive regulator for BMP4 expression. In order to determine the
functional relevance of BMP expression in malignant melanoma, chordin-expressing 
cell clones and antisense BMP4 cell clones were generated. The clones in which
BMP4 activity and expression are reduced show no changes in proliferation or in
attachment-independent growth when compared with controls. However, a strong
reduction of migratory and invasive properties was observed in these cells,
suggesting that BMP4 promotes melanoma cell invasion and migration and therefore 
has an important role in the progression of malignant melanoma.

PMID: 15695386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Histopathology. 2005 Feb;46(2):202-8.

Overexpression of Ets-1 proto-oncogene in latent and clinical prostatic
carcinomas.

Alipov G(1), Nakayama T, Ito M, Kawai K, Naito S, Nakashima M, Niino D, Sekine I.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue and Histopathology Section, Division of Scientific Data Registry,
Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

AIMS: The high incidence of clinically diagnosed prostatic cancer is exceeded by 
the frequency of tumours detected at autopsy. The Ets-1 proto-oncogene is
expressed by a variety of malignant and normal tissues. Therefore, in this study,
expression of Ets-1 protein was investigated in 'latent' prostatic cancer
detected at autopsy, compared with benign prostatic hyperplasia, normal prostatic
tissues and clinical prostatic cancer.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using immunohistochemistry, we analysed Ets-1 expression in 
95 prostatic specimens including 19 cases of latent prostatic carcinoma (LPC) and
55 cases of clinical prostatic carcinoma (CPC), 11 cases of benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH) and 10 cases of normal prostate (NP). Differences in the
incidence of LPC and CPC suggest different courses for the biological progression
of prostatic cancer. There was a significant difference in the degree of Ets-1
expression in CPC and LPC (P < 0.05). Ets-1 was not expressed in BPH and NP, but 
in malignant cases (57 of 74; 77.0%) commonly demonstrated immunoreactivity in
the tumour cells. In our study the expression of Ets-1 between benign and
malignant, and well, moderately and poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas of
prostatic cancer showed significant differences. The presence of Ets-1 mRNA was
confirmed by in-situ hybridization in human prostatic tissues.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that Ets-1 might play an important role in
carcinogenesis and/or the progression of human prostatic carcinomas.

PMID: 15693893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Immunol Methods. 2005 Jan;296(1-2):31-6. Epub 2004 Nov 24.

Cost efficient and effective gene transfer into the human natural killer cell
line, NK92.

Grund EM(1), Muise-Helmericks RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, 322, 86 Jonathan Lucas Street, Charleston, South
Carolina 29425, USA.

Introducing genes into cells is a crucial step in many fields of basic research, 
as well as for the development of new drugs and therapies. Many cell types are
resistant to normal methods of gene delivery, such as lipid based transfection
and electroporation. Delivery to resistant cell lines can be costly or
inefficient. Natural killer (NK) cells are highly resistant to transfection. We
have developed a novel method to deliver exogenous genes in the NK cell line,
NK92. Using a combination of electroporation and a defined buffer, we were able
to obtain an electroporation efficiency of 40% in NK92 cells. Using RNAi, we show
significant reduction of an endogenous protein (ETS1) using this optimized buffer
and electroporation conditions. Taken together, the results show a functional and
cost effective method for the expression of exogenous genes in NK cells.

PMID: 15680148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Aging Cell. 2005 Feb;4(1):21-30.

Telomere-independent cellular senescence in human fetal cardiomyocytes.

Ball AJ(1), Levine F.

Author information: 
(1)UCSD Cancer Center, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0816, USA.
ajball@ucsd.edu

Fetal cardiomyocytes have been proposed as a potential source of cell-based
therapy for heart failure. This study examined cellular senescence in cultured
human fetal ventricular cardiomyocytes (HFCs). HFCs were isolated and identified 
by immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR. Cells were found to senesce after 20-25
population doublings, as determined by growth arrest, morphological changes and
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity. Using the telomeric repeat
amplification protocol assay, telomerase activity was undetectable in primary
HFCs. Cells were transduced to express the human reverse transcriptase subunit
(hTERT) of telomerase. This resulted in greatly increased telomerase activity,
but no significant lifespan extension. Analysis of telomere length in primary
HFCs revealed that the senescent phenotype was not accompanied by telomere
shortening. Telomeres in hTERT-positive cells were elongated in comparison with
primary cells, and elongation was retained in senescent cells. Levels of the
tumor suppressor protein p16INK4A increased in all senescent cells whether
telomerase-positive or -negative. Senescence was accompanied by a decline in
transcript levels of the polycomb gene Bmi-1, Ets1 and Ets2 transcription
factors, and Id1, Id2 and Id3 helix-loop-helix proteins, suggesting roles for
these genes in maintenance of cardiomyocyte proliferative capacity. In addition
to offering novel insights into the behavior of human fetal cardiomyocytes in
culture, these findings have implications for the development of a cell-based
therapy for cardiac injury using primary fetal heart tissue.

PMID: 15659210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Gene. 2005 Jan 3;344:53-60. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Isolation and characterization of the human Cdc2L1 gene promoter.

Kahle A(1), Feng Y, A Nelson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Room 5208, Arizona Cancer Center, University of
Arizona, 1501 N. Campbell Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85724, United States.

CDK11 (cyclin-dependent kinase 11, formerly known as PITSLRE) is a member of the 
p34cdc2-related kinases. It has been previously shown to be involved in a variety
of different cellular processes including RNA processing, apoptosis, and cell
cycle progression. It is encoded by two different but highly similar genes,
Cdc2L1 (cell division control 2 like 1) and Cdc2L2 (cell division control 2 like 
2). Previous studies from our group identified and characterized the
transcriptional regulation of the human Cdc2L2 gene promoter. The current studies
identify and characterize the Cdc2L1 gene promoter. We cloned the promoter and
elucidated the different transcriptional regulatory elements that reside within
the 5' region of the gene. Deletion analysis of the promoter showed a region of
nucleotides -152 to +11 to be necessary for basal transcription of the Cdc2L1
gene. Sequencing analysis found this region of the promoter to be highly GC-rich 
but is lacking both TATA and CAAT boxes. There are several different
transcription factor binding sites that are consensus or near consensus found
within this region. The potential binding sites include two Ets-1 sites, one
Skn-1 site, and one E2F-1 site. Transfection studies of various site-directed
mutagenesis clones for these different sites revealed that both Ets-1 sites play 
critical roles in sustained transcriptional activity as well as Skn-1. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation of the endogenous promoter with Ets-1 and Skn-1 verified an
in vivo association of Ets-1 and Skn-1 transcription factors with the endogenous 
promoter. These results, in addition to our Cdc2L2 results, lead to the further
comprehension of the fundamental mechanisms dictating CDK11 gene expression
through the Cdc2L1 gene promoter.

PMID: 15656972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Semin Cancer Biol. 2005 Apr;15(2):149-57. Epub 2004 Dec 30.

Cathepsin B and tumor proteolysis: contribution of the tumor microenvironment.

Sloane BF(1), Yan S, Podgorski I, Linebaugh BE, Cher ML, Mai J, Cavallo-Medved D,
Sameni M, Dosescu J, Moin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
bsloane@med.wayne.edu

Tumor-stromal interactions induce expression of matrix metalloproteinases and
serine proteases and, as shown recently, the cysteine protease cathepsin B. We
speculate that such interactions upregulate the transcription factor Ets1,
resulting in increased cathepsin B expression. This would be consistent with the 
observed concomitant upregulation of matrix metalloproteinases and serine
proteases as well as with the ability of extracellular matrices and their binding
partners to alter cathepsin B expression and secretion. Using a confocal assay to
analyze the contribution of tumor-stromal interactions to proteolysis, we have
been able to confirm enhanced degradation of extracellular matrices by all three 
classes of proteases.

PMID: 15652460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 27;24(5):916-31.

SP100 inhibits ETS1 activity in primary endothelial cells.

Yordy JS(1), Moussa O, Pei H, Chaussabel D, Li R, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

SP100 was first identified as a nuclear autoimmune antigen and is a constituent
of the nuclear body. SP100 interacts with the ETS1 transcription factor, and we
have previously shown that SP100 reduces ETS1-DNA binding and inhibits ETS1
transcriptional activity on the MMP1 and uPA promoters. We now demonstrate that
SP100 expression is upregulated by interferons, which have been shown to be
antiangiogenic, in primary endothelial cells. As ETS1 is functionally important
in promoting angiogenesis, we tested the hypothesis that ETS1 activity is
negatively modulated by SP100 in endothelial cells. SP100 directly antagonizes
ETS1-mediated morphological changes in human umbilical vein endothelial cell
(HUVEC) network formation and reduces HUVEC migration and invasion. To further
understand the functional relationship between ETS1 and SP100, cDNA microarray
analysis was utilized to assess reprogramming of gene expression by ETS1 and
SP100. A subset of the differentially regulated genes, including heat-shock
proteins (HSPs) H11, HSPA1L, HSPA6, HSPA8, HSPE1 and AXIN1, BRCA1, CD14, CTGF
(connective tissue growth factor), GABRE (gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptor
epsilon), ICAM1, SNAI1, SRD5A1 (steroid-5-alpha-reductase 1) and THY1, were
validated by real-time PCR and a majority showed reciprocal expression in
response to ETS1 and SP100. Interestingly, genes that are negatively regulated by
ETS1 and upregulated by SP100 have antimigratory or antiangiogenic properties.
Collectively, these data indicate that SP100 negatively modulates ETS1-dependent 
downstream biological processes.

PMID: 15592518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 25;280(8):7088-99. Epub 2004 Dec 9.

The structural and dynamic basis of Ets-1 DNA binding autoinhibition.

Lee GM(1), Donaldson LW, Pufall MA, Kang HS, Pot I, Graves BJ, McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.

The transcription factor Ets-1 is regulated by the allosteric coupling of DNA
binding with the unfolding of an alpha-helix (HI-1) within an autoinhibitory
module. To understand the structural and dynamic basis for this autoinhibition,
we have used NMR spectroscopy to characterize Ets-1DeltaN301, a partially
inhibited fragment of Ets-1. The NMR-derived Ets-1DeltaN301 structure reveals
that the autoinhibitory module is formed predominantly by the hydrophobic packing
of helices from the N-terminal (HI-1, HI-2) and C-terminal (H4, H5) inhibitory
sequences, along with H1 of the intervening DNA binding ETS domain. The
intramolecular interactions made by HI-1 in Ets-1DeltaN301 are similar to the
intermolecular contacts observed in the crystal structure of an Ets-1DeltaN300
dimer, confirming that the latter represents a domain-swapped species. (15)N
relaxation studies demonstrate that the backbone of the N-terminal inhibitory
sequence is mobile on the nanosecond-picosecond and millisecond-microsecond time 
scales. Furthermore, hydrogen exchange measurements reveal that amide protons in 
helices HI-1 and HI-2 exchange with water at rates only approximately 15- and
approximately 75-fold slower, respectively, than predicted for an unfolded
polypeptide. These findings indicate that inhibitory helices are only marginally 
stable even in the absence of DNA. The energetic coupling of DNA binding with the
facile unfolding of the labile HI-1 provides a mechanism for modulating Ets-1 DNA
binding activity via protein partnerships, post-translational modifications, or
mutations. Ets-1 autoinhibition illustrates how conformational equilibria within 
structural domains can regulate macromolecular interactions.

PMID: 15591056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4578-84. Epub 2004 Dec 7.

Role of Ets-2 in the regulation of heme oxygenase-1 by endotoxin.

Chung SW(1), Chen YH, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02115, USA.

Ets proteins play a vital role in the regulation of mammalian immunity, and
family members Ets-1 and Ets-2 regulate a variety of genes that participate in
the propagation of an inflammatory response. Heme oxygenase (HO)-1, although
acutely induced by inflammatory stimuli, has cytoprotective properties and
prevents an exaggerated inflammatory response. Ets-1 and Ets-2 both induce HO-1
promoter activity; however, Ets-2 was a more potent transactivator of HO-1 in
macrophages. A potent inflammatory mediator, bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
induced Ets-2 at the mRNA and protein level, and this induction preceded the
up-regulation of HO-1. To further delineate the role of Ets-2 in regulating HO-1 
transcription, we performed HO-1 promoter analysis studies in macrophages.
Deletion mutants down to -137/+74 maintained an activity analogous to that of the
largest construct, -4045/+74. Further deletion constructs (starting with
-117/+74) showed a significant reduction in promoter activity when co-transfected
with Ets-2 or exposed to LPS. Promoter sequence analysis revealed two putative
Ets binding sites (EBSs) in this region, and mutation of these sites showed that 
EBS -93, more than EBS -125, was critical for full HO-1 promoter activity.
Additional studies showed that EBS -93 binds Ets-2 and that mutation of the DNA
binding domain of Ets-2 entirely prevented transactivation of HO-1. Finally,
overexpression of a dominant negative form of Ets-2 blunted HO-1 promoter
induction by LPS, and kinase inhibitors (PI3K more than JNK) that reduced Ets-2
expression markedly decreased endogenous HO-1 expression. Our data provide
evidence that Ets-2 contributes to the up-regulation of HO-1 by the potent
inflammatory stimulus LPS in macrophages.

PMID: 15590657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004 Dec;15(12):3083-92.

Expression and function of Ets-1 during experimental acute renal failure in rats.

Tanaka H(1), Terada Y, Kobayashi T, Okado T, Inoshita S, Kuwahara M, Seth A, Sato
Y, Sasaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Homeostasis Medicine and Nephrology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 5-45
Yushima 1-chome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

The Ets family of transcription factors is defined by a conserved DNA-binding Ets
domain that forms a winged helix-turn-helix structure motif. The Ets family is
involved in a diverse array of biologic functions, including cellular growth,
migration, and differentiation. The hypothesis in this study was that Ets-1 is
re-expressed during regeneration after acute renal failure (ARF) and plays a key 
role in the transcriptional regulation of cyclin D1 and the cell cycle
progression in renal tubular cells. For clarifying the significance of Ets-1 in
ARF, a rat ARF model in vivo and LLC-PK1 cells as an in vitro model were used.
After the left rat renal artery was clamped for 1 h, the whole kidney homogenate 
was examined and total RNA was extracted at 6, 12, 24, 48, and 72 h after
reperfusion by Western blot analysis and real-time reverse transcription-PCR.
Ets-1 mRNA and protein expression were strongly increased at 6 to 24 h after the 
ischemia, respectively. The expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha was
increased dramatically as early as 6 h after ischemia-reperfusion and decreased
at 48 and 72 h after ischemia-reperfusion. In the immunohistologic examination,
Ets-1 was expressed in the proximal tubules and coexpressed with proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Furthermore, overexpression of Ets-1 promoted the
cell cycle and increased the promoter activity and protein expression of cyclin
D1 in LLC-PK1 cells. Ets-1 promoter activity increased between 3 and 6 h in
hypoxia, and hypoxia also induced changes in the Ets-1 protein level in LLC-PK1
cells. The Ets-1 induction by hypoxia was abolished by the transfection of
dominant-negative hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha. A gel shift assay demonstrated
that Ets-1 binds to the ets-1 binding site of the cyclin D1 promoter in the
ischemia-reperfusion condition. Overexpression of Ets-1 did not significantly
change the caspase 3 activity or the value of cell death ELISA in LLC-PK1 cells. 
Taken together, these data suggest that Ets-1 plays a key role in the cell-cycle 
progression of renal tubules in ARF. The Ets-1 pathway may regulate the
transcription of cyclin D1 and control the regeneration of renal tubules in ARF.

PMID: 15579511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Histol Histopathol. 2005 Jan;20(1):119-26.

Expression of the ets-1 proto-oncogene in human breast carcinoma: differential
expression with histological grading and growth pattern.

Katayama S(1), Nakayama T, Ito M, Naito S, Sekine I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

The proto-oncogene, ets-1, is a transcription factor known to control the
expression of a number of genes and has been postulated to play a role in cell
growth, differentiation and tumour invasion. We examined 137 cases of breast
carcinoma by immunohistochemistry and compared the degree of Ets-1 expression
among the different histological types of invasive carcinomas. Ets-1 was not
expressed in the normal breast epithelium nor in noninvasive carcinomas. Among
the 137 breast carcinoma cases, 104 (83.2%) showed positive staining for the
Ets-1 protein. Histologically, invasive ductal carcinomas expressed
immunopositivity with intense staining for Ets-1 in the tumour cells. Ets-1
expression correlated with Bloom-Richardson grading in invasive ductal carcinoma 
(p<0.01). However, there was no correlation between Ets-1 expression and lymph
node metastasis, "t" classification or TNM staging. In situ hybridization
confirmed the presence of Ets-1 mRNA in breast carcinomas. The expression of
Ets-1 mRNA was detected in two of three different kinds of cultured human breast 
carcinoma cell lines and one of three human breast carcinoma tissues by the
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction method. These findings suggest
that ets-1 is overexpressed in ductal cells of the breast that have undergone
malignant conversion and that ets-1 is one of the factors associated with tumour 
growth and histological differentiation of breast carcinomas.

PMID: 15578430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Front Biosci. 2005 Jan 1;10:506-11. Print 2005 Jan 1.

The transcription factor Ets-1 in breast cancer.

Lincoln DW 2nd(1), Bove K.

Author information: 
(1)Stratton VA Medical Center, Medical Research Service, Albany, NY 12208, USA.

The proto-oncogene Ets-1 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors
which share a unique DNA binding domain, the Ets domain. Ets binding sites have
been described on the promoters or enhancers of many proteinases and several Ets 
members transcriptionally regulate such promoters in transient cotransfection
assays. Ets-1 is involved in both normal and pathological functions. Ets-1 is
expressed in a variety of cells, including endothelial cells, vascular smooth
muscle cells and epithelial cells. Ets-1 regulates the expression of several
angiogenic and extracellular matrix remodeling factors promoting an invasive
phenotype. The Ets family of transcription factors may play a role in the disease
progression of breast cancer. In tumors, including breast neoplasia, Ets-1
expression is indicative of poorer prognosis. This review will summarize the role
of Ets-1 in both the tumor cells, and the tumor endothelial cells as it relates
to breast tumor growth and spread.

PMID: 15574387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(24):10954-64.

Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling activates Ets-1 and Ets-2 by
CBP/p300 recruitment.

Foulds CE(1), Nelson ML, Blaszczak AG, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, 2000 Circle of Hope, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84112-5550, USA.

Cell signaling affects gene expression by regulating the activity of
transcription factors. Here, we report that mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) phosphorylation of Ets-1 and Ets-2, at a conserved site N terminal to
their Pointed (PNT) domains, resulted in enhanced transactivation by preferential
recruitment of the coactivators CREB binding protein (CBP) and p300. We
discovered this phosphorylation-augmented interaction in an unbiased affinity
chromatography screen of HeLa nuclear extracts by using either mock-treated or
ERK2-phosphorylated ETS proteins as ligands. Binding between purified proteins
demonstrated a direct interaction. Both the phosphoacceptor site, which lies in
an unstructured region, and the PNT domain were required for the interaction.
Minimal regions that were competent for induced CBP/p300 binding in vitro also
supported MAPK-enhanced transcription in vivo. CBP coexpression potentiated
MEK1-stimulated Ets-2 transactivation of promoters with Ras-responsive elements. 
Furthermore, CBP and Ets-2 interacted in a phosphorylation-enhanced manner in
vivo. This study describes a distinctive interface for a transcription
factor-coactivator complex and demonstrates a functional role for inducible
CBP/p300 binding. In addition, our findings decipher the mechanistic link between
Ras/MAPK signaling and two specific transcription factors that are relevant to
both normal development and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC533975
PMID: 15572696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4772-8. Epub 2004 Nov 23.

Interleukins 2 and 15 regulate Ets1 expression via ERK1/2 and MNK1 in human
natural killer cells.

Grund EM(1), Spyropoulos DD, Watson DK, Muise-Helmericks RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Interleukins (IL)-2 and IL-15 regulate natural killer (NK) cell proliferation,
survival, and cytolytic activity. Ets1 is a transcription factor expressed early 
in NK cell differentiation. Because IL-2Rbeta, IL-2Rgamma, IL-15, and Ets1
knock-out mice similarly lack NK cells, we explored a molecular connection
between IL-2R signaling and Ets1. Here we report the post-transcriptional
regulation of Ets1 by IL-2R signaling in human NK cells. IL-2 and IL-15
stimulation leads to increased Ets1 protein levels with no significant change in 
mRNA levels. Pulse and pulse-chase experiments show that IL-2 stimulation results
in both a marked increase in the nascent translation of Ets1 and an increased
protein half-life. Pharmacological inhibition of MEK specifically blocks IL-2-
and IL-15-induced translation, whereas p38, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and
mTOR inhibitors had no effect on Ets1 levels. Fli1, an Ets family member,
exhibited a different mechanism of regulation, illustrating the specificity of
IL-2R beta and gamma subunit signaling on the regulation of Ets1 expression.
Expression of a dominant negative form of MNK1, a regulator of the translation
initiation factor eIF4E, blocks the expression of Ets1 as do the dominant
negative forms of the common IL-2R beta and gamma chains. Expression of Ets1 is
regulated similarly in normal peripheral human NK cells. Taken together, our
findings provide a direct link between IL-2R subunit signaling and Ets1
expression and helps to explain the interdependence of the IL-2R subunits and
Ets1 for NK cell development and function.

PMID: 15563472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2004 Aug;26(8):454-7.

[EB virus encoded latent membrane protein 1 mediated expression of transcription 
factor Ets-1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zeng L(1), Liu YP, Wang H, Tao YG, Zhao XR, Li W, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya School of
Medicine, Central South University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the expression of tanscription factor Ets-1 mediated by
EB virus encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC) cells.
METHODS: LMP1-expressing NPC HNE2 cells regulated by Tet-on system (pTet-on-LMP1 
HNE2) were used. Expression of LMP1 and Ets-1 was observed after induction with
Doxycycline (Dox). Expression of Ets-1 mRNA and protein was detected by RT-PCR
and Western blot, respectively. The phosphorylation level of Ets-1 protein was
examined by co-immunoprecipitation. The DNA binding activity of Ets-1 was
detected by electrophoretic-mobility shift assay (EMSA).
RESULTS: After induction with Dox in pTet-on-LMP1 HNE2 cells, to some extent, the
expression of Ets-1 mRNA and protein, its phosphorylation level and DNA binding
activity were increased with enhancement of LMP1 expression.
CONCLUSION: LMP1 induces transcriptional activation and expression of Ets-1 which
may contribute to the development of NPC.

PMID: 15555331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Diabetologia. 2003 Nov;46(11):1483-8. Epub 2003 Oct 8.

Elevated serum vascular endothelial growth factor is associated with visceral fat
accumulation in human obese subjects.

Miyazawa-Hoshimoto S(1), Takahashi K, Bujo H, Hashimoto N, Saito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chuo-ku, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Adipose tissue expresses some bioactive molecules, which may be 
involved in the development of obesity-associated metabolic disorders and
cardiovascular diseases. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) an important
angiogenic factor is implicated in normal and pathological vessel formation. The 
aim of this study is to investigate clinically the association between blood
serum VEGF concentrations and body fat accumulation as well as distribution. The 
study also aims to show the effect of serum VEGF protein on gene expression of
transcriptional factor E26 transformation-specific-1 (Ets-1) and matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-3.
METHODS: Serum VEGF concentrations were measured in 38 overweight or obese
subjects. Fat distribution in the abdominal subcutaneous as well as visceral fat 
areas was assessed by computed tomography scans at umbilical level. Furthermore, 
the changes of serum VEGF concentrations following body weight reduction therapy 
were analyzed in eight subjects recruited from the original pool of subjects.
Semi-purified circulating VEGF proteins were obtained by heparin-sepharose and
its biological activities were shown to alter gene expressions in human aortic
endothelial cells.
RESULTS: Serum VEGF concentrations were positively correlated with BMI (r=0.433, 
p=0.007) and visceral fat area (r=0.488, p=0.002). Stepwise regression analysis
showed the visceral fat area as the most important determinant factor for VEGF
circulating levels. Following body weight reduction therapy, VEGF concentrations 
as well as visceral fat area were decreased. The serum semi-purified VEGF protein
enhanced expressions of Ets-1 and MMP-3 in human aortic endothelial cells.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Increased serum VEGF concentrations associated with
visceral fat accumulation could influence vascular endothelial function.

PMID: 14534780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 9;22(44):6857-64.

Restoration of SMAD4 by gene therapy reverses the invasive phenotype in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells.

Duda DG(1), Sunamura M, Lefter LP, Furukawa T, Yokoyama T, Yatsuoka T, Abe T,
Inoue H, Motoi F, Egawa S, Matsuno S, Horii A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku
University, 980-8574 Sendai, Japan.

SMAD4 is a critical cofactor in signal transduction pathways activated in
response to transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)-related ligands,
regulating cell growth and differentiation. The roles played by SMAD4
inactivation in tumours highlighted it as a tumour-suppressor gene. However,
restoration of the TGF-beta antiproliferative pathway following SMAD4 gene
transfer in null-tumour cell lines is controversial. Herein, we report the
inhibitory effects of SMAD4 on pancreatic tumour invasion and angiogenesis.
Adenoviral transfer of this gene in a panel of SMAD4 homozygous-deleted human
pancreatic tumour cell lines restored SMAD4 protein expression and function.
Although it did not affect proliferation significantly in vitro, SMAD4 inhibited 
in vivo tumour growth in immunodeficient mice. In this xenograft setting,
differential suppression of tumour growth in vivo was mediated, at least in part,
through downregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor and expression of
gelatinases. We documented the reduced invasion and angiogenesis histologically
and by intravital microscopy, and gained mechanistic insight at the messenger and
protein level. Finally, we found a negative reciprocal regulation between SMAD4
and ETS-1. ETS-1 is considered a marker for tumour invasion. Upon SMAD4 deletion,
we detected high expression levels of ETS-1 in pancreatic tumour cells,
suggesting the shift of the pancreatic tumour toward an invasive phenotype.

PMID: 14534532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2003;88:153-62.

Glioma invasion--pattern of dissemination by mechanisms of invasion and surgical 
intervention, pattern of gene expression and its regulatory control by
tumorsuppressor p53 and proto-oncogene ETS-1.

Giese A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Luebeck, Germany.
alf.giese@neurochirurgie.mu-luebeck.de

The capacity of glioma cells to invade normal brain leads to far reaching
dissemination of these tumors limiting surgical resection and the prospect of
local treatment strategies. The analysis of the dissemination pattern, the
molecular substrates and mechanisms involved suggest that glioma invasion most
likely represents independent cellular behaviors leading to distinct pattern of
spread. The search for common denominators of the invasive phenotype has
demonstrated that invasive cells show gene expression profiles indicating
elevated expression of motility associated genes and genes involved in resistance
to apoptosis whereas proliferation and apoptosis related gene expression is
repressed. Confirming these findings, invasive cells in vitro show elevated
motility and resistance to drug induced apoptosis. Obviously invasiveness is an
early event in the progression of glial tumors. Therefore, the loss of control
over invasion genes must involve key elements of molecular tumor progression. We 
have recently demonstrated that deregulation of invasion gene expression occurs
as a consequence of functional impairment of tumor suppressor p53 leading to
unrestrained activation of proto-oncogene Ets-1 dependent invasion-associated
genes. In this article the prospect of limiting the dissemination of glial tumors
by anti-invasive strategies and targets for modulation of the invasive phenotype 
to reconstitute chemo- and radiation sensitivity are discussed.

PMID: 14531573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. FASEB J. 2003 Dec;17(15):2278-80. Epub 2003 Oct 2.

Coordinated functions of Akt/PKB and ETS1 in tubule formation.

Lavenburg KR(1), Ivey J, Hsu T, Muise-Helmericks RC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, and Department of Cell 
Biology and Anatomy, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

We investigated the inter-relationship between two downstream effectors of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), the serine threonine kinase Akt (also 
known as protein kinase B) and the transcription factor ETS1, during
tubulogenesis. Human endothelial cell culture and the in vivo Drosophila tracheal
systems are employed in comparative analysis. We show that VEGF stimulates the
expression of ETS1 through a phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt-dependent
pathway in primary endothelial cells. Activation of Akt results in vessel
formation in vitro, a process that is blocked by expression of antisense ETS1.
The functional relationship between ETS and Akt was then tested in the homologous
tubular system in Drosophila. Contrary to expectation, ETS1 and Akt did not form 
a linear positive regulatory pathway in vivo. Instead, genetic analyses suggest
that the Drosophila ETS1 homologue Pointed is required for cell motility per se
while Drosophila Akt (Dakt1) is responsible for organized and restricted cell
movement that is essential for tubule formation. Taken together, our results show
that ETS1 and Akt control different aspects of cell motility that are integrated 
in the precise regulation of vascular tubule formation.

PMCID: PMC2276577
PMID: 14525946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Sep 15;9(11):4221-6.

Differential vascular and transcriptional responses to anti-vascular endothelial 
growth factor antibody in orthotopic human pancreatic cancer xenografts.

Bockhorn M(1), Tsuzuki Y, Xu L, Frilling A, Broelsch CE, Fukumura D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Edwin L. Steele Laboratory, Massachusetts
General Hospital, 100 Blossom Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

PURPOSE: The objectives of this study were to investigate the effects of
anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) treatment on various vascular
functions, gene expression, and growth of orthotopic human pancreatic cancer
xenografts and thus to provide useful preclinical data for novel cancer
treatments.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Small pieces of a human pancreatic carcinoma, PANC-1, were
implanted into the pancreas of male severe combined immunodeficient mice. The
animals were treated with anti-human VEGF antibody A.4.6.1 (300 micro g, every 3 
days i.p.) or a nonspecific IgG between 4 and 8 weeks after tumor implantation.
Then, vascular density, diameter, permeability, and tumor growth were determined 
by intravital microscopy. Subsequently, tumors were harvested, and angiogenic
gene expression profile was determined by a microarray kit including 96 genes
involved in tumor angiogenesis.
RESULTS: Anti-VEGF antibody significantly reduced angiogenesis and growth of
orthotopic PANC-1 tumors. In the anti-VEGF treatment group, the vessel density
was significantly smaller (67.8 +/- 10.6 cm/cm(2)) than that seen in the control 
group (146.7 +/- 10.0 cm/cm(2)). However, vessel diameter and permeability were
not altered significantly by anti-VEGF antibody treatment. The pancreatic tumors 
in the treated group were significantly smaller than those in the control group. 
Microarray and subsequent Northern blot and semiquantitative reverse
transcription-PCR analyses revealed both a decrease (fibroblast growth factor 1, 
transforming growth factor beta1, platelet-derived growth factor alpha, erbB2,
and c-ets1,) and an increase (placenta growth factor, hypoxia-inducible factor
alpha, and endoglin) in expression of angiogenesis-related genes in the PANC-1
tumors by anti-VEGF treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-VEGF antibody treatment has differential effects on vessel
functions as well as angiogenic gene expression and inhibitory effects on
angiogenesis and growth of the orthotopic pancreatic tumor. Anti-VEGF strategy
appears promising for pancreatic cancer treatment.

PMID: 14519649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2003 Aug;25(4):396-400.

[Expression and significance about VEGF, KDR, MMP-1, and transcription factor
Ets-1 in human cervical carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu FL(1), Li YL, Wang ZD, Feng YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan
University, Shanghai 200011, China. xufl0716@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of VEGF, KDR, MMP-1, and its transcription
factor Ets-1 on the interstitial neovasculogenesis in human cervical carcinoma on
molecular level, which may provide further theoretic bases on judgement of
prognosis and explain interregularity between neovasculagenetic factors.
METHODS: VEGF, KDR, MMP-1, and Ets-1 were detected in 87 cervical carcinomas by
in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. The survival curves for patients 
with detected tumors were compared with the curves for those without tumors.
Multivariate analyses were performed with Pearson analysis.
RESULTS: VEGF mRNA and its protein were mainly expressed in cytoplasms of tumor
cells, positive rate was 78.6% (68/87) and 70.4% (61/87) respectively. KDR mRNA
and its protein were mainly expressed in vascular endothelial cells, as
correlation coefficient between KDR and VEGF was 0.892. Over expression of MMP-1 
was seen in both endothelial cells and tumor cells, especially in hyperplasia of 
endothelial cells. Ets-1 was mainly expressed in both endothelial cells and tumor
cells, correlation coefficient between Ets-1 and KDR, MMP-1, was 0.900 and 0.873,
respectively. Four factors of above were highly related with tumor
differentiation, lymph nodes metastasis as well as 5 years survival rate.
CONCLUSIONS: VEGF, KDR, MMP-1, and Ets-1 are important factors on
neovasculogenesis in cervical carcinoma, which may be considered to be reference 
indicator for determining biology behavior of cervical carcinoma, and may provide
further theoretic bases on antineovasculagenetic therapy.

PMID: 12974081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Cancer. 2003 Aug 20;2:29.

The biology of the Ets1 proto-oncogene.

Dittmer J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universität Halle-Wittenberg Universitätsklinik und Poliklinik für Gynäkologie
Magdeburger Str, 24 06097 Halle, Saale, Germany.
juergen.dittmer@medizin.uni-halle.de

The Ets1 proto-oncoprotein is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors
that share a unique DNA binding domain, the Ets domain. The DNA binding activity 
of Ets1 is controlled by kinases and transcription factors. Some transcription
factors, such as AML-1, regulate Ets1 by targeting its autoinhibitory module.
Others, such as Pax-5, alter Ets1 DNA binding properties. Ets1 harbors two
phosphorylation sites, threonine-38 and an array of serines within the exon VII
domain. Phosphorylation of threonine-38 by ERK1/2 activates Ets1, whereas
phosphorylation of the exon VII domain by CaMKII or MLCK inhibits Ets1 DNA
binding activity. Ets1 is expressed by numerous cell types. In haemotopoietic
cells, it contributes to the regulation of cellular differentiation. In a variety
of other cells, including endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells and
epithelial cancer cells, Ets1 promotes invasive behavior. Regulation of MMP1,
MMP3, MMP9 and uPA as well as of VEGF and VEGF receptor gene expression has been 
ascribed to Ets1. In tumors, Ets1 expression is indicative of poorer prognosis.

PMCID: PMC194255
PMID: 12971829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Cancer Sci. 2003 Sep;94(9):769-73.

Clinical implications of expression of ETS-1 in relation to angiogenesis in
ovarian cancers.

Khatun S(1), Fujimoto J, Toyoki H, Tamaya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Gifu 500-8705, Japan.

ETS-1 has been identified as a transcription factor involved in tumor
angiogenesis, which is essential for the growth, invasion, and metastasis of
solid tumors. This result prompted us to study whether ETS-1 works as an
angiogenic mediator in ovarian cancers. Immunohistochemical staining revealed
that ETS-1 was expressed in vascular endothelial cells and in cancer cells of
ovarian cancers. There was a significant correlation between microvessel counts
and both ETS-1 histoscores and ets-1 mRNA levels in ovarian cancers. Both ETS-1
histoscores and ets-1 mRNA levels increased with the progression of ovarian
cancers. Furthermore, the 24-month survival rate of 30 patients with high ets-1
(high ETS-1 histoscores and high ets-1 mRNA levels) was 30%, while that of 30
other patients with low ets-1 (low ETS-1 histoscores and ets-1 mRNA levels) was
70%. There was a significant difference between the 24-month survival rates of
the 30 patients with high ets-1 and the 30 with low ets-1. This indicates that
ETS-1 might act as an angiogenic mediator in, and be a prognostic factor for,
ovarian cancers.

PMID: 12967474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):47275-80. Epub 2003 Sep 5.

CITED2-mediated regulation of MMP-1 and MMP-13 in human chondrocytes under flow
shear.

Yokota H(1), Goldring MB, Sun HB.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Program, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

CITED2 (CBP/p300-interacting transactivator with ED-rich tail 2) is a member of
the Cited family of nuclear regulators, previously known as mrg1
(melanocyte-specific gene-related gene 1). CITED2 is inducible by varying stimuli
including lipopolysaccharide, hypoxia, and cytokines such as interleukin 9 and
interferon gamma. Using the immortalized human chondrocyte cell line, C-28/I2, we
investigated whether CITED2 could be responsive to mechanical stimuli, and if so,
whether CITED2 could mediate shear-driven regulation of matrix metalloproteinase 
(MMP) genes. The C-28/I2 cells were cultured under flow shear at 1-20 dyn/cm2,
and the role of CIT-ED2 in regulation of MMPs was examined using the plasmids
encoding sense and antisense CITED2 DNA sequences. The results showed that flow
shear at 5 dyn/cm2 increased CITED2 mRNA and protein levels and down-regulated
MMP-1 and MMP-13 mRNA and protein levels as well as enzyme activities. Consistent
with the coordinated expression patterns of CITED2 and MMPs, overexpression of
CITED2 repressed MMP-1 and MMP-13 mRNA levels and activities, whereas antisense
CITED2 plasmids prevented the shear-induced down-regulation of MMP expression.
Interleukin-1beta induced the formation of p300-Ets-1 complexes without affecting
expression of CITED2. Transforming growth factor-beta as well as flow shear at 5 
dyn/cm2 stimulated not only the expression of CITED2 but also the association of 
CIT-ED2 with p300 by dissociating Ets-1 from p300. These results indicate that
CITED2 plays a major role in shear-induced down-regulation of MMP-1 and MMP-13
via a transforming growth factor-beta-dependent pathway.

PMID: 12960175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Int J Cancer. 2003 Nov 1;107(2):183-8.

Stromal expression of invasion-promoting, matrix-degrading proteases MMP-1 and -9
and the Ets 1 transcription factor in HNPCC carcinomas and sporadic colorectal
cancers.

Behrens P(1), Mathiak M, Mangold E, Kirdorf S, Wellmann A, Fogt F, Rothe M,
Florin A, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancers (HNPCCs) are an important subgroup of 
colorectal carcinomas. Compared to sporadic variants, they present several
particular features, the most important of which are less invasive and metastatic
properties linked to a more favorable prognosis. This contrasts to the generally 
poor differentiation of the epithelial tumor component. Since matrix-degrading
proteases secreted by stromal fibroblasts contribute significantly to tumor
invasion, we analyzed the stromal expression of 2 matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP-1 and -9) and of one of their regulators, the Ets 1 transcription factor, by
both immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization in sporadic colorectal
carcinomas and HNPCC tumors. We found that MMP-1 and -9 as well as Ets 1 are
upregulated in the fibroblastic stroma during the development from sporadic
adenomas to invasive carcinomas. HNPCC tumors exhibited a significantly lower
expression of Ets 1, MMP-1 and -9. These findings on the basis of lower
matrix-degrading properties of the fibroblastic tumor stroma in HNPCC tumors
might help to explain why, in spite of their less differentiated phenotype, HNPCC
tumors have a less invasive and metastatic potential compared to sporadic
cancers.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12949792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Blood. 2004 Jan 1;103(1):229-35. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Expression analyses identify MLL as a prominent target of 11q23 amplification and
support an etiologic role for MLL gain of function in myeloid malignancies.

Poppe B(1), Vandesompele J, Schoch C, Lindvall C, Mrozek K, Bloomfield CD,
Beverloo HB, Michaux L, Dastugue N, Herens C, Yigit N, De Paepe A, Hagemeijer A, 
Speleman F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ghent, Belgium.

MLL amplification was recently recognized as a recurrent aberration in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodys-plastic syndrome (MDS), associated with
adverse prognosis and karyotype complexity. Here we present detailed results of
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and expression analyses of MLL and 5
selected 11q candidate oncogenes (CBL, DDX6, ETS1, FLI1, and PLZF) in 31 patient 
samples and one cell line with 11q23 gain. FISH analyses revealed that the 11q23 
amplicon invariably encompassed MLL, DDX6, ETS1, and FLI1, whereas expression
analyses identified MLL and DDX6 as the most differentially expressed genes among
samples with and without 11q23 copy gain or amplification. In MLL-amplified
samples, a significant transcriptional up-regulation of MEIS1, PROML1, ADAM10,
NKG2D, and ITPA was noted. Further analyses, designed to elucidate a possible
role of the 11q overexpressed genes (MLL, DDX6, FLI1, and ETS1) in unselected MDS
and AML samples, revealed a significant upregulation of MLL in MDS. Our findings 
confirm the MLL gene as a prominent target of 11q23 amplification and provide
further evidence for an etiologic role for MLL gain of function in myeloid
malignancies. In addition, our results indicate that the transcriptional program 
associated with MLL rearrangements and MLL overexpression displays significant
similarities.

PMID: 12946992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 1;261(1):25-38.

An Ets transcription factor, HrEts, is target of FGF signaling and involved in
induction of notochord, mesenchyme, and brain in ascidian embryos.

Miya T(1), Nishida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Nagatsuta,
226-8501 Yokohama, Japan.

In ascidian embryos, a fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signal induces notochord,
mesenchyme, and brain formation. Although a conserved Ras/MAPK pathway is known
to be involved in this signaling, the target transcription factor of this
signaling cascade has remained unknown. We have isolated HrEts, an ascidian
homolog of vertebrate Ets1 and Ets2, to elucidate the transcription factor
involved in the FGF signaling pathway in embryos of the ascidian Halocynthia
roretzi. Maternal mRNA of HrEts was detected throughout the entire egg cytoplasm 
and early embryos. Its zygotic expression started in several tissues, including
the notochord and neural plate. Overexpression of HrEts mRNA did not affect the
general organization of the tadpoles, but resulted in formation of excess sensory
pigment cells. In contrast, suppression of HrEts function by morpholino antisense
oligonucleotide resulted in severe abnormalities, similar to those of embryos in 
which the FGF signaling pathway was inhibited. Notochord-specific Brachyury
expression at cleavage stage and notochord differentiation at the tailbud stage
were abrogated. Formation of mesenchyme cells was also suppressed, and the
mesenchyme precursors assumed muscle fate. In addition, expression of Otx in
brain-lineage blastomeres was specifically suppressed. These results suggest that
an Ets transcription factor, HrEts, is involved in signal transduction of FGF
commonly in notochord, mesenchyme, and brain induction in ascidian embryos.

PMID: 12941619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Eur Urol. 2003 Sep;44(3):329-36.

Angiogenetic protooncogene ets-1 induced neovascularization is involved in the
metastatic process of testicular germ cell tumors.

Adam M(1), Schmidt D, Wardelmann E, Wernert N, Albers P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Bonn University, Bonn, Germany. mirkoadam@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Induction of angiogenesis is essential for tumor growth and
metastasis. The role of angiogenetic factors and corresponding microvessel
density in the development of metastasis of nonseminomatous testicular germ cell 
tumors (NSGCTs) is not clearly defined. Aim of the study was to gain new insights
in the expression of the above described factors in different histological
subtypes of metastatic and non-metastatic NSGCTs.
METHODS: Paraffin-embedded tissues of 39 NSGCTs (19 organ confined NSGCTs,
pathological stage I and 20 NSGCTs with metastasis, pathological stage II) were
immunohistochemical stained with antibodies for vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) with the ligands flt and flk, for the angiogenetic factor ets-1 as 
well as for endothelial markers CD34 and CD105. Areas representative of the
invasive tumor were selected and the different histological subtypes were
microdissected. For each subtype immunohistochemical expression in metastatic and
organ confined tumors was assessed. Additionally, neovascularization was
investigated by microvessel density and correlated to the markers of
angiogenesis.
RESULTS: VEGF expression was most often seen in teratoma components. There was no
significant difference in the expression of VEGF, flt or flk in metastatic vs.
organ confined tumors and their different histological subtypes seen. Only
frequency and intensity for ets-1 expression differed significantly between
metastatic and non-metastatic tumors. Using CD105 a significantly higher
microvessel density was observed in stage II tumors. In addition, microvessel
density determined by CD105 correlated significantly with ets-1 expression.
DISCUSSION: VEGF and its receptors flt and flk seem not be involved in the
progress of metastatic development of NSGCTs. Only expression of ets-1, a
protooncogene involved in tumor angiogenesis, was significantly higher and more
frequently seen in metastatic NSGCTs. A difference in microvessel density between
tumor stages could only be observed if the specific CD105 antibody was used. In
contrast, no difference in microvessel distribution between histological subtypes
or tumor stages was observed if the pan-endothelial marker CD34 was used.
Furthermore, ets-1 expression was significantly associated with CD105 microvessel
density. Conclusively, ets-1 together with microvessel density determined by
CD105 may have prognostic value in the multistep event of carcinogenesis.

PMID: 12932931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Brain Res Brain Res Protoc. 2003 Aug;12(1):35-40.

An abbreviated procedure for the cloning and identification of Ets transcription 
factors regulating the expression of the human presenilin 1 gene.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107,
USA.

We have previously defined a crucial DNA element controlling 90% of the
expression of the presenilin 1 gene at (-35 to +6). This region contains an Ets
transcription factor binding motif, and a two-basepair alteration within the core
sequence (GGAA to TTAA) of the Ets consensus also reduced transcription by over
90%. We have shown that Ets1/2 transcription factors bind specifically to the -10
Ets element and activate PS1 transcription. The identification of other
transcription factors recognizing specifically this promoter area should provide 
insights into the regulation of PS1. We have used the -10 Ets element as a bait
in yeast one hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library using a His3 reporter
construct. We describe an abbreviated one-hybrid protocol to screen cDNA
libraries. This assay selected four factors from the Ets family: Ets2, ER81, ERM 
and Elk1. We have also shown that specific DNA binding activity to the -10 Ets
element of PS1 could easily be detected in yeast clones by EMSAs including
protein extracts from yeast cells, thus confirming specific DNA binding activity 
without further sequencing and subcloning into suitable expression vectors.
Ultimately the identity of putative clones was confirmed by DNA sequencing. We
also confirmed the specific DNA binding properties of the factors identified by
showing that the proteins produced by in vitro translation of the entire cDNAs
from Elk1 and ER81 indeed binds specifically to the -10 region of the PS1
promoter.

PMID: 12928043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mod Pathol. 2003 Aug;16(8):772-7.

Expression of the ets-1 proto-oncogene in melanocytic lesions.

Keehn CA(1), Smoller BR, Morgan MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of South Florida College of Medicine, USA.
ckeehn@hsc.usf.edu

Ets-1 oncoprotein is a transcription factor known to regulate the expression of
numerous genes important in extracellular matrix remodeling and angiogenesis.
Up-regulation of Ets-1 has been shown to be important in a variety of human
malignancies and to correlate with prognosis. To our knowledge, this oncoprotein 
has not been examined in melanocytic lesions. A series of 10 cutaneous melanomas 
and 24 benign melanocytic lesions with patient records were independently
examined for diagnosis confirmation and immunohistochemical expression by two
dermatopathologists. The immunohistochemical expression for Ets-1 (Novocastra,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was scored by an average of the mean labeling intensity;
no nuclear staining = 0, weak nuclear staining = 1, moderate = 2, and intense =
3. Ets-1 expression was statistically assessed by the one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) comparing the mean labeling intensity of melanoma to benign
melanocytic nevi. All of the benign melanocytic lesions exhibited negative to
weak nuclear staining, with an average mean labeling intensity of 0.4. Melanoma
in situ exhibited moderate nuclear staining, for a mean labeling intensity of
2.0, whereas all conventional invasive melanomas exhibited moderate to strong
nuclear staining, with a mean labeling intensity of 2.7. Metastatic melanoma
exhibited very strong nuclear staining, with a mean labeling intensity of 3.0.
Invasive desmoplastic melanoma, like melanoma in situ, showed moderate nuclear
staining with a mean labeling intensity of 2.1. There was a trend toward more
intense staining with melanoma progression. A statistically significant
difference in the mean labeling intensity of Ets-1 was seen between invasive
melanoma and benign melanocytic nevi (P <.0001). Ets-1 oncoprotein expression,
however, does not distinguish among benign melanocytic lesions. Staining
intensity and pattern might be a useful adjunct with histomorphology in
distinguishing invasive melanoma from benign melanocytic nevi. Furthermore, Ets-1
expression may be an important pathogenic mechanism and predictor of aggressive
biologic behavior of cutaneous melanoma, with a trend toward staining intensity
increasing as Clark stage increases.

PMID: 12920221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):42106-14. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

HMGA1 co-activates transcription in B cells through indirect association with
DNA.

McCarthy KM(1), McDevit D, Andreucci A, Reeves R, Nikolajczyk BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

The immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer, or mu enhancer, is required for B cell
development. Only the appropriate combination of transcription factors results in
B cell-specific enhancer activation. HMGA1 (formerly (HMG-I(Y)) is a proposed
co-activator of the ETS transcription factors required for mu enhancer activity. 
HMGA1 associates with the ETS factor PU.1, resulting in changes in PU.1
structure, and enhanced transcriptional synergy with Ets-1 on the mu enhancer in 
nonlymphoid cells. New data show HMGA1 directly interacts with Ets-1 in addition 
to PU.1. In vitro HMGA1/Ets-1 interaction facilitates Ets-1/mu enhancer binding
in the absence of an HMGA1.Ets-1.DNA complex. To address whether HMGA1 is present
in the transcriptionally active mu nucleoprotein complex, we completed DNA
pull-down assays to detect protein tethering in the context of protein/DNA
interaction. Results show that HMGA1 is not tightly associated with mu enhancer
DNA through PU.1 or Ets-1, despite strong associations between these proteins in 
solution. However, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show HMGA1 associates
with the endogenous enhancer in B cells. Furthermore, antisense HMGA1
substantially decreases mu enhancer activity in B cells. Taken together, these
data suggest that HMGA1 functions as a transcriptional mu enhancer co-activator
in B cells through indirect association with DNA.

PMID: 12907668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 10;278(41):39684-96. Epub 2003 Aug 5.

Ras signaling and transcriptional synergy at a flexible Ets-1/Pit-1 composite DNA
element is defined by the assembly of selective activation domains.

Duval DL(1), Jean A, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver,
Colorado 80262, USA. dawn.duval@uchsc.edu

Pit-1 and Ets-1 binding to a composite element synergistically activates and
targets Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling to the rat prolactin
promoter. These transcriptional responses appear to depend on three molecular
features: organization of the Ets-1/Pit-1 composite element, physical interaction
of these two factors via the Pit-1 homeodomain (amino acids 199-291) and the
Ets-1 regulatory III domain (amino acids 190-257), and assembly of their
transcriptional activation domains (TADs). Here we show that the organization of 
the Ets-1/Pit-1 composite element tolerates significant flexibility with regard
to Ras stimulation and synergy. Specifically, the putative monomeric Pit-1
binding site can be substituted with bona fide binding sites for either a Pit-1
monomer or dimer, and these sites tolerated a separation of 28 bp. Additionally, 
we show that the physical interaction of Ets-1 and Pit-1 is not required for Ras 
responsiveness or synergy because block mutations of the Pit-1 interaction
surface in Ets-1, which reduced Ets-1/Pit-1 binding in vitro, did not
significantly affect Ets-1 stimulation of Ras responsiveness or synergy. We also 
show differential use of distinct TAD subtypes and Pit-1 TAD subregions to
mediate either synergy or Ras responsiveness. Specifically, TADs from Gal4, VP16,
or Ets-2 regulatory III domain linked to Ets-1 DNA binding domain constructs
restored synergy to these TAD/Ets-1 DNA binding domain fusions. Conversely,
deletion of the defined Pit-1 TAD (amino acids 2-80) retained synergy, but not
Ras responsiveness. Consequently, we further defined the Pit-1 amino-terminal TAD
into region 1 (R1, amino acids 2-45) and region 2 (R2, amino acids 46-80). R1
appears to regulate basal and synergistic responses, whereas the Ras response was
mapped to R2. In summary, Ras responsiveness and Pit-1/Ets-1 synergy are mediated
through the assembly of distinct TADs at a flexible composite element, indicating
that different mechanisms underlie these two transcriptional responses and that
the Pit-1 R2 subregion represents a novel, tissue-specific Ras-responsive TAD.

PMID: 12902343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Pathol. 2003 Aug;200(5):561-7.

Ets 1 is expressed in capillary blood vessels but not in lymphatics.

Wernert N(1), Okuducu AF, Pepper MS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, PO Box 2120, 53011 Bonn, Germany. 
wernert@meb.uni-bonn.de

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2003 Aug;200(5):551-2.

Little is known about the mechanisms that regulate lymphangiogenesis and, in
particular, about regulation at the transcriptional level. To determine whether
parallels exist in the mechanisms of angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis, the
expression of the Ets 1 transcription factor (which has previously been shown to 
be involved in angiogenesis) was examined in two transgenic mouse lines, namely
RipVEGF-C mice (which develop lymphatic capillaries ectopically around islets of 
Langerhans) and Rip1Tag2 mice (which develop insulinomas that are not
lymphangiogenic). Crossing the two lines results in double transgenic mice that
develop lymphatics around insulinomas, which in turn promotes metastasis to
regional lymph nodes. By immunohistochemistry, it was found that, in contrast to 
blood vessels, lymphatic vessels in wild-type and transgenic mice did not express
Ets 1. Immunohistochemical staining for matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and
MMP-9 as well as membrane type 1-MMP (MT1-MMP/MMP-14), all of which are encoded
by known or potential Ets 1 target genes, showed the same cellular distribution
as Ets 1. These findings suggest that the transcriptional regulatory mechanisms
of lymphangiogenesis differ from those involved in angiogenesis. Furthermore, if 
proteases are involved in lymphangiogenesis, these observations suggest that they
are different from those considered to be important for blood vessel formation.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12898591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Pathol. 2003 Aug;200(5):551-2.

Lymphatics and vascular channels; the differences behind similarity.

Jones PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, University of Leeds, Clinical Sciences Building, St
James's University Hospital, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.

Comment on
    J Pathol. 2003 Aug;200(5):561-7.

Although sharing many features and functions, there is a mounting body of
evidence to suggest that there are subtle differences between lymphatics and
vascular channels. New data suggest that Ets-1 and Ets-1-target MMP genes are
differentially expressed in lymphatic and vascular channels. Since it is
generally accepted that the Ets family of transcription factors play a
significant role in the regulation of the expression of angiogenic factors, the
finding that Ets-1 is apparently not involved in lymphangiogenesis may highlight 
one aspect where angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis are differently regulated.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12898589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Anticancer Res. 2003 May-Jun;23(3A):2143-53.

ERF, an ETS-related transcriptional repressor, can induce erythroid
differentiation.

Athanasiou M(1), Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., NCI-Frederick, Frederick, MD
21702, USA. athanasi@ncifcrf.gov

Ets-family genes have been implicated in leukemia, as well as in normal
hematopoiesis. ERF is an ets-related gene that represses transcription and is
regulated by MAPK phosphorylation through its effect on ERF sub-cellular
localization. Using pluripotent human cell lines, we studied the effect of ERF on
erythroid differentiation. K562 and HEL cells expressing ERF expressed elevated
levels of the erythroid-specific markers CD71 and Glycophorin A, as well as
hemoglobin and GATA1. Treatment with the Erk kinase inhibitor PD98058 further
enhanced the erythroid phenotype in ERF-expressing cells and cells expressing a
non-phosphorylatable ERF mutant exhibited an even more enhanced phenotype. These 
results are consistent with the fact that ERF function is regulated by MAPK, and 
suggest that the effect of the MAPK pathway in erythroid differentiation is
partially mediated by ERF. The effect of ERF is similar to the one shown for ETS1
and opposite to the FLI1 function in these cells, suggesting that several ets
genes may play key roles in hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 12894589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Anticancer Res. 2003 May-Jun;23(3A):2015-26.

Marker-assisted study of genetic background and gene-targeted locus modifiers in 
lymphopoietic phenotypes.

Spyropoulos DD(1), Bartel FO, Higuchi T, Deguchi T, Ogawa M, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, Department of Cell
Biology and Anatomy, Medical University of South Carolina, 86 Jonathan Lucas St.,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA. spyropdd@musc.edu

Forward and reverse genetic approaches facilitate the molecular dissection of
individual gene functions and the integration of individual gene functions into
multi-gene processes in the context of the whole organism. Variations in mutant
phenotypes due to genetic background differences have been well documented
through the analysis of mouse mutants. Nevertheless, recommendations concerning
the assessment of genetic background as it impacts on phenotype, and utilization 
of genetic background differences to identify and integrate gene functions have
been largely overlooked. Genetic background as it relates to immunological
mutants will be discussed utilizing an Ets1-targeted allele to exemplify
phenotypic variation due to background. Marker-assisted strategies for the
identification of genetic modifiers, especially those linked to the targeted
locus, will also be considered.

PMID: 12894574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2003 Jul;129(7):430-6. Epub 2003 Jul 8.

Ets-1 and VEGF expression correlates with tumor angiogenesis, lymph node
metastasis, and patient survival in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Mukherjee T(1), Kumar A, Mathur M, Chattopadhyay TK, Ralhan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 110029,
Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, India.

PURPOSE: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) in the Indian population
exhibits insidious symptomatology, late clinical presentation, aggressive
behavior, and high propensity for metastasis. Ets-1, a transcription factor, is
expressed in esophageal tumors and associated with poor prognosis. The aim of the
present study was to determine the relationship between Ets-1 expression, tumor
angiogenesis [vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and microvessel density
(MVD)] and the biological behavior of ESCCs.
METHODS: In a prospective study the expression of Ets-1, VEGF, and PECAM-1
(CD-31) was determined in 55 ESCCs, by immunohistochemical analysis, correlated
with clinicopathological parameters and outcome of the patients.
RESULTS: Overexpression of Ets-1 and VEGF proteins was observed in 44/55 (80%)
and 38/55 (69%) of ESCCs, respectively. VEGF immunopositivity was associated with
lymph node metastasis ( P=0.002). Analysis of mRNA isoforms using RT-PCR revealed
increased expression of VEGF 121 transcripts in ESCCs and MVD was correlated with
de-differentiation status of the tumors ( P=0.049). Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis showed significant correlation between poor disease-free survival and
tumor stage ( P=0.02) and with nodal metastasis ( P=0.05). Concomitant expression
of VEGF, Ets-1 proteins, and high MVD was correlated with poor disease-free
survival ( P=0.004).
CONCLUSION: Significant association of Ets-1 and VEGF proteins with tumor
angiogenesis (MVD), lymph node invasion, and poor disease-free survival
underscores their relevance regarding aggressive tumor behavior and highlights
their potential utility as adverse prognostic factors in esophageal carcinomas.

PMID: 12851814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2003 Jun 30;204(1-2):155-68.

Ets-1 activates parathyroid hormone-related protein gene expression in
tumorigenic breast epithelial cells.

Cataisson C(1), Gordon J, Roussière M, Abdalkhani A, Lindemann R, Dittmer J,
Foley J, Bouizar Z.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U349, Centre Viggo Petersen Hôpital Lariboisière, 6 rue Guy Patin
75010, Paris, France.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is produced by many tumors not
associated with humoral hypercalcemia, including breast cancers. In this study,
we used three human immortalized mammary epithelial cell lines that differ in
tumorigenicity and PTHrP expression. Using RT-PCR we investigated 5' and 3'
alternative splicing of PTHrP transcripts and promoter usage in the lines.
Increased levels of P3-derived transcripts and the 1-139 mRNA isoform were
observed in the most tumorigenic cell line. Transient transfection experiments
identified elements close to P3 promoter that appeared to account for a portion
of differential PTHrP expression among the three cell lines. Using site-directed 
mutagenesis, a previously described Ets-1/Sp1 binding site upstream of P3 was
determined to be crucial for full activity of this promoter. RT-PCR and western
blot evaluation of Ets family member expression found that Ese-1 was present in
all three lines, but that appreciable levels of Ets-1 protein were present
exclusively in the most tumorigenic line. Cotransfection of Ets-1 expression
vectors activated PTHrP reporter constructs in the most tumorigenic line but not 
in the other cell lines. These findings suggest a potential mechanism by which
PTHrP transcription may be regulated as a consequence of events that promote
tumorigenic behavior in breast epithelial cells.

PMID: 12850290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Jul;88(7):3305-11.

Identification of an enhancer of the human activating protein-2alpha gene that
contains a critical Ets1 binding site.

Cheng YH(1), Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Endocrinology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. cheny0@cchmc.org

Deletion analysis studies of the 5'-flanking region of the activating
protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha) gene indicates that the proximal 152 bp are essential 
for minimal promoter activity and that a 140-bp fragment from nucleotides -1279
to -1139 acts as an enhancer of basal transcriptional activity. Ligation of the
140-bp fragment to a minimal AP-2alpha promoter or a heterologous simian virus 40
promoter luciferase reporter plasmid conferred enhancer activity in trophoblast
cells. In deoxyribonuclease I footprint studies, nuclear extracts from
trophoblast cells protected two regions of the 140-bp fragment, E2 and E3.
Site-directed mutagenesis of an Ets1-binding site in E2 significantly inhibited
AP-2alpha enhancer activity, whereas mutagenesis of two putative polyomavirus
enhancer activator-3-binding sites on E2 and an insulin upstream factor 1-binding
site in E3 had no effect on enhancer activity. Gel shift and supershift assays
indicated that Ets1 binds to the Ets site in E2, and overexpression of Ets1 in
transfection studies induced AP-2alpha promoter activity. As the transcription
factor Ets1 is abundant in trophoblast cells, these investigations strongly
suggest that AP-2alpha gene expression in the placenta is enhanced by a
cis-acting element at nucleotides -1279 to -1139 that contains a critical
Ets1-binding site.

PMID: 12843180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Neuro Oncol. 2003 Jul;5(3):179-87.

Molecular cloning and identification of the human interleukin 13 alpha 2 receptor
(IL-13Ra2) promoter.

Wu AH(1), Low WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Minnesota Medical School, 2001 Sixth
Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The interleukin 13 alpha 2 receptor (IL-13Ra2) has been shown to be expressed in 
most malignant glioblastoma cells. Recent studies suggest that IL-13Ra2 serves as
a dominant negative inhibitor or a decoy receptor for IL-13. To investigate the
transcriptional regulation of this receptor, we cloned and characterized the
promoter for the human IL-13Ra2 gene. Our results demonstrate that this promoter 
contains three TATA boxes and one CCAAT site. Several putative transcriptional
factor binding sites for nuclear factor of activated T cells 1, AP1 (c-JUN and
c-FOS), AP2, GABP, OCT1, GATA3, PRE, and C-ETS1 were predicted in the promoter
region. Using the secreted alkaline phosphate reporter gene assay, we
investigated the functional activity of the human IL-13Ra2 promoter by transient 
transfection in glioma cell lines U118, U87, and T98, which differ in their
expression of the human IL-13Ra2 protein. The different secreted alkaline
phosphate activities among these 3 cell lines suggest that the expression of
human IL-13Ra2 is regulated at the transcriptional level. Methylation analysis
showed that expression of IL-13Ra2 may not be the result of methylation of the
CpG dinucleotides in the promoter region of the gene. Deletion analysis
identified a 64 base pair (bp) region that is necessary for human IL-13Ra2
promoter activity. This 64-bp sequence contains cis-elements for AP1, nuclear
factor of activated T cells, and AP2. The possible role of AP1 in the regulation 
of human IL-13Ra2 promoter activity was suggested by in vitro mutagenesis and
c-JUN N-terminal kinase inhibition analysis.

PMCID: PMC1920687
PMID: 12816724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Gene. 2003 May 22;310:203-13.

Characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the rat AJ18 gene.

Jheon AH(1), Suzuki N, Nishiyama T, Cheifetz S, Sodek J, Ganss B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Room 239 Fitzgerald
Building, 150 College Street, Toronto, Ont. M5S 3E2, Canada. a.jheon@utoronto.ca

Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domains are present in one-third of all C(2)H(2)
zinc finger containing proteins, making the KRAB/C(2)H(2) proteins one of the
largest known families of putative transcription repressors. AJ18 has been
identified as a novel KRAB/C(2)H(2) gene that is involved in the differentiation 
of osteogenic cells. To study the regulation of expression of the AJ18 gene, the 
5'-flanking region of the AJ18 gene was obtained by screening a rat genomic
library. This region was sequenced, and the transcription start site mapped by
primer extension. The AJ18 gene consists of at least four exons, the first exon
coding for an unusually long 2.3 kb 5'-UTR region. A putative internal ribosome
entry site, immediately upstream of the translation initiation site, is indicated
from the complementarity of a 12 nucleotide sequence with a region in the rat 18S
rRNA. Chimeric constructs encompassing the region surrounding the transcription
start site (-77-+171), as well as constructs with additional 1.9 kb upstream from
this region revealed strong transcriptional activity when ligated to a luciferase
reporter gene and tested in transient transfection assays. This activity was lost
on deletion of the 5'-flanking region to -77. In addition, transcriptional
activity was progressively lost with the inclusion of downstream sequences
extending into the 5'-UTR. Several known response elements for proteins such as
Runx2, NFkappaB, Smads, Sp1, and Ets1 are retained within the conserved sequences
of rat and mouse AJ18, which was retrieved from mouse genomic libraries.
Interestingly, the transcriptional activity was approximately 100-fold higher in 
the osteocarcinoma cell line ROS 2.8/17 compared to the fibroblast-like
C3H10T1/2. Notably, this is the first gene promoter from the large KRAB/C(2)H(2) 
zinc finger family of proteins to be identified and characterized.

PMID: 12801648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Immunol. 2003 Jun 15;170(12):6057-64.

Characterization and analysis of the proximal Janus kinase 3 promoter.

Aringer M(1), Hofmann SR, Frucht DM, Chen M, Centola M, Morinobu A, Visconti R,
Kastner DL, Smolen JS, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA.

Janus kinase 3 (Jak3) is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase essential for signaling
via cytokine receptors that comprise the common gamma-chain (gammac), i.e., the
receptors for IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21. Jak3 is preferentially
expressed in hemopoietic cells and is up-regulated upon cell differentiation and 
activation. Despite the importance of Jak3 in lymphoid development and immune
function, the mechanisms that govern its expression have not been defined. To
gain insight into this issue, we set out to characterize the Jak3 promoter. The
5'-untranslated region of the Jak3 gene is interrupted by a 3515-bp intron.
Upstream of this intron and the transcription initiation site, we identified an
approximately 1-kb segment that exhibited lymphoid-specific promoter activity and
was responsive to TCR signals. Truncation of this fragment revealed that core
promoter activity resided in a 267-bp fragment that contains putative Sp-1, AP-1,
Ets, Stat, and other binding sites. Mutation of the AP-1 sites significantly
diminished, whereas mutation of the Ets sites abolished, the inducibility of the 
promoter construct. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that histone
acetylation correlates with mRNA expression and that Ets-1/2 binds this region.
Thus, transcription factors that bind these sites, especially Ets family members,
are likely to be important regulators of Jak3 expression.

PMID: 12794134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Eur J Biochem. 2003 May;270(10):2274-86.

Gene transcription of fgl2 in endothelial cells is controlled by Ets-1 and Oct-1 
and requires the presence of both Sp1 and Sp3.

Liu M(1), Leibowitz JL, Clark DA, Mendicino M, Ning Q, Ding JW, D'Abreo C, Fung
L, Marsden PA, Levy GA.

Author information: 
(1)Multi Organ Transplant Program, Toronto General Hospital and The University of
Toronto, Canada.

The immune coagulant fgl2/fibroleukin has been previously shown to play a pivotal
role in the pathogenesis of murine and human fulminant hepatitis and fetal loss
syndrome. Constitutive expression of fgl2 transcripts at low levels are seen in
cytotoxic T cells, endothelial, intestinal and trophoblast cells, while specific 
factors (such as virus and cytokines) are required to induce high levels of fgl2 
expression in other cell types including monocytes/macrophages. To address the
transcriptional mechanisms that regulate constitutive expression of fgl2, murine 
genomic clones were characterized and the transcription start site was defined by
5'-RACE and primer extension. A comprehensive assessment of basal fgl2 promoter
activity in murine vascular endothelial cells defined a minimal 119 bp region
responsible for constitutive fgl2 transcription. A complex positive regulatory
domain (PRD) spanning a 39-bp sequence from -87 to -49 (relative to the
transcription start site) was identified. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
studies in vascular endothelial cells revealed that the nucleoprotein complexes
that form on this positive regulatory domain (PRD) contain Sp1/Sp3 family
members, Oct-1, and Ets-1. Heterologous expression studies in Drosophila
Schneider cells confirmed that the constitutive expression of this gene is
controlled by Ets-1 and requires the presence both of the Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors. The presence of this complex multicomponent PRD in the
fgl2 proximal promoter is consistent with the observation that, in vivo, fgl2
expression is tightly regulated. Moreover, viral induced fgl2 expression also
requires the presence of this PRD. These results clearly demonstrate that
multiple cis DNA elements in a clustered region work cooperatively to regulate
constitutive fgl2 expression and interact with inducible elements to regulate
viral-induced fgl2 expression in endothelial cells.

PMID: 12752447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 May 12;113(1-2):57-66.

Ets transcription factors ER81 and Elk1 regulate the transcription of the human
presenilin 1 gene promoter.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, 76107, USA.

We have previously defined a crucial DNA element controlling 90% of the
expression of the presenilin 1 gene at (-35 to +6). This region contains an Ets
transcription factor binding motif, and a 2-base pair alteration within the core 
sequence (GGAA to TTAA) of the Ets consensus also reduced transcription by over
90%. We have shown that Ets1/2 transcription factors bind specifically to the -10
Ets element and activate PS1 transcription. The identification of other
transcription factors recognizing specifically this promoter area should provide 
insights into the regulation of PS1. We have used the -10 Ets element as a bait
in yeast one hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library. This assay selected 
three factors from the Ets family: Ets2, ER81 and Elk1. We show that in vitro
translated ER81 indeed binds specifically to the -10 region of the PS1 promoter
and that ER81 activates by two- to threefold the basal transcription of a
presenilin-1 promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter synthetic gene
(-119, +178)PS1CAT in transient infection assays in neuroblastoma cells
(SK-N-SH). GABPalpha, a member of the Ets family closely related to Ets2 and also
containing a pointed domain, only increased PS1 transcription by about twofold.
Cotransfection of GABPbeta together with GABPalpha did not increase PS1
transcription. However, GABPbeta alone activated PS1 transcription by two- to
threefold. In contrast, the more distantly related Ets factor Elk1 repressed PS1 
transcription very effectively.

PMID: 12750007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Oncogene. 2003 May 8;22(18):2699-709.

EAPII interacts with ETS1 and modulates its transcriptional function.

Pei H(1), Yordy JS, Leng Q, Zhao Q, Watson DK, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Ets proteins constitute a family of conserved sequence-specific DNA-binding
proteins and function as transcription factors. ETS1 plays important roles in
differentiation, lymphoid cell development, invasiveness and angiogenesis. Such
diverse roles of ETS1 are likely to be dependent on its associated proteins. A
yeast two-hybrid screen was conducted and here we describe a novel ETS1
interacting protein designated as ETS1-associated protein II (EAPII). EAPII
protein interacts with ETS1 and other Ets proteins (ETS2 and FLI1) both in vitro 
and in vivo. Indirect immunofluorescence demonstrated that EAPII is predominately
localized to the nucleus of mammalian cells. EAPII negatively modulates ETS1
transcriptional activity and attenuates synergistic transactivation by ETS1 and
AP-1. Significantly, re-expression of EAPII inhibits the migration of epithelial 
cancer cells, but does not affect cell viability. Therefore, EAPII is a novel
ETS1 modulator that regulates specific aspects of the ETS1 functions.

PMID: 12743594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 25;278(30):27903-9. Epub 2003 May 9.

Ets-1 protects vascular smooth muscle cells from undergoing apoptosis by
activating p21WAF1/Cip1: ETS-1 regulates basal and and inducible p21WAF1/Cip:
ETS-1 regulates basal and inducible p21WAF1/Cip1 transcription via distinct
cis-acting elements in the p21WAF/Cip1 promoter.

Zhang C(1), Kavurma MM, Lai A, Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, The University of New South Wales and Department
of Haematology, The Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2052,
Australia.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CKI) p21WAF1/Cip1 is regulated at the
level of transcription by nuclear factors such as the co-activator p300. It is
presently unknown whether the Ets family of transcription factors control
p21WAF1/Cip1 gene expression. Ets-1 inhibits apoptosis in vascular smooth muscle 
cells as determined by both fluorescein isothiocyanate-linked annexin V/propidium
iodide staining of cells and fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis and
quantitative cytoplasmic histone-associated internucleosomal DNA fragmentation.
p21WAF1/Cip1 can play a mitogenic and anti-apoptotic role in smooth muscle cells.
Using transient transfection and Western blot analysis, we determined that Ets-1 
activates p21WAF1/Cip1 transcription and protein expression. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays revealed that Ets-1 interacts selectively with the
-1350GGAA-1347 Ets element in the p21WAF1/Cip1 promoter. Mutation of this element
reduced basal and Ets1-inducible p21WAF1/Cip1 promoter-dependent expression. In
contrast, the -1577GGAT-1574 motif mediates basal but not Ets-1 activation of the
p21WAF1/Cip1 promoter. Co-immunoprecipitation and co-transfection analysis showed
that Ets-1 binds p300 and cooperatively activates p21WAF1/Cip1 transcription. The
phenotypic importance of Ets-1 regulation of p21WAF1/Cip1 was demonstrated by the
capacity of antisense p21WAF1/Cip1 strategies to block Ets-1-inhibition of
apoptosis and inhibit Ets-1-induction of proliferation.

PMID: 12740370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 May 23;305(1):203-8.

Lactate-sensitive response elements in genes involved in hyaluronan catabolism.

Formby B(1), Stern R.

Author information: 
(1)The Rasmus Institute for Medical Research, Santa Barbara, CA 93103, USA.

Tissue anoxia occurs early in wound healing. This is accompanied by production of
lactate followed by increased hyaluronan and CD44 expression, suggesting a cause 
and effect relationship. Fibroblasts increased hyaluronan and CD44 when lactate
was added to cultures. Increased deposition of hyaluronan correlates with greater
turnover. In current models of hyaluronan catabolism, it is tethered to cell
surfaces by CD44 in caveolin-enriched invaginations. It is cleaved to 20-kDa
fragments by Hyal-2 on the plasma membrane, endocytosed, and delivered ultimately
to lysosomes, and further digested by Hyal-1. Sequence analyses of promoter
regions of genes for CD44, caveolin-1, Hyal-1, and -2 revealed multiple AP-1 and 
ets-1 response elements. To test their relevance, RNA from lactate-treated
fibroblasts was analyzed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
Increased transcripts of c-fos, c-jun, c-ets, Hyal-1, -2, CD44, and caveolin-1
mRNAs were observed. We have thus identified lactate-activated genes important in
the wound healing responses. Similar responses facilitating tumor progression,
the Warburg effect, may share such mechanisms.

PMID: 12732217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Int Surg. 2003 Jan-Mar;88(1):25-33.

Ets-1 expression in vascular endothelial cells as an angiogenic and prognostic
factor in colorectal carcinoma.

Tokuhara K(1), Ogata Y, Nakagawa M, Shirouzu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kurume University Faculty of Medicine, Kurume City,
Fukuoka, Japan.

We investigated Ets-1 expression and its influence on angiogenesis and survival
using immunohistochemistry of surgical specimens from 95 patients of colorectal
cancer. The expression rate of Ets-1 was 48.4% of all cases in cancer cells,
65.3% in endothelial cells, and 28.4% in stromal cells. The microvessel density
in patients with vascular Ets-1 expression was significantly higher than that in 
patients without the expression. A significant positive correlation was
discovered between the Ets-1 vascular expression and vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) expression, or pyrimidine nucleoside phosphorylase (dThdPase)
activity in the tumor. The positivity of vascular Ets-1 expression was higher in 
node-positive patients and in M1 patients. The survival rate was significantly
lower in those cases positive for vascular Ets-1. Angiogenic factors such as VEGF
might be involved in tumor angiogenesis through the Ets-1 vascular expression.
The Ets-1 vascular expression may be a prognostic factor for colorectal cancer.

PMID: 12731728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2003 Mar;78(2):167-78.

Estrogen-induced Ets-1 promotes capillary formation in an in vitro tumor
angiogenesis model.

Lincoln DW 2nd(1), Phillips PG, Bove K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Service, Stratton VA Medical Center, Albany, NY 12208, USA.

We employed an in vitro angiogenesis model that simulates the in vivo milieu for 
tumor capillary formation to study the direct effects of estrogen.
17beta-estradiol (E2) treatment significantly stimulated capillary sprouting
within 8 h in co-cultures of rat aortic endothelial cells (RAECs) and mouse
mammary tumor cells. Co-cultures treated with either progesterone (P4) or E2+P4
showed minimal endothelial cell (EC) sprouting when compared to E2 treated
cultures. Treatment with the E2 agonist ICI 182,780 dramatically inhibited
capillary formation, demonstrating E2-specificity. Within hours, of E2 treatment 
ECs isolated from tumor cell/EC co-cultures demonstrated a statistically
significant increase in both mRNA and protein levels of the transcription factor 
Ets-1. We observed increased matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) and decreased tissue 
inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) mRNA levels in these ECs following E2
treatment. Ets-1 upregulates expression of the vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) receptor, Flt-1 and we detected increased Flt-1 mRNA levels in ECs
co-cultured with tumor cells following E2 treatment. Expression of Ets-1
contributes to destabilization of a quiescent EC phenotype in favor of an
invasive angiogenic one, in part, by increasing expression of MMPs and integrin
molecules that favor migration and invasion. Transfection of ECs with Ets-1
antisense prior to co-culture with E2 resulted in a 95% inhibition in capillary
formation. We demonstrate here, for the first time that nanomolar concentrations 
of E2 directly and rapidly induced new capillary formation in a mammary tumor/EC 
co-culture system and suggest that this response may be mediated, in part, by an 
E2-induced increase in Ets-1 expression.

PMID: 12725417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2003 Mar;22(1):103-15.

Coordinated expression of integrin subunits, matrix metalloproteinases (MMP),
angiogenic genes and Ets transcription factors in advanced-stage ovarian
carcinoma: a possible activation pathway?

Davidson B(1), Goldberg I, Gotlieb WH, Kopolovic J, Risberg B, Ben-Baruch G,
Reich R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Montebello N-0310
Oslo, affiliated with the University of Oslo, Norway. bend@ulrik.uio.no

The events that mediate tumor progression in ovarian carcinoma are poorly
understood to date. This review summarizes our results studying
metastasis-associated molecules in advanced-stage ovarian carcinomas, details the
co-expression of mRNA of these genes, and discusses their prognostic role.
Fifty-five primary and metastatic FIGO stage III-IV ovarian carcinomas were
analyzed for the expression of alpha v and beta1 integrin subunits, the matrix
metalloproteinases MMP-2, MMP-9, and MT1-MMP, the MMP inhibitor TIMP-2, vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF),
interleukin-8 (IL-8), PEA3 and Ets-1 using mRNA in situ hybridization. Tumor and 
adjacent stromal cell expression was scored. The association between integrin
subunit expression and the expression of MMP, TIMP-2, angiogenic genes, PEA3 and 
Ets-1 was statistically analyzed. Alpha v integrin subunit mRNA expression in
carcinoma cells showed significant association with that of MMP-2 and IL-8 in
this cellular compartment, while the presence of beta1 integrin subunit mRNA
showed similar association with that of PEA3, Ets-1, IL-8, bFGF and MMP-2.
Expression of beta1 integrin subunit mRNA in stromal cells was associated with
that of TIMP-2 and Ets-1 in this compartment. In addition, significant
intercellular associations were found between alpha v integrin subunit mRNA
expression in carcinoma cells and stromal cell expression of Ets-1, as well as
between stromal cell expression of alpha v integrin subunit and labeling for IL-8
in carcinoma cells. The presence of beta1 integrin subunit mRNA in carcinoma
cells showed a significant association with that of Ets-1, IL-8 and bFGF in
stromal cells, while the presence of beta1 integrin subunit mRNA in stromal cells
was associated with tumor PEA3 mRNA expression. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first evidence for coordinated autocrine and paracrine expression of 
members of these four families of metastasis-associated genes in human cancer.
The results of this analysis support experimental data regarding cross-talk
between carcinoma cells and peritumoral fibroblasts. They also suggest the
existence of a putative activation sequence of metastatic genes, involving the
beta1 (and possibly alpha v) integrin subunits, IL-8, PEA3, Ets-1 and MMP in
ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 12716042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. DNA Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;22(2):79-94.

The epithelial-specific ETS transcription factor ESX/ESE-1/Elf-3 modulates breast
cancer-associated gene expression.

Eckel KL(1), Tentler JJ, Cappetta GJ, Diamond SE, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Molecular Biology, and Colorado Cancer
Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262,
USA.

Several members of the ETS family of transcription factors contribute to
tumorigenesis in many different tissues, including breast epithelium. The ESX
gene is an epithelial-specific Ets member that is particularly relevant to breast
cancer. ESX is amplified in early breast cancers, it is overexpressed in human
breast ductal carcinoma in situ, and there may be a positive feedback loop
between the HER2/neu proto-oncogene and ESX. Despite this progress in our
understanding of ESX, its ability to regulate tumor-related gene expression and
to modulate breast cell survival, remain unknown. Here we show that HA-ESX
stimulates the collagenase and HER2/neu promoters, but fails to activate an
intact stromelysin promoter. However, HA-ESX activates, in a dose-dependent
manner, a heterologous promoter containing eight copies of the Ets binding site
derived from the stromelysin gene (p8Xpal-CAT). Analysis of the ability of
constructs encoding nine Ets family members to activate the HER2/neu promoter
revealed three patterns of gene activation: (1) no effect or repressed promoter
activity (Elk-1 and NET); (2) intermediate activity (ER81, GABP, ESX, and
HA-Ets-2); and, (3) maximal activity (Ets-1, VP-16-Ets-1, and EHF). Based on
these observations, we also determined whether ESX is capable of conferring a
survival phenotype upon immortalized, but nontransformed and ESX negative MCF-12A
human breast cells. Using a colony formation assay, we found that HA-ESX and
HA-Ets-2, mediated MCF-12A cell survival rates that approached those generated by
oncogenic V12 Ras, whereas empty vector resulted in negligible colony formation. 
By contrast, in immortalized and transformed T47D breast cancer cells, which
express both HER2/neu and ESX, we found that antisense and dominant-negative
HA-ESX inhibited T47D colony formation, whereas control vector allowed formation 
of many colonies. These results are significant because they show that HA-ESX is 
able to differentially activate several malignancy-associated gene promoters, and
that ESX expression is required for cellular survival of nontransformed MCF-12A
and transformed T47D human mammary cells.

PMID: 12713734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biomed Sci. 2003 May-Jun;10(3):320-7.

Expression of ETS-1 related to angiogenesis in uterine endometrium during the
menstrual cycle.

Fujimoto J(1), Aoki I, Toyoki H, Khatun S, Sato E, Tamaya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gifu University School of Medicine,
40 Tsukasa-machi, Gifu City 500-8705, Japan. jf@cc.gifu-u.ac.jp

ETS-1 has been identified as a transcription factor for angiogenesis, which is
essential for the development and growth of the uterine endometrium. This
characteristic prompted us to study whether ETS-1 functions as an angiogenic
mediator in uterine endometrium. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the
localization of ETS-1 was similar to that of vascular endothelial cells. There
was a significant correlation between microvessel counts and both ETS-1
histoscores and ets-1 mRNA levels in uterine endometrium. The ETS-1 histoscores
and ets-1 mRNA levels increased in the proliferative phase, reached a peak during
peri-ovulation and decreased in the secretory phase. Furthermore, the ETS-1
histoscores and ets-1 mRNA levels correlated with vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) levels in the proliferative phase. This indicates that ETS-1 might 
be an angiogenic mediator in uterine endometrium linked to VEGF in the
proliferative phase.

Copyright 2003 National Science Council, ROC and S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12711859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Gene. 2003 Mar 27;307:87-97.

Dual regulation of ets-activated gene expression by SP1.

Kelley KM(1), Wang H, Ratnam M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Ohio,
3035 Arlington Avenue, Toledo, OH 43614-5804, USA.

The human folate receptor (hFR) type gamma gene is driven by a TATA-less promoter
that uses a canonical Sp1 element for basal transcription. Using nuclear extract 
from 293 (human embryonic) cells, we mapped a second (non-canonical) Sp1 element 
to which Sp1 bound with a comparable affinity and which overlaps a functional ets
binding site (EBS). Mutagenesis experiments revealed that the binding of ets to
the EBS activates the promoter synergistically with Sp1 bound at the downstream
site; however, binding of Sp1 to the EBS does not contribute to promoter
activity. A further increase in Sp1 by inducible expression in recombinant 293
cells resulted in a small but significant decrease in the hFR-gamma promoter
activity, but the decrease was abolished when the EBS was deleted from the
promoter. In 293 cells, which do not express hFR-gamma, the Sp1 level was
relatively high whereas in the hFR-gamma-positive HL60 leukemia cells, the Sp1
level was low and the EBS predominantly bound an ets protein. To account for the 
above observations, we propose a model in which when the Sp1 level is low, ets
out competes Sp1 for binding to the EBS and synergistically enhances the
hFR-gamma promoter activity by interacting with Sp1 bound at the canonical site
whereas at higher levels, Sp1 represses the promoter by competitively inhibiting 
the binding of ets. As a partial extension of this model to the regulation of
other ets activated genes, we show that Sp1 can predictably bind to a variety of 
ets elements including those responsive to Ets1 and Spi.1/Pu.1. A dual
concentration-dependent action of Sp1 as an activator or a repressor offers a
potential mechanism contributing to tissue-specific regulation of ets-dependent
genes by Sp1.

PMID: 12706891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Endocrine. 2003 Feb-Mar;20(1-2):3-12.

Selective repression of rat prolactin gene by stable expression of
dominant-negative Ets in GH4 pituitary cells.

Tentler JJ(1), Bradford AP, Schweppe RE, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Members of the Ets family of transcription factors are key regulators controlling
prolactin (PRL) gene expression. Utilizing a transient transfection approach and 
the GH4 rat pituitary cell line, we have shown that Ets- 1 acts synergistically
with the pituitary-specific POU homeodomain transcription factor, Pit-1, to
mediate basal and Ras-induced regulation of the proximal (-425) rat PRL (rPRL)
promoter. Although the transient transfection approach has provided important
information regarding rPRL proximal promoter regulation, the role of Ets factors 
in the regulation of the intact, endogenous PRL promoter has not been explored.
To address this area of question, we created several clonal GH4 cell lines that
stably express either dominant-negative Ets (dn-EtsZ) or dominant-active Ets
(VP16 Ets) constructs and used these cell lines as a model system to analyze the 
role of Ets factors on endogenous PRL gene expression. Northern blot analysis of 
these cells showed that PRL mRNA levels were dramatically reduced, by an average 
of 80%, in the cell lines expressing dn-Ets compared to vector-only controls.
Conversely, stable expression of the dominant-active VP16 Ets led to an average
threefold increase in PRL mRNA. GH4 cells expressing dn-EtsZ displayed
significantly lower levels of intracellular PRL protein content and greatly
diminished secretion of PRL into the cell culture medium, compared to vector-only
controls. Consistent with our previous observations, the mRNA levels for growth
hormone were unaffected by either dn-EtsZ or VP16 Ets expression. Expression of
dn-EtsZ reduced Pit-1 mRNA levels by about 30%; however, the intracellular levels
of Pit-1 protein were unchanged. Taken together, these results verify and
strengthen the view that Ets factors play a critical role in the regulation of
endogenous PRL gene expression and PRL protein production.

PMID: 12668863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Oncogene. 2003 Mar 27;22(12):1795-806.

Expression of an Ets-1 dominant-negative mutant perturbs normal and tumor
angiogenesis in a mouse ear model.

Pourtier-Manzanedo A(1), Vercamer C, Van Belle E, Mattot V, Mouquet F,
Vandenbunder B.

Author information: 
(1)FRE 2353 CNRS/Institut Pasteur de Lille/Université Lille 2, Institut de
Biologie de Lille, France.

We and others have shown that members of the Ets family of transcription factors 
are involved in morphogenic properties of endothelial cells in vitro. To
investigate the role of these factors in the transcriptional regulation of
angiogenesis in vivo, we set up a nontraumatic model that allows daily
macroscopic examination of both growth factor- and tumor-induced angiogenesis in 
mouse ears. In the same animal, we were thus able to record variations in the
patterns of neovessels induced and cell populations recruited by the angiogenic
factors FGF-2 and VEGF. In this model, inhibition of FGF-2-induced angiogenesis
by the pharmacological compound TNP-470 was readily observed, demonstrating that 
the mouse ear model is also useful in the evaluation of antiangiogenic
strategies. Our functional analysis of Ets transcription factors activity
utilized a competitor protein, Ets1-DB, a dominant negative Ets1 mutant lacking
the transactivation domain. Retrovirus-mediated expression of Ets1-DB inhibited
FGF-2-induced angiogenesis, while the expression of Ets1-DB in cancerous and
stromal cells disturbed tumor-induced angiogenesis. These results illustrate the 
value of the ear model and highlight the role of Ets family members in the
transcriptional regulation of tumor angiogenesis.

PMID: 12660815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Med Electron Microsc. 2002 Dec;35(4):242-7.

Possible role of Ets-1 and MMP-1 in matrix remodeling in experimental cisplatin
nephropathy.

Nazneen A(1), Razzaque MS, Liu D, Taguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

Cisplatin is an effective antitumor drug, but nephrotoxicity has restricted its
clinical use. Renal interstitial fibrosis is a major complication of cisplatin
treatment, due to the increased accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM)
proteins. Ets-1 protein plays a role in matrix remodeling by regulating
matrix-degrading enzymes. We studied the role of Ets-1, matrix
metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1), and interstitial collagen (type III) in experimental
cisplatin nephropathy. Wistar rats ( n = 24) were treated with cisplatin (6
mg/kg), and killed on days 3, 7, and 14, along with control rats. By
immunohistochemistry, a significant increase ( P < 0.02) in the number of
Ets-1-positive cells (40.09 +/- 1.52) was detected in kidneys of
cisplatin-treated rats on day 3, compared with the number in control rat kidneys 
(29.80 +/- 0.13). The number of Ets-1-positive cells decreased in kidneys from
cisplatin-treated rats on days 7 (10.93 +/- 1.20) and 14 (12.16 +/- 0.60). The
expression of MMP-1 showed a similar pattern, increasing on day 3, but decreasing
on days 7 and 14. The decreased levels of Ets-1 and MMP-1 were associated with
increased interstitial accumulation of collagen in kidneys of cisplatin-treated
rats on day 14. Molecular interactions among Ets-1, MMP-1, and type III collagens
might play a role in matrix remodeling in cisplatin nephropathy.

PMID: 12658359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):19716-22. Epub 2003 Mar 17.

Identification of Ets-1 as an important transcriptional activator of
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha in COS-7 cells and co-activation
with transcriptional enhancer factor-4.

Sugimoto H(1), Sugimoto S, Tatei K, Obinata H, Bakovic M, Izumi T, Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Gunma University School of Medicine, Maebashi
371-8511, Japan.

Phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis via the CDP-choline pathway is primarily
regulated by CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CT). Transcriptional
enhancer factor-4 (TEF-4) enhances the transcription of CTalpha in COS-7 cells by
interactions with the basal transcription machinery (Sugimoto, H., Bakovic, M.,
Yamashita, S., and Vance, D.E. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276,12338-12344). To
identify the most important transcription factor involved in basal CTalpha
transcription, we made CTalpha promoter-deletion and -mutated constructs linked
to a luciferase reporter and transfected them into COS-7 cells. The results
indicate that an important site regulating basal CTalpha transcription is -53/-47
(GACTTCC), which is a putative consensus-binding site of Ets transcription
factors (GGAA) in the opposite orientation. Gel shift analyses indicated the
existence of a binding protein for -53/-47 (GACTTCC) in nuclear extracts of COS-7
cells. When anti-Ets-1 antibody was incubated with the probe in gel shift
analyses, the intensity of the binding protein was decreased. The binding of
endogenous Ets-1 to the promoter probe was increased when TEF-4 was expressed;
however, the amount of Ets-1 detected by immunoblotting was unchanged. When cells
were transfected with Ets-1 cDNA, the luciferase activity of CTalpha promoter
constructs was greatly enhanced. Co-transfection experiments with Ets-1 and TEF-4
showed enhanced expression of reporter constructs as well as CTalpha mRNA. These 
results suggest that Ets-1 is an important transcriptional activator of the
CTalpha gene and that Ets-1 activity is enhanced by TEF-4.

PMID: 12642588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Circulation. 2003 Mar 18;107(10):1411-7.

Angiogenic property of hepatocyte growth factor is dependent on upregulation of
essential transcription factor for angiogenesis, ets-1.

Tomita N(1), Morishita R, Taniyama Y, Koike H, Aoki M, Shimizu H, Matsumoto K,
Nakamura T, Kaneda Y, Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Suita,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is an angiogenic growth
factor, it is still unclear how it exerts its angiogenic effects. Thus, we
focused on the role of an essential transcription factor for angiogenesis, ets-1.
In this study, we addressed the following specific questions: (1) what genes
responsible for angiogenesis can be regulated by HGF and (2) whether upregulation
of gene expression for angiogenesis is dependent on ets-1.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In human endothelial cells, HGF significantly stimulated the
matrix-degrading pathway, such as the production of matrix metalloprotease-1
(MMP-1) through its specific receptor, c-met. In addition, HGF also significantly
increased HGF itself and its specific receptor, c-met. Moreover, HGF
significantly increased the transcription activity and mRNA expression of ets-1
in a time-dependent manner. Importantly, transfection of antisense ets-1
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) resulted in a significant reduction in MMP-1, HGF and
c-met. Interestingly, HGF also stimulated ets-1 mRNA in vascular smooth muscle
cells, similar to endothelial cells. Of importance, transfection of antisense
ets-1 ODN resulted in a significant decrease in vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) and HGF expression, whereas HGF stimulated both HGF and VEGF
expression. Moreover, in vivo transfection of ets-1 antisense ODN resulted in an 
inhibition of angiogenesis induced by the HGF gene in a rat ischemic hindlimb
model.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we demonstrated that HGF stimulated the expression of MMP-1,
VEGF, HGF itself, and c-met in human endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle
cells. Upregulation of angiogenesis-related genes was largely dependent on the
induction of ets, especially ets-1. These data provide new information about the 
mechanisms of angiogenesis.

PMID: 12642363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Diabetologia. 2003 Jan;46(1):115-23. Epub 2002 Dec 6.

HGF/NK4 inhibited VEGF-induced angiogenesis in in vitro cultured endothelial
cells and in vivo rabbit model.

Nakabayashi M(1), Morishita R, Nakagami H, Kuba K, Matsumoto K, Nakamura T, Tano 
Y, Kaneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: As vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays a pivotal
role in the development of diabetic retinopathy, inhibition of angiogenesis
induced by VEGF is crucial to treat diabetic retinopathy. HGF (hepatocyte growth 
factor)/NK4, containing the N-terminal hairpin domain and the four subsequent
kringle domains of HGF, is considered as a specific antagonist for HGF. Our aim
was to explore the inhibitory effects of HGF/NK4 on angiogenesis induced by VEGF.
METHODS: To analyze the in vivo angiogenesis, we used rabbit corneal micropocket 
assay. Proliferation and migration of human endothelial cells, expression of
ets-1, an essential transcription factor for angiogenesis, and the
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) was examined with 
or without HGF/NK4.
RESULTS: Using corneal micropocket assay, in vivo administration of HGF/NK4
inhibited angiogenesis induced by VEGF. HGF/NK4 inhibited proliferation and
migration of human endothelial cells induced by VEGF in a dose-dependent manner. 
Interestingly, VEGF-mediated phosphorylation of ERK was significantly attenuated 
by HGF/NK4. Of importance, HGF/NK4 attenuated the increase in ets-1 protein
stimulated by VEGF. Nevertheless, HGF/NK4 did not affect phosphorylation of VEGF 
receptor-2 [kinase domain region (KDR)/foetal liver kinase (Flk)-1]. Although
tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor (Na(3)VO(4)), or okadaic acid, serine-threonin
kinase inhibitor, did not prevent the inhibition of ERK phosphorylation by
HGF/NK4, co-incubation of HGF/NK4 with VEGF significantly diminished
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) ERK kinase (MEK) phosphorylation (p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Overall, HGF/NK4 inhibited angiogenesis induced by
VEGF through inhibition of phosphorylation of ERK and ets-1 expression in in
vitro cultured endothelial cells and in vivo rabbit model.

PMID: 12637990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Circ Res. 2003 Apr 18;92(7):749-56. Epub 2003 Mar 13.

Ets-1 and Ets-2 transcription factors are essential for normal coronary and
myocardial development in chicken embryos.

Lie-Venema H(1), Gittenberger-de Groot AC, van Empel LJ, Boot MJ, Kerkdijk H, de 
Kant E, DeRuiter MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box
9602, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

In the development of a functional myocardium and formation of the coronary
vasculature, epicardium-derived cells play an essential role. The proepicardial
organ contributes to the developing coronary system by delivering mural cells to 
the endothelium-lined vessels. In search of genes that regulate the behavior of
(pro)epicardial cells, the Ets-1 and Ets-2 transcription factors stand out as
strong candidates. In the present study, the hypothesis that Ets transcription
factors have a role in proper coronary and myocardial development was tested via 
antisense technology, by targeting Ets-1 and Ets-2 mRNAs to downregulate protein 
expression in chicken embryos. The results suggest that hereby the development of
the coronary system is hampered, primarily by defects in the process of
epithelial-mesenchymal transformation of the mesothelia of the primary and
secondary heart fields. This was indicated by a lack of periarterial and
epicardial mesenchyme, of peripheral coronary smooth muscle cells, and changes in
myocardial morphology. A defect in myocardial perfusion caused by the absence of 
one or both coronary ostia seems to be "solved" by the development of numerous
small fistulae connecting the ventricular lumen with the subepicardially located 
coronary vessels. The presence of coronary vascular aberrations in the
antisense-Ets phenotype enabled us for the first time to study abnormal coronary 
development in a model that is not lethal to the embryo.

PMID: 12637368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Int J Oncol. 2003 Apr;22(4):849-53.

Splicing variant DeltaVII-Ets1 is downregulated in invasive Ets1-expressing
breast cancer cells.

Ballschmieter P(1), Braig M, Lindemann RK, Nordheim A, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institut, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Transcription factor Ets1 is expressed in invasive breast cancer cells. In
T-cells, the splicing variant DeltaVII-Ets1 is naturally produced along with full
length Ets1 (fl-Ets1). Though its function is unknown, the lack of important
inhibitory domains predicts a regulatory role of DeltaVII-Ets1 in
fl-Ets1-controlled transcription. Examining the expression status of
DeltaVII-Ets1 in invasive Ets1-producing MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, we found
that the DeltaVII-Ets1 protein could only be detected when nuclear proteins from 
these cells were fractionated by ionic exchange chromatography. When
overexpressed, DeltaVII-Ets1 was found to be partially degraded in breast cancer 
cells, but not in Jurkat T-cells or SK-Mel melanoma cells. In contrast, no
proteolytic products resulted from ectopic expression of fl-Ets1 suggesting that 
breast cancer cells are able to specifically cleave DeltaVII-Ets1. Overexpression
of DeltaVII-Ets1 reduced survival of MDA-MB-231 cells, but not of MCF-7 cells. A 
mutant version of DeltaVII-Ets1, lacking first 129 N-terminal amino acids, had no
effect. These data suggest that Ets1-producing invasive breast cancer cells
specifically downregulate DeltaVII-Ets1, as it may be able to adversely affect
the survival of these cells.

PMID: 12632078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Int J Oncol. 2003 Apr;22(4):799-805.

Protein kinase Calpha regulates Ets1 transcriptional activity in invasive breast 
cancer cells.

Lindemann RK(1), Braig M, Ballschmieter P, Guise TA, Nordheim A, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)u Institut für Zellbiologie, Abteilung Molekularbiologie, Universität
Tübingen, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

We have previously shown that PKC inhibitors interfere with the
Ets1/Smad3-dependent regulation of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) P3
promoter activity by TGFbeta in invasive MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. By
examining PKC expression in a variety of breast cancer cell lines, the protein
level of PKCalpha was found to be much higher in Ets1-expressing MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells than in Ets1-deficient MCF-7 and SK-BR3 cells. No 
correlation of Ets1 expression with the expression of other PKC subtypes
(PKCbeta1, PKCbeta2, PKCdelta or PKCepsilon) could be observed. In contrast to
MDA-MB-231 cells, PKCalpha-deficient MCF-7 cells do not support Ets1-induced
activation of the PTHrP P3 promoter suggesting that PKCalpha may be important for
Ets1 activity. A constitutively active form of PKCalpha was found to potentiate
the P3 promoter activation by Ets1 alone and in synergy with Smad3. PKCalpha, but
not PKCepsilon, also induced phosphorylation of the Ets1 protein. Both PKCalpha
effects on Ets1 depended on the exon VII domain of Ets1. Using verapamil and
ionomycin, we could show that PKCalpha induces Ets1 phosphorylation independent
of calcium mobilization. Collectively, our data suggest that PKCalpha may
regulate Ets1 activity in invasive breast cancer cells.

PMID: 12632071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochem J. 2003 Jun 15;372(Pt 3):787-97.

Ets2 and protein kinase C epsilon are important regulators of parathyroid
hormone-related protein expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Lindemann RK(1), Braig M, Hauser CA, Nordheim A, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Abteilung Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, 
Auf der Morgenstelle 15, Germany.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) promotes the metastatic potential and
proliferation of breast cancer cells, and acts anti-apoptotically. In invasive
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, transforming growth factor beta-regulated PTHrP
synthesis is mediated by an Ets1/Smad3-dependent activation of the PTHrP P3
promoter. In the present study, we studied the regulation of PTHrP expression in 
non-invasive, Ets1-deficient and transforming growth factor beta-resistant MCF-7 
cells. We found PMA to be a strong stimulator of P3-dependent PTHrP expression in
MCF-7 cells. Mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase 1 (MEK-1)/ERK1/2
inhibitor PD98059 interfered with this activity. Promoter studies revealed that
the PMA effect depended on the Ets and stimulating protein-1 (Sp1)-binding sites.
Of several Ets factors tested, Ets2, but not Ese-1, Elf-1 or Ets1, supported the 
PMA-dependent increase in promoter activity. PD98059 and a threonine to alanine
mutation of the ERK1/2-responsive Ets2 phosphorylation site at position 72
inhibited the Ets2/PMA effect. Activated protein kinase C (PKC) epsilon could
mimic PMA by stimulating the P3 promoter alone or in co-operation with Ets2 in an
MEK-1/ERK1/2-dependent manner. Activated PKC alpha, although capable of
co-operating with Ets2, failed to induce transcription from the P3 promoter on
its own. The Ets2/PKalpha synergistic effect was neither sensitive to PD98059 nor
to Thr(72)/Ala(72) mutation. PMA neither increased the expression of Sp1 nor
modulated the transcriptional activity of Sp1. However, it induced the
displacement of a yet unknown factor from the Sp1-binding site, which may result 
in Sp1 recruitment to the promoter. Our results suggest an ERK1/2-dependent
Ets2/PKC epsilon synergism to be involved in PTHrP expression in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC1223436
PMID: 12628005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Mar;23(6):1946-60.

Activation of the early B-cell-specific mb-1 (Ig-alpha) gene by Pax-5 is
dependent on an unmethylated Ets binding site.

Maier H(1), Colbert J, Fitzsimmons D, Clark DR, Hagman J.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research
Center, 1400 Jackson Street, K516B, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

Methylation of cytosine in CpG dinucleotides promotes transcriptional repression 
in mammals by blocking transcription factor binding and recruiting methyl-binding
proteins that initiate chromatin remodeling. Here, we use a novel cell-based
system to show that retrovirally expressed Pax-5 protein activates endogenous
early B-cell-specific mb-1 genes in plasmacytoma cells, but only when the
promoter is hypomethylated. CpG methylation does not directly affect binding of
the promoter by Pax-5. Instead, methylation of an adjacent CpG interferes with
assembly of ternary complexes comprising Pax-5 and Ets proteins. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, recruitment of Ets-1 is blocked by
methylation of the Ets site (5'CCGGAG) on the antisense strand. In transfection
assays, selective methylation of a single CpG within the Pax-5-dependent Ets site
greatly reduces mb-1 promoter activity. Prior demethylation of the endogenous
mb-1 promoter is required for its activation by Pax-5 in transduced cells.
Although B-lineage cells have only unmethylated mb-1 genes and do not modulate
methylation of the mb-1 promoter during development, other tissues feature high
percentages of methylated alleles. Together, these studies demonstrate a novel
DNA methylation-dependent mechanism for regulating transcriptional activity
through the inhibition of DNA-dependent protein-protein interactions.

PMCID: PMC149480
PMID: 12612069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Oncogene. 2003 Feb 13;22(6):919-23.

Trans-activation of heparanase promoter by ETS transcription factors.

Lu WC(1), Liu YN, Kang BB, Chen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Human Genetics, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.

The remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important process required for
cancer cells to turn into invasive and metastatic cancer cells. To dissolve the
protein components of ECM, matrix metalloproteinases are some of the essential
enzymes. Another ECM remodeling enzyme is the heparanase (Hpa) that digests the
heparin sulfate component of the matrix. In metastatic cancer cells the Hpa gene 
is upregulated. To investigate the mechanism of why Hpa was upregulated in
metastatic cancer cells, the regulatory sequence of heparanase gene was isolated 
and its function analysed in metastatic breast cancer cells. We found there are
four ETS transcription factor binding sites. Two of them flanking the
transcription initiation of the Hpa gene are nonfunctional, whereas two others
are highly functional and responded to exogenously added ETS transcription
factors. Mutation of these two ETS binding sites abolished the transcriptional
activation of Hpa promoter by ETS transcription factors. Among four transcription
factors tested (ETS1, ETS2, PEA3, and ER81), ETS1 and ETS2 are more potent in
transactivating the human Hpa gene. Furthermore, dominant-negative ETS
transcription factors failed to transactivate Hpa promoter and could abrogate the
function of wild-type transcription factor in transactivation activity of ETS
transcription factors on the Hpa promoter. These results suggest that ETS
transcription factors play an important role in tumor invasion and metastasis by 
modulating the remodeling of ECM.

PMID: 12584571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biochem J. 2003 May 15;372(Pt 1):41-52.

Hormone-induced modifications of the chromatin structure surrounding upstream
regulatory regions conserved between the mouse and rabbit whey acidic protein
genes.

Millot B(1), Montoliu L, Fontaine ML, Mata T, Devinoy E.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique, 78 352 Jouy en josas Cedex, France.

The upstream regulatory regions of the mouse and rabbit whey acidic protein (WAP)
genes have been used extensively to target the efficient expression of foreign
genes into the mammary gland of transgenic animals. Therefore both regions have
been studied to elucidate fully the mechanisms controlling WAP gene expression.
Three DNase I-hypersensitive sites (HSS0, HSS1 and HSS2) have been described
upstream of the rabbit WAP gene in the lactating mammary gland and correspond to 
important regulatory regions. These sites are surrounded by variable chromatin
structures during mammary-gland development. In the present study, we describe
the upstream sequence of the mouse WAP gene. Analysis of genomic sequences shows 
that the mouse WAP gene is situated between two widely expressed genes (Cpr2 and 
Ramp3). We show that the hypersensitive sites found upstream of the rabbit WAP
gene are also detected in the mouse WAP gene. Further, they encompass functional 
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5-binding sites, as has been
observed in the rabbit. A new hypersensitive site (HSS3), not specific to the
mammary gland, was mapped 8 kb upstream of the rabbit WAP gene. Unlike the three 
HSSs described above, HSS3 is also detected in the liver, but similar to HSS1, it
does not depend on lactogenic hormone treatments during cell culture. The region 
surrounding HSS3 encompasses a potential matrix attachment region, which is also 
conserved upstream of the mouse WAP gene and contains a functional transcription 
factor Ets-1 (E26 transformation-specific-1)-binding site. Finally, we
demonstrate for the first time that variations in the chromatin structure are
dependent on prolactin alone.

PMCID: PMC1223369
PMID: 12580766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Feb 7;301(2):472-9.

An intronic alternative promoter of the human lactoferrin gene is activated by
Ets.

Liu D(1), Wang X, Zhang Z, Teng CT.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, P.O. Box 12233, MD E2-01, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA.

Lactoferrin expresses in a variety of tissues and involves in various aspects of 
host defense mechanisms. The lactoferrin gene is differentially regulated through
multiple signaling pathways. Recently, an alternative form of human lactoferrin
mRNA (Delta LF) was found in normal human tissues but absent from the tumor
cells. In this study, we identified the transcription start sites of the Delta LF
in mammary gland and bone marrow and demonstrated that the Delta LF is the
product of an alternative (P2) promoter present in the first intron of the
lactoferrin gene. The P2 promoter has high activity in Jurkat and U937 and low
activity in RL95-2 and HEC-1B cell lines. Nonetheless, the promoter activity in
HEC-1B cells was dramatically enhanced with overexpression of the Ets-1
transcription factor. The GFP-tagged lactoferrin is present in the cytoplasm
whereas GFP-tagged Delta LF is found in both nucleus and cytoplasm as examined by
fluorescence and confocal microscopy.

PMID: 12565886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Jpn J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002 Dec;50(12):503-7.

Ets-1 gene expression in patients with thymoma.

Sasaki H(1), Kobayashi Y, Tanahashi M, Yukiue H, Yano M, Kaji M, Kiriyama M,
Fukai I, Yamakawa Y, Fujii Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagoya City University Medical School, Nagoya,
Japan.

OBJECTIVES: The Ets-1 protooncogene transcription factor is involved in several
cellular functions, including the activation of several proteases, and reportedly
plays an important role in carcinoma invasion and metastasis. We hypothesize that
Ets-1 mRNA expression could be a predictor of thymoma development and invasion.
METHODS: Subjects were 37 patients with thymoma whose mRNA expression was
quantified by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
using LightCycler, a microvolume multisample fluorimeter.
RESULTS: No significant difference was found in Ets-1 mRNA expression for gender,
age, or pathological subtype. Ets-1 mRNA expression in tumor tissues from stage
II-IV thymoma (25.311 +/- 42.336) was more elevated than in that from stage I
thymoma (2.097 +/- 4.492) (p = 0.0374). Ets-1 mRNA expression may thus serve as a
marker of higher thymoma stages.
CONCLUSIONS: With use of the Light Cycler RT-PCR assay, Ets-1 expression may play
an important role in the extension and progression of thymoma as in other
cancers. Further study and longer follow-up are, however, needed to confirm the
Ets-1 impact on biological tumor behavior.

PMID: 12561090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Orthop Sci. 2003;8(1):102-8.

Enhanced expression of Runx2/PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1/AML3 during fracture healing.

Kawahata H(1), Kikkawa T, Higashibata Y, Sakuma T, Huening M, Sato M, Sugimoto M,
Kuriyama K, Terai K, Kitamura Y, Nomura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Medical School, Osaka, Japan.

The cause of the dramatic increase in expression of the osteopontin gene during
fracture healing was studied in a mouse experimental model. Semiquantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, Northern blotting, and in situ
hybridization analysis showed that the enhanced expression took place prior to
callus formation. The change in the expression pattern of collagenous and
noncollagenous bone matrix proteins in addition to Ets-1 and Runx2, major
transcription factors of osteopontin, were examined and compared to that of
osteopontin. Although Ets-1 expression showed no significant change during
fracture healing, enhanced expression of Runx2 corresponding to that of
osteopontin was observed. Furthermore, in situ hybridization demonstrated that
osteopontin-expressing cells also express the Runx2 gene. The results indicated
the possibility that Runx2 is a major regulator of osteopontin during fracture
healing.

PMID: 12560895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2002 Nov-Dec;29(3):553-61.

Role of Ets-1 in erythroid differentiation.

Marziali G(1), Perrotti E, Ilari R, Lulli V, Coccia EM, Mazzeo S, Kühn LC, Testa 
U, Battistini A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 
00161 Rome, Italy.

Members of the Ets gene family are known to be expressed in the hematopoietic
tissue and some of them play a pivotal role in normal hematopoietic cell
development. Ets-1 gene expression was analyzed in Friend Leukemia Cells (FLC)
induced to erythroid differentiation by DMSO. We show that the level of Ets-1
protein and its binding activity decreases in FLC along erythroid differentiation
of primary human progenitors. The same behavior was observed during normal
erythroid differentiation. Moreover, FLC constitutively expressing Ets-1 show a
decrease in TfR gene expression, globin mRNA and hemoglobin synthesis. These data
indicate that a decrease in Ets-1 binding activity is required for a normal
erythroid maturation and that a deregulated expression of this transcription
factor may interfere with terminal erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 12547252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Apr;10(2):100-3.

Sequence analysis of 5'-flanking region of human pax-5 gene exon 1B.

Liu ML(1), Rahman M, Hirabayashi Y, Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital,
Jiangxi Medical College, Nanchang 330008, China.

Pax-5 gene is important transcription factor in B-lymphopoiesis and B-cell
development. To understand the regulatory mechanism of pax-5 expression, the
immediate 5'-flanking region (6 671 bp) of human pax-gene exon 1B was isolated
and characterized. Analysis of the total sequence showed that the proximal
promoter includes 3 CAT boxes, 1 SP1 and 1 E box. However, there was no consensus
sequence for a TATA box in the 5'-flanking region. Putative regulatory sites of
further upstream in the sequence revealed 6 LMO(2)COM, 5 NFAT, 2 LPOLYA-B, 3
GATA1, 2 AP4, 10 MZF1, 1 ETS1-B, 1 GATA3, 1 NKX25, 2 RORA1, 1 LYF1, 2 Ikaros2, 2 
TCF11, 1 GATA-C and 1 FREAC7. Therefore, the 5'-flanking region of human pax-5
exon 1B could be involved in regulating the expression of human pax-5 and B-cell 
differentiation and development.

PMID: 12513807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Development. 2003 Feb;130(3):483-94.

Snail precedes slug in the genetic cascade required for the specification and
migration of the Xenopus neural crest.

Aybar MJ(1), Nieto MA, Mayor R.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Nucleus in Developmental Biology, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
de Chile, Casilla 653, Santiago, Chile.

The complex sequence of inductive events responsible for the generation of the
neural crest at the border between the neural plate and the epidermis, triggers a
genetic cascade involving several families of transcription factors. Two members 
of the Snail family, Snail and Slug, have both been implicated in this cascade.
In chick and Xenopus, loss- and gain-of-function experiments have provided
evidence that Slug plays a key role in neural crest development. However, in
contrast to the chick, Snail rather than Slug is expressed in the premigratory
neural crest in the mouse and, in Xenopus, Snail precedes Slug expression in this
population. Thus, in order to study the function of Snail in neural crest
development in Xenopus, we have carried out conditional gain- and
loss-of-function experiments using different Snail constructs fused to a
glucocorticoid receptor element. We show that Snail is able to induce the
expression of Slug and all other neural crest markers tested (Zic5, FoxD3, Twist 
and Ets1) at the time of specification. This activation is observed in whole
embryos and in animal caps, in the absence of neural plate and mesodermal
markers. We show that Snail is required for neural crest specification and
migration and that it works as a transcriptional repressor. These functions have 
been previously attributed to SLUG: However, Slug alone is unable to induce other
neural crest markers in animal cap assays, and we show that Snail and Slug can be
functionally equivalent when tested in overexpression studies. This suggests
that, in Xenopus embryos, at least some of the functions previously attributed to
Slug can be carried out by SNAIL: This is additionally supported by rescue
experiments in embryos injected with dominant-negative constructs that indicate
that Snail lies upstream of Slug in the genetic cascade leading to neural crest
formation and that it plays a key role in crest development.

PMID: 12490555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Mol Biol Cell. 2002 Dec;13(12):4497-507.

Calcium regulation of GM-CSF by calmodulin-dependent kinase II phosphorylation of
Ets1.

Liu H(1), Grundström T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, S-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

The multipotent cytokine granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) is involved in particular in the physiological response to infection and
in inflammatory responses. GM-CSF is produced by many cell types, including T
lymphocytes responding to T-cell receptor activation and mantle zone B
lymphocytes. B-cell receptor and T-cell receptor activation generates two major
signals: an increase in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration and a protein kinase
cascade. Previous studies have shown that the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent
phosphatase calcineurin mediates stimulation of GM-CSF transcription in response 
to Ca(2+). In this study, we show that Ca(2+) signaling also regulates GM-CSF
transcription negatively through Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMK II) 
phosphorylation of serines in the autoinhibitory domain for DNA binding of the
transcription factor Ets1. Wild-type Ets1 negatively affects GM-CSF transcription
on Ca(2+) stimulation in the presence of cyclosporin A, which inhibits
calcineurin. Conversely, Ets1 with mutated CaMK II target serines showed an
increase in transactivation of the GM-CSF promoter/enhancer. Moreover,
constitutively active CaMK II inhibited transactivation of GM-CSF by wild-type
Ets1 but not by Ets1 with mutated CaMK II sites. Mutation of CaMK II target
serines in Ets1 also relieves inhibition of cooperative transactivation of GM-CSF
with the Runx1/AML1 transcription factor. In addition, the Ca(2+)-dependent
phosphorylation of Ets1 reduces the binding of Ets1 to the GM-CSF promoter in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC138649
PMID: 12475968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Oncogene. 2002 Dec 5;21(55):8506-9.

Expression of the transcription factor Ets-1 is an independent prognostic marker 
for relapse-free survival in breast cancer.

Span PN(1), Manders P, Heuvel JJ, Thomas CM, Bosch RR, Beex LV, Sweep CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Endocrinology, University Medical Center Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. p.span@ace.azn.nl

The transcription factor Ets-1 regulates the expression of several angiogenic and
extracellular matrix remodeling factors, and might be implicated in disease
progression of breast cancer. In the present study, the prognostic value of Ets-1
expression was assessed by quantitative real-time fluorescence RT-PCR in 123
sporadic primary breast cancer samples of patients with a median follow-up time
of 62 months. Ets-1 expression levels correlated significantly with VEGF and
PAI-1 in the same tissue. In univariate (P=0.0011) and multivariate (P=0.005)
analyses, Ets-1 expression showed significant prognostic value for relapse-free
survival. Ets-1 is a strong, independent predictor of poor prognosis in breast
cancer. This seems - at least in part - to be attributable to its role in
transcriptional regulation of factors involved in angiogenesis (VEGF), and
extracellular matrix remodeling (PAI-1).

PMID: 12466970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):7520-30. Epub 2002 Dec 2.

Cooperative interaction of hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha (HIF-2alpha ) and
Ets-1 in the transcriptional activation of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor-2 (Flk-1).

Elvert G(1), Kappel A, Heidenreich R, Englmeier U, Lanz S, Acker T, Rauter M,
Plate K, Sieweke M, Breier G, Flamme I.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Medizin der Universität zu Köln,
Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 9, 50931 Köln, Germany.

Interactions between Ets family members and a variety of other transcription
factors serve important functions during development and differentiation
processes, e.g. in the hematopoietic system. Here we show that the endothelial
basic helix-loop-helix PAS domain transcription factor, hypoxia-inducible
factor-2alpha (HIF-2alpha) (but not its close relative HIF-1alpha), cooperates
with Ets-1 in activating transcription of the vascular endothelial growth factor 
receptor-2 (VEGF-2) gene (Flk-1). The receptor tyrosine kinase Flk-1 is
indispensable for angiogenesis, and its expression is closely regulated during
development. Consistent with the hypothesis that HIF-2alpha controls the
expression of Flk-1 in vivo, we show here that HIF-2alpha and Flk-1 are
co-regulated in postnatal mouse brain capillaries. A tandem HIF-2alpha/Ets
binding site was identified within the Flk-1 promoter that acted as a strong
enhancer element. Based on the analysis of transgenic mouse embryos, these motifs
are essential for endothelial cell-specific reporter gene expression. A single
HIF-2alpha/Ets element conferred strong cooperative induction by HIF-2alpha and
Ets-1 when fused to a heterologous promoter and was most active in endothelial
cells. The physical interaction of HIF-2alpha with Ets-1 was demonstrated and
localized to the HIF-2alpha carboxyl terminus and the autoinhibitory exon VII
domain of Ets-1, respectively. The deletion of the DNA binding and
carboxyl-terminal transactivation domains of HIF-2alpha, respectively, created
dominant negative mutants that suppressed transactivation by the wild type
protein and failed to synergize with Ets-1. These results suggest that the
interaction between HIF-2alpha and endothelial Ets factors is required for the
full transcriptional activation of Flk-1 in endothelial cells and may therefore
represent a future target for the manipulation of angiogenesis.

PMID: 12464608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Dec;269(23):5956-62.

Activation of transcription of the human presenilin 1 gene by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health
Science Center at Fort Worth, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA.

We have recently identified an Ets element controlling over 90% of the basal
expression of the human presenilin 1 (PS1) gene. We have also shown that Ets1 and
Ets2 act as transactivators of the PS1 gene by cotransfection experiments in
SK-N-SH neuronal cells. The PS1 gene is widely but differentially expressed
across tissues and the expression in brain appears to be restricted to neurons.
To gain further insight into the regulation of the gene we have examined the
regulation of PS1 by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA). SK-N-SH neuronal
cells were treated with 0.2 micro m TPA for 30 min to 24 h and the level of
expression of the endogenous PS1 gene was measured by Northern blot analysis. A
two- to threefold increase in the level of PS1 mRNA appeared 4-8 h after the
addition of TPA. A similar increase in transcription activity was observed in
nuclear run off experiments, indicating that the increased mRNA level results
from an activation in the initiation of transcription of PS1. Consistently, TPA
also increased the level of PS1 protein. No activation of the PS1 endogenous gene
by TPA was observed in hepatoma HepG2 cells. Next we tested the effect of TPA on 
the expression of the PS1 promoter by transfecting fusion genes including various
fragments of the PS1 promoter linked to a CAT reporter into SK-N-SH cells. TPA
also stimulated the expression of the PS1CAT constructs. Generally wild type
constructs -687/+178, -118/+178, -22/+178 including the short -35/+6 fragment
showed a minor two- to threefold activation by TPA. Point mutations eliminating
the -10 Ets motif or the -6 CREB/AP1 motif did not decrease the stimulation by
TPA. Thus TPA appears to activate the transcription of the PS1 gene by a
mechanism which does not require these elements.

PMID: 12444985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Oncogene. 2002 Nov 14;21(52):7933-44.

Role of Ets-1 in transcriptional regulation of transferrin receptor and erythroid
differentiation.

Marziali G(1), Perrotti E, Ilari R, Lulli V, Coccia EM, Moret R, Kühn LC, Testa
U, Battistini A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 
00161 Rome, Italy.

High expression of transferrin receptor (TfR) on the membrane of erythroid cells 
accounts for the high level of iron required to sustain heme synthesis. Several
studies indicate that during erythroid differentiation TfR expression is highly
dependent on transcriptional regulation. In this study we characterized the
minimal region able to confer transcriptional regulation during erythroid
differentiation in Friend leukemia cells (FLC). This region of 120 bp, upstream
the transcription start site, contains an overlapping consensus recognition
sequence for AP1/CREB/ATF transcription factors and for proteins of the Ets
family and a GC rich region. Here, we report that both the Ets and the Ap1/CRE
like sites are essential for promoter activity during erythroid differentiation. 
We showed that Ets-1 binds to the EBS-TfR and its binding activity decreases in
FLC induced to differentiate and during normal erythroid differentiation.
Consistent with this, FLC constitutively expressing Ets-1 show a decrease in TfR 
gene expression, globin mRNA and hemoglobin synthesis. We conclude that Ets-1
binding activity is modulated during erythroid maturation and that a deregulated 
expression of this transcription factor interferes with terminal erythroid
differentiation.

PMID: 12439744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Dec;22(23):8135-43.

Biallelic mutations in p16(INK4a) confer resistance to Ras- and Ets-induced
senescence in human diploid fibroblasts.

Huot TJ(1), Rowe J, Harland M, Drayton S, Brookes S, Gooptu C, Purkis P, Fried M,
Bataille V, Hara E, Newton-Bishop J, Peters G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London
WC2A 3PX.

The INK4a/ARF tumor suppressor locus is implicated in the senescence-like growth 
arrest provoked by oncogenic Ras in primary cells. INK4a and ARF are distinct
proteins encoded by transcripts in which a shared exon is decoded in alternative 
reading frames. Here we analyze dermal fibroblasts (designated Q34) from an
individual carrying independent missense mutations in each copy of the common
exon. Both mutations alter the amino acid sequence of INK4a and functionally
impair the protein, although they do so to different degrees. Only one of the
mutations affects the sequence of ARF, causing an apparently innocuous change
near its carboxy terminus. Unlike normal human fibroblasts, Q34 cells are not
permanently arrested by Ras or its downstream effectors Ets1 and Ets2. Moreover, 
ectopic Ras enables the cells to grow as anchorage-independent colonies, and in
relatively young Q34 cells anchorage independence can be achieved without
addition of telomerase or perturbation of the p53 pathway. Whereas ARF plays the 
principal role in Ras-induced arrest of mouse fibroblasts, our data imply that
INK4a assumes this role in human fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC134058
PMID: 12417717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Genetics. 2002 Oct;162(2):543-56.

Focused genetic recombination of bacteriophage t4 initiated by double-strand
breaks.

Shcherbakov V(1), Granovsky I, Plugina L, Shcherbakova T, Sizova S, Pyatkov K,
Shlyapnikov M, Shubina O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Chernogolovka, Moscow Region, 142432 Russia. svp@icp.ac.ru

A model system for studying double-strand-break (DSB)-induced genetic
recombination in vivo based on the ets1 segCDelta strain of bacteriophage T4 was 
developed. The ets1, a 66-bp DNA fragment of phage T2L containing the cleavage
site for the T4 SegC site-specific endonuclease, was inserted into the proximal
part of the T4 rIIB gene. Under segC(+) conditions, the ets1 behaves as a
recombination hotspot. Crosses of the ets1 against rII markers located to the
left and to the right of ets1 gave similar results, thus demonstrating the equal 
and symmetrical initiation of recombination by either part of the broken
chromosome. Frequency/distance relationships were studied in a series of two- and
three-factor crosses with other rIIB and rIIA mutants (all segC(+)) separated
from ets1 by 12-2100 bp. The observed relationships were readily interpretable in
terms of the modified splice/patch coupling model. The advantages of this
localized or focused recombination over that distributed along the chromosome, as
a model for studying the recombination-replication pathway in T4 in vivo, are
discussed.

PMCID: PMC1462285
PMID: 12399370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2002 Oct 1;22(10):1733-9.

Characterization of human glycoprotein VI gene 5' regulatory and promoter
regions.

Furihata K(1), Kunicki TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Roon Research Center for Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, Division of
Experimental Hemostasis and Thrombosis, Department of Molecular and Experimental 
Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, Calif 92037, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Platelet glycoprotein VI is a collagen receptor belonging to the
immunoglobulin-like protein family that is essential for platelet interactions
with collagen and is exclusively expressed in the megakaryocytic lineage. The
objective of this study was to characterize the human glycoprotein VI gene (GP6) 
5' regulatory and promoter regions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We first used 5' RACE to establish experimentally that the
major transcription start site lies 28 bp upstream from the start codon. We next 
subcloned the 5' regulatory region of GP6 into pGL3-basic [pGL3(-1576)] and used 
deletion mutagenesis to identify important regulatory regions, comparing the
activity of transiently expressed promoter-luciferase constructs in Dami and HeLa
cells. We found that megakaryocyte lineage-specific transcription is largely
controlled within the segment -191/-39. By site-directed mutagenesis, we
confirmed that a GATA-1 site at -176 and an Ets-1 site at -45 play important
roles in the regulation of GP6 transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We have determined that the GP6 sequence -191 to -39 represents the 
core promoter and that transcription is driven largely by GATA-1 (-176) and
c-Ets-1 (-45) sites within this segment.

PMID: 12377757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Ann Oncol. 2002 Oct;13(10):1605-11.

Clinical implications of expression of ETS-1 related to angiogenesis in uterine
endometrial cancers.

Fujimoto J(1), Aoki I, Toyoki H, Khatun S, Tamaya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Gifu City, Japan. jf@cc.gifu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis is essential for development, growth and advancement of 
solid tumors. During angiogenesis, ETS-1 is strongly expressed in vascular
endothelial cells and the adjacent interstitial cells, while the inhibition of
ETS-1 expression leads to suppression of angiogenesis. This prompted us to study 
the clinical implications of ETS-1 in relation to angiogenesis in uterine
endometrial cancers.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Sixty patients underwent resection for uterine endometrial 
cancers. From the tissues of 60 uterine endometrial cancers, the levels of ets-1 
mRNA, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF), platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor (PD-ECGF) and interleukin
(IL)-8 were determined by competitive RT-PCR using recombinant RNA and enzyme
immunoassay, and the localization and counts of microvessel were determined by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: There was a significant correlation between microvessel count and ets-1 
gene expression levels in uterine endometrial cancers. Immunohistochemical
staining revealed that the localization of ETS-1 was similar to that of vascular 
endothelial cells. The level of ets-1 mRNA tended to increase with increasing
disease stage. Furthermore, the level of ets-1 mRNA correlated with levels of
VEGF in well-differentiated adenocarcinomas (G1) and of bFGF in moderately
differentiated adenocarcinomas (G2) and poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas
(G3).
CONCLUSIONS: ETS-1 is a possible angiogenic mediator in uterine endometrial
cancers.

PMID: 12377649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Ann Oncol. 2002 Oct;13(10):1598-604.

Clinical implications of expression of ETS-1 related to angiogenesis in uterine
cervical cancers.

Fujimoto J(1), Aoki I, Toyoki H, Khatun S, Tamaya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Gifu City, Japan. jf@cc.gifu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis is essential for development, growth and advancement of 
solid tumors. ETS-1 has been recognized as a candidate for tumor angiogenic
transcription factor. This prompted us to study the clinical implications of
ETS-1-related angiogenesis in uterine cervical cancers.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty patients underwent curative resection for uterine
cervical cancers. The patients' prognoses were analyzed with a 24-month survival 
rate. In the tissue of 60 uterine cervical cancers, the levels of ets-1 mRNA,
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF),
platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor (PD-ECGF) and interleukin (IL)-8 
were determined by competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
using recombinant RNA and enzyme immunoassay, and the localization and counts of 
microvessels were determined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: There was a significant correlation between microvessel counts and ets-1
gene expression levels in uterine cervical cancers. Immunohistochemical staining 
revealed that the localization of ETS-1 was similar to that of vascular
endothelial cells. The level of ets-1 mRNA correlated with the levels of PD-ECGF 
and IL-8 among angiogenic factors. Furthermore, the prognosis of the 25 patients 
with high ets-1 mRNA expression in uterine cervical cancers was extremely poor,
while the 24-month survival rate of the other 25 patients with low ets-1 mRNA
expression was 92%.
CONCLUSIONS: ETS-1 might be a prognostic indicator as an angiogenic mediator in
uterine cervical cancers.

PMID: 12377648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47898-906. Epub 2002 Sep 24.

T cell-specific expression of the murine CD3delta promoter.

Ji HB(1), Gupta A, Okamoto S, Blum MD, Tan L, Goldring MB, Lacy E, Roy AL,
Terhorst C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. hji@caregroup.harvard.edu

T cell-specific expression of human and mouse CD3delta is known to be governed by
an enhancer element immediately downstream from the gene. Here we demonstrate by 
transgenic and in vitro studies that the murine CD3delta (mCD3delta) promoter
prefers to be expressed in cells of the T lineage. Deletion analyses of a
promoter segment (-401/+48 bp) followed by transient transfections indicate that 
upstream elements between -149 and -112 bp contribute to full expression of the
gene. Furthermore, a core promoter region -37/+29 appears to contribute to a T
cell specificity. Using substitution mutant scanning, four positive and one
negative regulatory elements were found within the mCD3delta core promoter. The
first two positive elements comprise two classical initiator-like sites, which
recruit TFII-I, whereas a third contains a functional Ets binding site.
Immediately adjacent to the observed transcription start site is a negative
element that utilizes the transcription regulator YY1. The last positive
regulatory element contains a potentially functional CREB binding site and the
minor transcriptional start site. Because NERF-2, Elf-1, and Ets-1 are expressed 
preferentially in lymphocytes and because, in addition, YY1 represses the
promoter activity strongly in non-T cells, we conclude that the combination of
these transcription factors contributes to the T cell-specific expression pattern
of mouse CD3delta.

PMID: 12324448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 1;99(20):12657-62. Epub 2002 Sep 19.

Structural characterization of the PIT-1/ETS-1 interaction: PIT-1 phosphorylation
regulates PIT-1/ETS-1 binding.

Augustijn KD(1), Duval DL, Wechselberger R, Kaptein R, Gutierrez-Hartmann A, van 
der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, University Medical Center Utrecht and
Center for Biomedical Genetics, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

The POU-domain transcription factor Pit-1 and Ets-1, a member of the ETS family
of transcription factors, can associate in solution and synergistically activate 
the prolactin promoter by binding to a composite response element in the
prolactin promoter. We mapped the minimal region of Ets-1 required for the
interaction with the Pit-1 POU-homeodomain. Here, we describe a detailed NMR
study of the interaction between the POU-homeodomain of Pit-1 and the minimal
interacting region of Ets-1. By using heteronuclear single quantum coherence
titration experiments, we were able to map exact residues on the POU-homeodomain 
that are involved in the interaction with this minimal Ets-1 interaction domain. 
By using our NMR data, we generated point mutants in the POU-homeodomain and
tested their effect on the interaction with Ets-1. Our results show that
phosphorylation of Pit-1 can regulate the interaction with Ets-1.

PMCID: PMC130516
PMID: 12242337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 8;277(45):42841-51. Epub 2002 Sep 4.

Mechanisms regulating expression of the tumor necrosis factor-related light gene.
Role of calcium-signaling pathway in the transcriptional control.

Castellano R(1), Van Lint C, Peri V, Veithen E, Morel Y, Costello R, Olive D,
Collette Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Cancérologie et d'Immunologie de Marseille, Université de la
Méditerranée, INSERM, Unite 119, 13009 Marseille, France.

LIGHT (TNFSF14) is a newly identified tumor necrosis factor superfamily member
involved in the regulation of immune responses by control of activation,
maturation, and survival of immune effector cells. Despite the immunological
relevance of the LIGHT protein, little knowledge is available as to how light
gene expression is regulated. In T-lymphocytes, most LIGHT surface expression and
transcript accumulation occurs after T cell activation. In this study, we have
shown that these events are blocked at the transcriptional level by cyclosporin
A, an immuno-suppressive drug. Besides, we identified a role for Ca2+ -signaling 
pathways and NFAT transcription factors in T cell activation-induced LIGHT
expression. To further investigate this process, we have identified, cloned, and 
characterized a 2.1-kilobase 5'-flanking DNA genomic fragment from the human
light gene. We have shown the transcriptional activity of the herein-identified
minimal 5' regulatory region of human light gene parallels the endogenous
expression of light in T cells. Moreover, we demonstrated that induced LIGHT
promoter activity can be equally blocked by cyclosporin A treatment or dominant
negative NFAT overexpression and further identified by site-directed mutagenesis 
and electrophoretic mobility supershift analysis of a NFAT transcription factor
binding site within the human light minimal promoter. Finally, Sp1 and Ets1
binding sites were identified and shown to regulate light basal promoter
activity. Thus, the present study establishes a molecular basis to further
understand the mechanisms governing human light gene expression and,
consequently, could potentially lead to novel therapeutic manipulations that
control the signaling cascade, resulting in LIGHT production in conditions
characterized by immunopathologic activation of T cells.

PMID: 12215452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Cell Biochem. 2002;87(1):93-102.

Okadaic acid stimulates osteopontin expression through de novo induction of AP-1.

Kim HJ(1), Lee MH, Kim HJ, Shin HI, Choi JY, Ryoo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, 101 Dong, In-dong, Jung-gu, Daegu, 700-422, Korea.

Osteopontin, a major non-collagenous bone matrix protein, is strikingly
upregulated in various tissues under certain pathologic conditions, including
cancer. However, the mechanism of upregulation of the osteopontin gene in tumor
cells remains unclear. Okadaic acid, a strong non-phorbol ester tumor promoter,
is known to stimulate the expression of osteopontin. The aim of the present study
was to understand the mechanism by which okadaic acid regulates osteopontin gene 
expression. Okadaic acid stimulated osteopontin mRNA expression in several cell
lines within 3 h, and the increase in osteopontin mRNA was sustained for 24 h.
New protein synthesis was required for the okadaic acid-elicited increase in
osteopontin mRNA expression. A serial promoter deletion study showed that the
okadaic acid-response element is located between positions -265 and -73, a
sequence that includes the Runx2, Ets-1, and AP-1 binding sequences. Okadaic acid
increased the mRNA expression of AP-1 components but not of Runx2 or Ets-1.
Site-directed mutagenesis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays confirmed
that protein binding of the AP-1 consensus sequence is necessary for the okadaic 
acid-mediated osteopontin gene upregulation. These results indicate that de novo 
induction of the oncoprotein AP-1 is required for okadaic acid-stimulated
osteopontin gene upregulation.

PMID: 12210726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Aug;29(1):99-112.

An Ets motif in the proximal decidual prolactin promoter is essential for basal
gene expression.

Brar AK(1), Kessler CA, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Research Foundation and
Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. 
anoop.brar@chmcc.org

Transcriptional regulation of the prolactin gene in the decidua differs from that
in the pituitary. Several lines of evidence strongly suggest this difference is
due to regulation of the prolactin gene in the decidua and other extra-pituitary 
tissues by tissue-specific transcription factors, which activate distinct
promoters to induce prolactin gene expression in extra-pituitary sites compared
with the pituitary. The human decidua is a major site of extra-pituitary
expression of the prolactin gene. Here we present evidence that the transcription
factor Ets-1 is critical for basal expression of the decidua-type (or decidual)
prolactin promoter. Overexpression of Ets-1 significantly induces decidual
prolactin promoter activity in BeWo and JAR cells that express little or no
endogenous Ets-1. Conversely, a dominant/negative mutant of Ets represses basal
promoter activity. Although the proximal 1.5 kb of the decidual prolactin
promoter contains six Ets motifs, only the Ets motif at nt -77/-71 is essential
for basal gene expression. Mutation of the Ets motif at nt -77/-71 results in an 
approximately 90% decrease in promoter activity, while mutation of the other Ets 
motifs results in only small changes. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrate that Ets proteins in decidualized endometrial stromal cells bind this
Ets motif in the decidual prolactin promoter. Ets protein expression increases up
to 20-fold upon induction of decidualization in endometrial stromal cells under
conditions in which expression of the prolactin gene is also induced. These
studies provide strong evidence for a critical role of the Ets transcription
factor in basal expression of the decidual prolactin promoter.

PMID: 12200232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Anticancer Res. 2002 May-Jun;22(3):1581-4.

Expression of ets-1 and ets-2 in colonic neoplasms.

Ito Y(1), Takeda T, Okada M, Matsuura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Osaka Seamen's Insurance Hospital, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Investigation of transcription regulators in carcinoma can contribute
greatly to clarifying the biological character of the carcinoma. In this study,
we examined the expression of ets-1 and ets-2, prominent transcription regulators
belonging to the ets family, in various colonic tissues.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the expression of ets-1 and ets-2 in
normal colon, hyperplastic polyps, adenomas, carcinoma-in-adenoma and colonic
adenocarcinomas by means of immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Expression of ets-1 and ets-2 was not observed in normal colon and
hyperplastic polyp. The ets-1 labeling index significantly increased with the
successive events of colonic carcinogenesis. A similar tendency was observed for 
ets-2 expression in colonic neoplasms. In adenocarcinoma, ets-1 and ets-2
expression was directly linked to lymph node metastasis.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that ets-1 and ets-2 may act as transcription
regulators of the genes related to colonic carcinogenesis and the progression of 
colonic adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 12168840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Histol Histopathol. 2002;17(3):845-50.

Promotion of metastasis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma by Epstein-Barr virus latent 
membrane protein-1.

Yoshizaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Otolaryngology, Graduate School of Medicine Kanazawa University, Takaramachi, 
Japan.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a malignant tumor associated with Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV). Latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1) is an EBV-encoded oncoprotein and 
is detected in approximately 50-70% of patients with NPC. LMP-1 is thought to
play an essential role in tumorigenesis of NPC. In addition to its transforming
properties, LMP-1 has been suggested to be associated with promotion of
metastasis. Metastasis is a phenomenon composed of multiple sequential cascades. 
Reduction of tumor cell adhesion, degradation of extracellular matrix, basement
membrane, enhancement of cell motility, and promotion of neovascularization are
thought to be essential steps. LMP-1 down-regulates expression of E-cadherin,
induces matrix metalloproteinase-9 and urokinase type-plasminogen activator
through activation of NF-kappaB and AP-1, and enhances cell motility via ets-1
activation. LMP-1 also induces vascular endothelial growth factor through
cyclooxygenase-2 activation and interleukin-8 through NF-kappaB activation.
Clinical studies suggested the association of these factors with metastatic
status of patients with NPC. In this review, the role of LMP-1 in the metastasis 
of NPC is discussed.

PMID: 12168795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Aug;16(8):1752-66.

Glucocorticoid-mediated suppression of cytokine-induced matrix
metalloproteinase-9 expression in rat mesangial cells: involvement of nuclear
factor-kappaB and Ets transcription factors.

Eberhardt W(1), Schulze M, Engels C, Klasmeier E, Pfeilschifter J.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmazentrum Frankfurt, Klinikum der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität,
D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. w.eberhardt@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Glucocorticoids and their synthetic analogs exert potent antiinflammatory actions
that, in most cases, are due to an inhibition of the expression of inflammatory
genes. In this study, we elucidated the mechanisms of dexamethasone-mediated
suppression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) expression triggered by
IL-1beta in rat mesangial cells. Treatment of mesangial cells with dexamethasone 
markedly reduced the gelatinolytic content of conditioned media due to a decrease
in MMP-9 expression. Cloning of a 1.3-kb fragment of the rat MMP-9 gene promoter 
and subsequent site- directed mutagenesis revealed that a nuclear factor kappaB
(NF-kappaB) site at -561 to -550 and a region from -511 to -497 bearing a distal 
activator protein 1 site adjacent to an Ets-binding site are essentially involved
in the IL-1beta-mediated transactivation of MMP-9. Inhibition of MMP-9 expression
by dexamethasone resides in a promoter region downstream of -597. The
IL-1beta-caused increase in DNA binding of both NF-kappaB and Ets-1
immunopositive complexes was substantially suppressed by dexamethasone as shown
by EMSA. This was paralleled with a reduced abundance of p65 and Ets-1 proteins
in cell nuclei concomitantly with a reduced inhibitor of kappaB (IkappaB)
degradation. In addition to NF-kappaB, we suggest a pivotal role for the Ets
binding site, in concert with a distal activator protein-1 element, in the
transcriptional suppression of cytokine-induced MMP-9 expression by
glucocorticoids.

PMID: 12145332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. EMBO J. 2002 Aug 1;21(15):4081-93.

Ets1 is required for p53 transcriptional activity in UV-induced apoptosis in
embryonic stem cells.

Xu D(1), Wilson TJ, Chan D, De Luca E, Zhou J, Hertzog PJ, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, 246 Clayton, Clayton, Victoria
3168, Australia.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells contain a p53-dependent apoptosis mechanism to avoid
the continued proliferation and differentiation of damaged cells. We show that
mouse ES cells lacking Ets1 are deficient in their ability to undergo UV-induced 
apoptosis, similar to p53 null ES cells. In Ets1(-/-) ES cells, UV induction of
the p53 regulated genes mdm2, perp, cyclin G and bax was decreased both at mRNA
and protein levels. While p53 protein levels were unaltered in Ets1(-/-) cells,
its ability to transactivate genes such as mdm2 and cyclin G was reduced.
Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility shift assays and immunoprecipitations
demonstrated that the presence of Ets1 was necessary for a CBP/p53 complex to be 
formed. Chromatin immunoprecipitations demonstrated that Ets1 was required for
the formation of a stable p53-DNA complex under physiological conditions and
activation of histone acetyltransferase activity. These data demonstrate that
Ets1 is an essential component of a UV-responsive p53 transcriptional activation 
complex in ES cells and suggests that Ets1 may contribute to the specificity of
p53-dependent gene transactivation in distinct cellular compartments.

PMCID: PMC126157
PMID: 12145208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Anim Genet. 2002 Aug;33(4):321-2.

Two chicken genes APOA1 and ETS1 are physically assigned to the same
microchromosome.

Sazanov AA(1), Trukhina AV, Smirnov AF, Jaszczak K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Farm Animal Genetics and Breeding, Russian Academy of
Agricultural Science, St Petersburg-Pushkin, Russia.

PMID: 12139520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Aug;132(4):685-97.

Expression and evolution studies of ets genes in a primitive coelomate, the
polychaete annelid, Hediste (Nereis) diversicolor.

Bocquet-Muchembled B(1), Leroux R, Chotteau-Lelièvre A, Vergoten G, Fontaine F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire ELICO (Ecosystèmes Littoraux et Côtiers), groupe d'Ecologie
Moléculaire, CNRS UPRES-A 8013, Bât. SN3, U.S.T.L., 59655 d'Ascq Cedex,
Villeneuve, France.

The Ets family includes numerous proteins with a highly conserved DNA-binding
domain of 85 amino acids named the ETS domain. Phylogenetic analyses from ETS
domains revealed that this family could be divided into 13 groups, among them are
ETS and ERG. The ets genes are present in the Metazoan kingdom and we have
previously characterized the Nd ets and Nd erg genes in the polychaete annelid
Hediste diversicolor. Here, we isolated a fragment encoding the ETS domain from
Nd Ets, by genomic library screening. By Northern blot analysis, we showed that
this gene was transcribed as one major mRNA of 2.6 kb and one minor mRNA of 3.2
kb. By in situ hybridization, we observed that Nd ets was expressed in the
intestine and oocytes and that Nd erg was expressed in cellular clumps present in
the coelomic cavity, in an area of proliferating cells situated between the last 
metamere and the pygidium. Finally, we showed that Nd erg shared the expression
pattern of Nd ets in oocytes. Molecular modeling studies have revealed that the
spatial structure of ETS domain of Nd Ets and Nd Erg was conserved, in comparison
to the murine Ets-1 and human Fli-1 proteins, respectively.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Inc.

PMID: 12128055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002 Jul 17;94(14):1080-91.

Coexpression of glucose transporter 1 and matrix metalloproteinase-2 in human
cancers.

Ito S(1), Fukusato T, Nemoto T, Sekihara H, Seyama Y, Kubota S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cancer cells express higher levels of glucose transporter proteins
(Gluts) than do normal cells. Glut-1 overexpression is associated with
invasiveness. Because matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) is also overexpressed in
cancer cells and is associated with invasiveness, we tested the hypothesis that
Glut-1 may regulate MMP-2 expression.
METHODS: We transiently transfected Glut-1 complementary DNA (cDNA) or Glut-1
antisense oligonucleotides in the human rhabdomyosarcoma cell line RD and
analyzed MMP-2 mRNA expression and cell invasiveness. Empty vector and sense
oligonucleotides were used for controls. We analyzed MMP-2 promoter activity in
transfectants with a luciferase reporter assay and with p53 and Ets-1 gel
mobility shift assays. Eight human cancer cell lines and 80 human cancer
specimens were analyzed for coexpression of Glut-1 and MMP-2 by western blot and 
immunohistochemical analyses, respectively.
RESULTS: Overexpression of Glut-1 in RD cells increased MMP-2 expression 4.3-fold
(95% confidence interval [CI] = 3.7-fold to 4.9-fold) and invasiveness 3.2-fold
(95% CI = 2.6-fold to 3.8-fold) relative to control transfected cells.
Conversely, suppression of Glut-1 expression by antisense oligonucleotides
decreased MMP-2 expression by 71.5% (95% CI = 71.1% to 71.9%) and invasiveness by
53.0% (95% CI = 47.5% to 58.5%). Glut-1-mediated MMP-2 expression involved the
binding of the transcription factor p53 but not Ets-1. All eight human cancer
cell lines coexpressed Glut-1 and MMP-2 by western blotting, and 45 of 80 human
tumor tissues coexpressed Glut-1 and MMP-2 by immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSIONS: MMP-2 expression and cell invasiveness are tightly associated with
Glut-1 expression in human cancer cell lines. Because suppression of Glut-1
decreased MMP-2 expression and cancer cell invasion, Glut-1 could be a target for
therapy of various cancers that overexpress Glut-1.

PMID: 12122099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36471-8. Epub 2002 Jul 15.

Basal transcription of the mouse sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase type 3 
gene in endothelial cells is controlled by Ets-1 and Sp1.

Hadri L(1), Ozog A, Soncin F, Lompré AM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U446/Biochimie, IFR-75, Signalisation et Innovation Thérapeutique Tour 
D4, Faculté de Pharmacie, 92296 Chatenay-Malabry, France.

We reported previously that the sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase type 3
(SERCA3) gene is expressed in many tissues and in a subset of cells such as
endothelial, epithelial, and lymphoid lineages. Here we analyzed the mechanisms
involved in the regulation of transcription of the SERCA3 gene in endothelial
cells. The promoter of the murine SERCA3 gene was isolated, and a single
transcription initiation site located 301 bp upstream of the translation
initiation site was identified. Analysis of the transcriptional activity of
fragments of the SERCA3 promoter showed the existence of a minimal promoter
region located between bases -97 and +153 that contains one ETS-binding site
(EBS) and two Sp1 elements that are essential for basal transcription. Mutation
of the EBS or of the Sp1 sites abolished the basal activity of the promoter. We
identified Ets-1 and Sp1 among endothelial nuclear factors that recognize the EBS
and Sp1 sites on the promoter. Furthermore, transactivation of the -97/+301
promoter fragment by Ets-1 requires the presence of both the EBS and Sp1 sites,
suggesting an interaction of the transcription factors on the gene promoter.
Finally, overexpression of Ets-1 induced the expression of SERCA3 in endothelial 
cells and in fibroblasts.

PMID: 12119294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Int J Cancer. 2002 Aug 1;100(4):401-6.

Acceleration of invasive activity via matrix metalloproteinases by transfection
of the estrogen receptor-alpha gene in endometrial carcinoma cells.

Mizumoto H(1), Saito T, Ashihara K, Nishimura M, Tanaka R, Kudo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sapporo Medical University School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

It is well known that the functions of reproductive organs are regulated by sex
steroids and their receptors and it is hypothesized that the progression of
neoplasms that originate from the reproductive organs is influenced by them.
However, the correlation between sex steroids and tumor progression, especially
tumor invasion, is not well known in endometrial carcinoma. In our study, we
focused on the influence of estrogen and its receptor in invasion and matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are known to be important in tumor invasion, as 
well as on endometrial carcinoma cells. The growth of Ishikawa cells, to which an
estrogen receptor-alpha expressing vector was transfected, was accelerated by 17 
beta-estradiol as was the acceleration of the expression of cyclin D1. By
invasion assay, in conditions with 17 beta-estradiol, the invasiveness of
Ishikawa cells was enhanced. Furthermore, according to the accelerated
invasiveness, the expression of MMP-1, -7 and -9 and Ets-1 was enhanced. These
results suggest that activation of ER-alpha by estrogen results in tumor
progression by stimulating cell growth and invasiveness via acceleration of the
expression of MMPs.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12115520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Gene. 2002 May 29;291(1-2):169-76.

Regulation of transcription of the murine gamma-glutamyl hydrolase gene.
Delineation of core promoter A and the role of LYF-1, E2F and ETS-1 in
determining tumor-specific expression.

Masumoto N(1), Chen J, Sirotnak FM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Our earlier studies (Gene 268 (2001) 183) showed that transcription of the mouse 
gamma-glutamyl hydrolase (gamma GH) gene is under the control of two separate
promoters widely distributed within the genome. We now report on further studies 
examining the functional characteristics of the more efficient promoter (promoter
A) which is contiguous with an exon 1 (exon A1a) alternate within the main body
of the gene. Functional deletion analysis of promoter A in pGL3 transfected in
NIH3T3 cells defined a 189 bp region of sequence 26 bp upstream of exon A1a as
mediating core promoter transcriptional activity. Further functional deletion
analysis and site-directed mutagenesis attributed the activity of this core
region to the presence of five SP1 sites within the most upstream 130 bp of
sequence and the presence of three cis-active elements, Ets-1, Lyf-1 and E2F in
the remaining downstream 59 bp of sequence. Electrophoretic gel-mobility shift
assays showed that differences in the binding of trans-acting factors to these
three elements accounts for the tumor-specific expression of this gene. Finally, 
analysis by fluorescent in situ hybridization revealed that promoter A and the
main body of the mouse gamma GH gene are located between A3 and A5 on chromosome 
4. This is an interesting finding in light of our earlier results which located
promoter B and two associated alternates of exon 1 of this gene on chromosome 17.

PMID: 12095690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. APMIS. 2002 Apr;110(4):347-53.

Ets-1 and integrin beta3 for lung metastasis from colorectal cancer.

Sato T(1), Miwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Shinminato Municipal Hospital, Japan.
YIB03163@niftyserve.or.jp

Ets-1 functions as tissue-specific transcription factor and plays an important
role in cell proliferation, differentiation, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. To
elucidate the involvement of Ets-1 in lung metastasis from colorectal cancer,
immunohistochemical analysis was performed on 51 colorectal cancer patients (22
with lung metastasis and 29 with advanced colorectal cancer showing no recurrence
for at least 5 years after surgery). Tumorous and stromal Ets-1 immunoreactivity 
was evaluated. Ets-1 protein was demonstrated within stromal fibroblasts,
myofibroblasts and capillaries, and also within carcinoma cells. Stromal Ets-1
immunoreactivity in primary colorectal cancer was statistically correlated with
lung metastasis (p<0.05). In primary colorectal cancer, a significant association
was observed between stromal Ets-1 immunoreactivity and vascular integrin beta3
expression (p<0.01). In the cases with lung metastasis, vascular integrin beta3
index in lung metastases was significantly diminished compared with primary
tumors or liver metastases (p<0.01). In contrast, stromal or tumorous Ets-1
expression did not change. In a multivariate model using logistic stepwise
regression analysis, vascular integrin beta3 and stromal Ets-1 overexpression
were significantly and independently related to lung metastasis. Stromal Ets-1
and/or vascular integrin beta3 may be useful markers for risk of lung metastasis 
from colorectal cancer.

PMID: 12076271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2002 Jun;128(6):336-42. Epub 2002 Apr 24.

Coexpression of Ets-1 and p53 in oral carcinomas is associated with
P-glycoprotein expression and poor prognosis.

Soni S(1), Pande P, Shukla NK, Ralhan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi 110029, India.

PURPOSE: To determine the association between the expression of P-gp with Ets-1
and p53 proteins in oral squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemical analysis of Ets-1, P-glycoprotein
(P-gp), and p53 proteins was carried out in 40 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
tissue sections from oral SCCs using specific antibodies for these proteins.
RESULTS: Expression of Ets-1 protein was observed in 27/40 (68%) cases, P-gp was 
overexpressed in 27/40 (68%) cases, and p53 accumulation was observed in 26/40
(65%) cases. Twenty-two of 27 (82%) SCCs showed concomitant overexpression of
Ets-1 and P-gp underpinning an association between the expression of these two
proteins ( P=0.007). Twenty-one of 27 (78%) Ets-1 overexpressing oral SCCs showed
accumulation of p53 protein ( P=0.015). Nineteen of the 27 (70%) P-gp expressing 
tumours showed p53 accumulation. Concomitant Ets-1 and P-gp overexpression was
significantly associated with poor prognosis ( P=0.002). In multivariate analysis
using Cox's proportional hazards model, P-glycoprotein emerged as the most
significant adverse predictor of disease-free survival (HR=6.2, P=0.003). The
hallmark of the study was the significant association between the expression of
Ets-1, P-gp, and p53 proteins in oral SCCs and their association with poor
prognosis. Oral cancer patients showing concomitant expression of Ets-1, P-gp,
and p53 proteins had shorter disease-free survival (median time of no
recurrence=18 months) and worst prognosis ( P=0.001) as compared to the cases
overexpressing any of these proteins.
CONCLUSION: Concomitant expression of Ets-1, P-gp, and p53 proteins adversely
affects the clinical outcome in oral SCCs.

PMID: 12073053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2002 Apr;72(3):227-32.

Expression of Ets-related transcription factors and matrix metalloproteinase
genes in human breast cancer cells.

Barrett JM(1), Puglia MA, Singh G, Tozer RG.

Author information: 
(1)Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre, McMaster University, Department of Pathology 
and Molecular Medicine, Ontario, Canada.

The expression levels of ets and MMP genes was examined in two breast cancer cell
lines of differing invasive potential. The more invasive MDA-MB-231 cell line had
higher levels of Ets-1, Ets-2, PEA3, ERM, Tel, Net, MMP-13 and -14 mRNA than
MCF-7 cells. MMP-1, -3 and -16 mRNAs were expressed equally. TPA stimulated
MMP-1, -9 and TIMP-1 mRNA expression in both cell lines. MMP-2 and MMP-7 mRNAs
were not detected in either cell line. The Ets-1 protein was only detected in
MDA-MB-231 cells and its level increased following TPA stimulation. TPA induced
MMP-9 activity in MCF-7 cells and increased its activity in MDA-MB-231 cells,
however, MMP-2 activity was not detected.

PMID: 12058964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2002 May;20(1):154-67.

beta-Neuregulin and autocrine mediated survival of Schwann cells requires
activity of Ets family transcription factors.

Parkinson DB(1), Langner K, Namini SS, Jessen KR, Mirsky R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, United Kingdom.

Members of the Ets transcription factor family function in many biological
processes. We show the presence of Ets transcription factors, most prominently
Net, in neonatal rat Schwann cells, and demonstrate Ets-dependent transcription
under conditions where the cells are exposed to autocrine signals or autocrine
signals plus beta-neuregulin. Using the potent MAPK kinase inhibitor U0126 we
also confirm that the MAP kinase pathway, an activator of Ets transcription, is
involved in beta-neuregulin mediated Schwann cell survival. Furthermore, we find 
that expression of dominant negative Ets1 (N70-Ets1) inhibits both the
beta-neuregulin and autocrine survival of Schwann cells. In contrast, the
survival of Schwann cells mediated by lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is unaffected
by expression of a dominant negative Ets molecule. These data demonstrate that
distinct autocrine and beta-neuregulin survival signals converge in their
requirement for Ets dependent transcription in Schwann cell survival.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12056846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2002 Jun;13(6):1568-78.

Transcription factor Ets-1 regulates gelatinase a gene expression in mesangial
cells.

Reisdorff J(1), En-Nia A, Stefanidis I, Floege J, Lovett DH, Mertens PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Immunology, Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische
Hochschule Aachen, Germany.

Ets transcription factors are involved in cell growth and angiogenesis. Ets-1
targets include members of the matrix metalloproteinase superfamily. In
inflammatory glomerular diseases, the patterns and regulation of Ets expression
have not been fully characterized. In the present study, nuclear binding
activities to the consensus Ets-1/PEA3 motif were detected in mesangial cells
(MC), and the Ets-1 protein was positively identified by Western blotting,
reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR), and DNA-binding studies. The 5' flanking
regions of the human and rat gelatinase A genes contain clusters of potential
Ets-1 binding motifs, one of which is evolutionarily conserved. Using a series of
5' deletion reporter constructs of the rat gelatinase A gene and an Ets-1
expression plasmid, a concentration-dependent threefold trans-activation of gene 
expression mapped to the conserved Ets-1 binding motif at -1004/-1053 bps,
designated responsive element-2 (RE-2). The RE-2 was operative within the context
of the homologous gelatinase A promoter but not with a heterologous simian virus 
40 promoter. Specific Ets-1 binding to this sequence was demonstrated by
DNA-binding studies. Transient expression of an Ets-1 expression plasmid
increased gelatinase A protein expression. Our findings identify an additional
matrix metalloproteinase family member, gelatinase A, as an Ets-1 responsive gene
in MC that may play a role in the high level expression of this enzyme in
inflammatory glomerular diseases.

PMID: 12039986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 16;277(33):29386-98. Epub 2002 May 28.

ETS-1 transcription factor binds cooperatively to the palindromic head to head
ETS-binding sites of the stromelysin-1 promoter by counteracting autoinhibition.

Baillat D(1), Bègue A, Stéhelin D, Aumercier M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS Unité Mixte de Recherche 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut
Pasteur de Lille, B.P. 447, 1 Rue Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex, France.

Stromelysin-1 (matrix metalloproteinase-3) is a member of the matrix
metalloproteinase family. Regulation of its gene expression is critical for
tissue homeostasis. Patterns of increased co-expression of stromelysin-1 and
ETS-1 genes have been observed in pathological processes. Stromelysin-1 promoter 
is transactivated by ETS proteins through two palindromic head to head
ETS-binding sites, an unusual configuration among metalloproteinase promoters. By
using surface plasmon resonance, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and
photo-cross-linking, we showed that full-length human ETS-1 (p51) binds
cooperatively to the ETS-binding site palindrome of the human stromelysin-1
promoter, with facilitated binding of the second ETS-1 molecule to form an
ETS-1.DNA.ETS-1 ternary complex. The study of N-terminal deletion mutants allowed
us to conclude that cooperative binding implied autoinhibition counteraction,
requiring the 245-330-residue region of the protein that is encoded by exon VII
of the gene. This region was deleted in the natural p42 isoform of ETS-1, which
was unable to bind cooperatively to the palindrome. Transient transfection
experiments showed a good correlation between DNA binding and promoter
transactivation for p51. In contrast, p42 showed a poorer transactivation,
reinforcing the significance of cooperative binding for full transactivation. It 
is the first time that ETS-1 was shown to be able to counteract its own
autoinhibition.

PMID: 12034715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25143-51. Epub 2002 May 3.

Ets-1 regulates fli-1 expression in endothelial cells. Identification of ETS
binding sites in the fli-1 gene promoter.

Lelièvre E(1), Lionneton F, Mattot V, Spruyt N, Soncin F.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1 rue Calmette, 59021 Lille
Cedex, France.

To understand the role of the Ets-1 transcription factor during angiogenesis, we 
have overexpressed it in endothelial cells and analyzed the levels of expression 
of several candidate target genes involved in angiogenesis. The transcripts
levels of the ETS transcription factor fli-1 are specifically up-regulated in
endothelial cells, which overexpress Ets-1, but not in fibroblasts. Analysis of
the promoter of the mouse fli-1 gene reveals that the 1-kb region that comprises 
the transcription starts and part of exon 1 is responsible for the response of
the promoter to Ets-1. The -270/-41 fragment contains two known Spi-1-responding 
Ets binding sites (EBS), which are also necessary for the activation by Ets-1. In
contrast to Spi-1, a third EBS is necessary for the full response of this
promoter fragment to Ets-1. The rest of the promoter activity has been located in
the -986/-505 region, where three active EBSs have been identified. Furthermore, 
endogenous Fli-1 was found to be bound to its own gene promoter and to be able to
promote the transactivation of its gene. These results suggest that Ets-1
activates an auto-regulatory loop of expression of fli-1 in endothelial cells, a 
mechanism that could have significant implications for the endothelial cell fate.

PMID: 11991951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 May;16(5):1069-78.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 is a target for the zinc-finger transcription
factor Ikaros in the pituitary.

Yu S(1), Asa SL, Ezzat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital and University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 2M9.

Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) have been implicated in a multitude of
endocrine cell hormonal and proliferative properties, and FGFR4 is differentially
expressed in normal and neoplastic pituitary. We therefore examined the
functionally important cis-DNA elements and multiprotein complexes implicated in 
the cooperative control of expression of the human FGFR4 gene in pituitary cells.
Using deletional mapping, we defined a 214-bp (-115/+99) promoter that was
functional in pituitary GH4 and PRL 235 cells. Overlapping 40- to 50-bp fragments
of this minimal promoter were examined by EMSA. Interestingly, fragment C
(-64/-26) included potential binding sites for the hematopoietic zinc
finger-containing transcription factor Ikaros (Ik) flanked by binding sites for
Sp and Ets-type factors. DNA binding by Ik, Sp, and Ets-like factors was
confirmed by oligonucleotide competition and supershifting with specific
antibodies. Transcriptional regulation of FGFR4 by Ik was demonstrated by
cotransfection of Ik1 with or without Sp1 or Ets overexpression and by disruption
of the Ik binding site. Although both Ets-1 and Sp1 overexpression stimulated
promoter activity, mutation of the Ik-binding site completely eliminated the Ik1 
effect. Specific Ik expression was identified by Western blotting of pituitary
GH4 and PRL235 cells and localized in primary mouse hormone-producing anterior
pituitary cells by immunocytochemistry. Our findings point to a new role for Ik
outside the hematopoietic system and suggest a novel transcriptional contribution
with Ets and Sp1 in regulation of FGFR4 in the pituitary.

PMID: 11981041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Mol Med (Berl). 2002 Apr;80(4):258-66. Epub 2002 Jan 24.

The Ets 1 transcription factor is upregulated during inflammatory angiogenesis in
rheumatoid arthritis.

Wernert N(1), Justen HP, Rothe M, Behrens P, Dreschers S, Neuhaus T, Florin A,
Sachinidis A, Vetter H, Ko Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, P.O. Box 2120, 53011 Bonn,
Germany. wernert@meb.uni-bonn.de

Neovascularization of the inflamed synovium and pannus is one of the hallmarks of
chronic rheumatoid arthritis. It contributes to disease progression by supplying 
blood to the inflamed tissues and by recruiting immune competent and inflammatory
cells. Angiogenesis is tightly regulated at several levels, but of significant
importance is transcription. The Ets 1 transcription factor has been intimately
linked to the regulation of angiogenesis under both physiological and
pathological conditions and is induced in endothelial cells by vascular
endothelial growth factor, the most important angiogenic factor in rheumatoid
arthritis. We investigated Ets 1 expression in synovial membranes of joints in
patients with active rheumatoid arthritis and compared the results to those
obtained in patients with degenerative joint disease, which is characterized by
significantly less neoangiogenesis. Using quantitative densitometric and
real-time RT-PCR approaches, we found a significant upregulation of Ets 1
transcripts in rheumatic, compared to osteoarthritic, synovial membranes.
Moreover, we were able to attribute both Ets 1 mRNA and Ets 1 protein to
capillary endothelial cells of newly formed blood vessels by in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Finally, our data suggest important roles
of the Ets 1 transcription factor in the regulation of inflammatory angiogenesis 
in rheumatoid arthritis.

PMID: 11976735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 25;21(18):2890-5.

Differential regulation of the response to DNA damage in Ewing's sarcoma cells by
ETS1 and EWS/FLI-1.

Soldatenkov VA(1), Trofimova IN, Rouzaut A, McDermott F, Dritschilo A, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Vincent T. Lombardi Cancer Center,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington DC 20007, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) cells contain levels of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) 
significantly higher than other eukaryotic cells. Previously, we cloned the PARP 
gene promoter region from EWS cells, showed that it contained multiple
ETS-binding sites and demonstrated a positive regulation of PARP by ETS1. We now 
report that, contrary to ETS1, EWS/FLI-1, an aberrant ETS transcription factor
present in most EWS cells, is a negative effector of PARP transcription. Because 
PARP levels have been associated with cellular resistance or sensitivity to
genotoxic agents, we studied the effect of modifying PARP levels in EWS cells on 
their response to DNA damage by modulating the expression of ETS1 or EWS/FLI-1
using antisense methodology. Results show that stable down-regulation of ETS1
increases the resistance of EWS cells to various genotoxic agents, whereas
down-regulation of EWS/FLI-1 has pro-apoptotic effects. Because down-regulation
EWS/FLI-1 does not dramatically change PARP levels, these results suggest a
direct effect for EWS/FLI-1 in the DNA damage response of EWS cells. Since
expression of the aberrant fusion proteins by EWS cells is essential for
maintaining their neoplastic phenotype, our results suggest that the use of
antisense oligonucleotides in combination with chemotherapeutic agents or
radiation may be doubly effective by causing both an increase in sensitivity to
therapeutic agents and a simultaneous down-regulation, or reversion, of the
neoplastic phenotype of EWS cells.

PMID: 11973649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36244-52. Epub 2002 Apr 22.

Ets-1 positively regulates Fas ligand transcription via cooperative interactions 
with Sp1.

Kavurma MM(1), Bobryshev Y, Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research and Surgical Professional Unit,
St. Vincents Hospital, The University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 9;285(28):21902.

The FasL/Fas system has been implicated in smooth muscle cell apoptosis and
atherosclerotic plaque instability, a process that can lead to plaque rupture,
precipitating myocardial infarction and sudden death. The transcriptional
mechanisms regulating FasL gene expression in vascular smooth muscle cells are
poorly understood. We recently described a novel mechanism mediating inducible
FasL gene expression in smooth muscle cells involving the zinc finger
transcription factor Sp1 (Kavurma, M. M., Santiago, F. S., Bofocco, E., and
Khachigian, L. M. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 4964-4971). We now show that FasL
gene expression is governed by cooperative activation between Sp1 and the Ets
family of transcription factors. The overexpression of Ets-1 was sufficient to
induce FasL promoter-dependent expression and protein synthesis. Ets-1 activation
of the promoter was abrogated either by deletion or mutation of the Sp1 binding
site. The overexpression of Ets-1 together with Sp1 produced cooperative
activation of the FasL promoter. Sp1 induction of the FasL promoter was abrogated
by an Ets-1 mutant lacking the activation domain. Conversely, Ets-1 activation of
the promoter was blocked by an Sp1 mutant bearing the DNA-binding domain. The
mutation of the (-365)GGAA(-362) element in the FasL promoter abolished Ets-1
activation and attenuated Sp1-inducible gene expression. Immunoprecipitation and 
supershift experiments revealed that endogenous Ets-1 and Sp1 physically interact
and co-occupy this site. Thus, FasL gene expression in vascular smooth muscle
cells is mediated by cooperativity between Ets-1 and Sp1.

PMID: 11970950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 4;21(15):2309-19.

Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor activates the ETS1 transcription factor
by a RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway.

Paumelle R(1), Tulasne D, Kherrouche Z, Plaza S, Leroy C, Reveneau S,
Vandenbunder B, Fafeur V.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS FRE 2353, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
B.P.447, 59021 Lille, France.

Erratum in
    Oncogene 2002 Jul 18;21(31):4872. Tulashe, David [corrected to Tulasne, David];
Reveneau, Syline [corrected to Reveneau, Sylvie].

Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) induces scattering and
morphogenesis of epithelial cells through the activation of the MET tyrosine
kinase receptor. Although the activated MET receptor recruits a number of
signaling proteins, little is known of the downstream signaling pathways
activated by HGF/SF. In this study, we wished to examine the signaling pathway
leading to activation of the ETS1 transcription factor. Using in vitro and in
vivo kinase assays, we found that HGF/SF activates the ERK1 MAP kinase, leading
to the phosphorylation of the threonine 38 residue of ETS1 within a putative MAP 
kinase phosphorylation site (PLLT38P). This threonine residue was neither
phosphorylated by JNK1, nor by p38 MAP kinases and was required for the induction
of transcriptional activity of ETS1 by HGF/SF. Using kinase and transcription
assays, we further demonstrated that phosphorylation and activation of ETS1
occurs downstream of a RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway. The functional involvement of
this pathway in HGF/SF action was demonstrated using U0126, a pharmacological
inhibitor of MEK, which blocked phosphorylation and activation of ETS1,
RAS-dependent transcriptional responses, cell scattering and morphogenesis. These
data demonstrated that ETS1 is a downstream target of HGF/SF acting through a
RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway and provides a signaling pathway leading to the
regulation of gene expression by HGF/SF.

PMID: 11948414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 May;34(1):42-7.

Double minute chromosomes in acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome:
identification of new amplification regions by fluorescence in situ hybridization
and spectral karyotyping.

Sait SN(1), Qadir MU, Conroy JM, Matsui S, Nowak NJ, Baer MR.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cytogenetics Laboratory, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New 
York 14263, USA.

Double minute chromosomes (dmin) are small chromatin bodies consisting of genes
amplified in an extrachromosomal location. dmins are uncommon in hematologic
malignancies; they are seen primarily in acute myeloid leukemia, with
amplification of the MYC oncogene or, less frequently, the MLL transcription
factor. Nine patients with hematologic malignancies with dmin were seen at the
Roswell Park Cancer Institute between 1985 and 2000; eight had acute myeloid
leukemia and one a myelodysplastic syndrome. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) demonstrated MYC amplification on dmin in four patients, but MLL
amplification was not seen. Spectral karyotyping showed that the dmin derived
from chromosome 11 in one patient and from chromosome 19 in two others without
MYC or MLL amplification; derivation from these chromosomes was confirmed by FISH
with chromosome paint probes. The dmin of chromosome 11 origin hybridized to a
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) RP11-112M22 that maps to 11q24.3 and is
predicted to contain ETS1 and other markers, including D11S11351 and D11S4091.
The dmin of chromosome 19 origin in one patient hybridized to BACs RP11-46I12 and
RP11-110J19; in the other patient, these clones did not hybridize with the dmin, 
but were found to be amplified on a marker chromosome that was derived from
chromosome 19 in that patient's cells. These BACs have been mapped to
19q12-19q13.1 and 19q11-19q13.1, respectively, and are predicted to contain the
markers D19S409 and D19S919 and the gene for ubiquinol-cytochrome C reductase,
Rieske iron-sulfur polypeptide1 (UQCRFS1). dmin originating from chromosome 19
have not been reported previously in hematologic malignancies.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11921281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 7;277(23):20399-408. Epub 2002 Mar 27.

Ets1 is an effector of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta ) signaling 
pathway and an antagonist of the profibrotic effects of TGF-beta.

Czuwara-Ladykowska J(1), Sementchenko VI, Watson DK, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology and Immunology and the
Hollings Cancer Center, Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Extracellular matrix (ECM) production and turnover are tightly controlled under
normal physiological conditions. Ets factors regulate matrix turnover by
activating transcription of several metalloproteinases (MMPs) and are frequently 
overexpressed in aggressive tumors and arthritis. Because of the prominent role
of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) in ECM synthesis, this study was
undertaken to determine the possible interactions between Ets1 and the TGF-beta
pathway. Experiments using adenoviral delivery of Ets1 in human fibroblasts have 
established that Ets1 strongly suppresses TGF-beta induction of collagen type I
and other matrix-related genes and reverses TGF-beta-dependent inhibition of
MMP-1. Subsequent experiments utilizing COL1A2 promoter demonstrated that Ets1 in
the presence of TGF-beta signaling interferes with the stimulatory role of p300. 
To gain further insight into the mechanism of Ets1 inhibition of the TGF-beta
signaling, the protein levels and post-translational modifications of Ets1 after 
TGF-beta treatment were analyzed. The level of total Ets1 protein was not
affected after 24 h of TGF-beta stimulation. Moreover, TGF-beta did not affect
either serine or threonine phosphorylation levels of Ets1. However, TGF-beta
induced rapid and prolonged lysine acetylation of Ets1. In addition, analyses of 
endogenous p300.Ets1 complexes revealed that acetylated Ets1 is preferentially
associated with the p300/CBP complexes. TGF-beta treatment leads to dissociation 
of Ets1 from the CBP/p300 complexes. Together, these findings suggest that
elevated expression of Ets1 in fibroblasts fundamentally alters their responses
to TGF-beta in favor of matrix degradation and away from matrix deposition as
exemplified by arthritis and cancer.

PMID: 11919190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;22(8):2687-702.

Sp100 interacts with ETS-1 and stimulates its transcriptional activity.

Wasylyk C(1), Schlumberger SE, Criqui-Filipe P, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

The cell nucleus is highly organized into distinct domains that spatially
separate physiological processes. One of these domains, the Sp100-promyelocytic
leukemia protein nuclear body (NB), is implicated in pathological processes, such
as cancer and viral infection, yet its functions remain poorly understood. We
show here that Sp100 interacts physically and functionally with ETS-1 and that NB
morphology is affected by ETS-1. ETS-1 is a member of the ets family of
transcription factors, which are key mediators of physiological and pathological 
processes. We have found that Sp100 interacts with two regions of ETS-1 (domains 
A+B and D+E+F). ETS-1 alters NBs while remaining localized throughout the
nucleus, apparently by recruitment of the core component Sp100 away from the NBs.
Sp100 strongly increases ETS-1 activation of natural and ets-focused promoters,
through a mechanism involving the activation (C) domain of ETS-1 in addition to
the interaction domains. Sp100 acts as a novel coactivator that potentiates the
activator function of ETS-1. Our results provide an important new connection
between nuclear structures and an important regulator of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC133711
PMID: 11909962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 29;292(2):427-33.

Dominant-negative HMGA1 blocks mu enhancer activation through a novel mechanism.

Andreucci A(1), Reeves R, McCarthy KM, Nikolajczyk BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Immunobiology Unit, Evans Memorial Department of
Clinical Research, EBRC-438, Boston Medical Center, 650 Albany Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The immunoglobulin mu intronic enhancer is a potent B cell-specific
transcriptional activator. The enhancer is activated by the appropriate
combination of transcription factors, amongst which are ets and bHLH proteins.
HMGA1 (formerly HMG-I(Y)) is a demonstrated co-activator of the mu enhancer.
HMGA1 functions through direct interaction with PU.1, one of the ets proteins
critical for enhancer activation. New data demonstrates dominant negative HMGA1
dramatically decreases enhancer activity in B cells. EMSA analysis demonstrated
that DN HMGA1 disrupts established PU.1/mu enhancer binding. Similarly, DN HMGA1 
blocks mu enhancer binding by Ets-1. In sharp contrast, DN HMGA1 had no effect on
binding activity of the ETS DNA binding domains of either PU.1 or Ets-1, or the
bHLH-zip protein TFE3, suggesting specificity. Taken together, the data suggest
that DN HMGA1 utilizes a novel mechanism to specifically block interaction
between ets proteins and mu enhancer DNA, suggesting DN HMGA1 represents a new,
highly specific means of regulating mu enhancer activity.

(c)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11906180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. In Vivo. 2001 Nov-Dec;15(6):489-94.

In vivo modulation of ETS genes induced by electromagnetic fields.

Mucci N(1), Ianni A, Ursini CL, Arzani D, Bhat NK, Navarra P, Romano-Spica V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Medicine, I.S.P.E.S.L., Rome, Italy.

We have previously shown that electromagnetic field (EMF) exposure induces ETS1
oncogene overexpression in different cell lines. In order to investigate in vivo 
EMF effects, BALB/c mice were exposed at different times to 50 MHz radiation,
modulated (80%) at 16 Hz. The exposed and control animals were sacrificed and the
spleen excised for rt-pcr and western blot analysis. We observed an increase in
ETS1 mRNA and protein expression, but a decrease in ETS2 protein levels.
Preliminary results from this experimental model show in vivo evidence of the
effect of EMF on ETS oncogene expression.

PMID: 11887334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Int J Cancer. 2002 Mar 1;98(1):8-13.

Concurrent overexpression of Ets-1 and c-Met correlates with a phenotype of high 
cellular motility in human esophageal cancer.

Saeki H(1), Oda S, Kawaguchi H, Ohno S, Kuwano H, Maehara Y, Sugimachi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. hsaeki@surg2.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) stimulates cell motility as well as mitotic
activity of cells. High concentrations of HGF or overexpression of its cellular
receptor c-Met in cancer have been reported. We analyzed the expression status of
c-Met immunohistochemically in 76 cases of human esophageal cancer.
Overexpression of c-Met was noted at a considerably high frequency. Intriguingly,
c-Met overexpression was frequent in a specific type of cell nest formation in
tumors, i.e., the small nest type, in which tumors form small, dispersed cell
nests. Further immunohistochemical analyses using serial sections revealed a
striking coincidence between overexpression of c-Met and its transcriptional
factor, Ets-1. Overexpression of c-Met and Ets-1 was statistically more frequent 
in small nest type tumors. The close correlation in expression status between
Ets-1 and c-Met was also confirmed using 6 established human esophageal cancer
cell lines. In addition, cells that expressed high levels of Ets-1 and c-Met
exhibited an extremely motile phenotype by HGF stimulation in vitro. The presence
of HGF in tissue sections was confirmed using similar immunohistochemical
approaches. These observations suggest that in human esophageal cancer cells the 
transcriptional factor Ets-1 upregulates the expression of c-Met and,
consequently, confers on cells a highly motile phenotype leading to a specific
form of tumor development.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11857377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Structure. 2002 Jan;10(1):11-4.

Ets-1 flips for new partner Pax-5.

Pufall MA(1), Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Protein partnerships provide specificity for transcription factors that display
conserved DNA binding properties. The newest Ets-1 partner Pax-5 directs a
surprising conformational change that maximizes the protein interface and changes
binding site preference.

PMID: 11796106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Mar;9(3):287-92.

c-Ets1 is a promising marker in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Takai N(1), Miyazaki T, Nishida M, Nasu K, Miyakawa I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oita Medical University, Oita
879-5593, Japan. takai@oita-med.ac.jp

c-Ets1 controls the expression of some genes involved in extracellular matrix
remodeling. To elucidate the involvement of c-Ets1 in epithelial ovarian
carcinogenesis, we investigated the role of the proto-oncogene c-ets1 in the
regulation of physiological processes such as cell proliferation,
differentiation, and tumor invasion. Using fluorescent immunohistochemistry, we
analyzed serial frozen sections for c-Ets1 protein expression in 26 patients with
ovarian epithelial carcinoma, 10 patients with benign cystadenoma of the ovary,
and 10 premenopausal patients with normal ovaries. We analyzed the relationship
between the percentage of c-Ets1 stained cells in a patient and characteristics
of the patient including histological classification, clinical stage,
histological grade, and clinical outcome. c-Ets1 was not detected in any cases of
benign ovarian cystadenoma. Most of the c-Ets1 proteins were found in the
cytoplasm and some in the nucleus of epithelial ovarian cancer tissues. Moreover,
c-Ets1 was strongly expressed in the head portion of papillary cancer tissues
that had invaded the stroma. c-Ets1 expression was significantly associated with 
clinical stage (p<0.01), histological grade (p<0.01), and clinical outcome
(p<0.01). Survival data were available for all patients and univariate Cox
regression analysis showed that c-Ets1 expression was significantly associated
with a poor prognosis (p<0.05). Our results demonstrate that c-Ets1 expression in
epithelial ovarian cancer correlates to the malignant potential of the tumor.

PMID: 11836635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Hepatol. 2002 Feb;36(2):169-78.

Hepatocyte growth factor induces collagenase (matrix metalloproteinase-1) via the
transcription factor Ets-1 in human hepatic stellate cell line.

Ozaki I(1), Zhao G, Mizuta T, Ogawa Y, Hara T, Kajihara S, Hisatomi A, Sakai T,
Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Health Administration Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Saga Medical
School, 5-1-1 Nabeshima, Saga 849-8501, Japan. ozaki@post.saga-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Although hepatocyte growth factor recently has been shown to
decrease hepatic fibrosis in animal models, the molecular mechanisms of this
effects remain to be elucidated. We investigated regulation of collagenase
expression by hepatocyte growth factor in hepatic stellate cells.
METHODS: A human hepatic stellate cell line, LI90, was treated with hepatocyte
growth factor. Expression of collagenase, 72 kDa gelatinase, procollagen alpha
1(I), tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1, transforming growth
factor-beta 1, or Ets-1, and carboxyterminal telopeptide of type I collagen was
examined. Ets-1 binding activity was determined by gel mobility shift assay,
collagenase promoter activity was evaluated by reporter gene assay. LI90 cells
were also transfected with Ets-1 antisense oligonucleotides with or without
hepatocyte growth factor.
RESULTS: Hepatocyte growth factor increased expression of collagenase mRNA and
protein, and an increase in Ets-1 mRNA preceded the increase in collagenase mRNA.
Collagenase activity and protein, and a degradation product of type I collagen
were increased in the medium. Nuclear extracts from treated LI90 cells also
showed increased Ets-1 binding activity. Hepatocyte growth factor and
cotransfection of Ets-1 enhanced promoter activity of collagenase gene.
Furthermore, treatment of LI90 cells with Ets-1 antisense oligonucleotides
downregulated basal and hepatocyte growth factor-induced Ets-1 and collagenase
mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the results suggest that hepatocyte growth factor
increases collagenase expression in hepatic stellate cells via the Ets-1
transcription factor-dependent manner.

PMID: 11830328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell Biochem. 2001 Nov;227(1-2):45-57.

Transcriptional coordination of the genes encoding catalytic (CK2alpha) and
regulatory (CK2beta) subunits of human protein kinase CK2.

Pyerin W(1), Ackermann K.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemische Zellphysiologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg,
Germany. w.pyerin@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Little is known of how protein kinase CK2 genes are regulated, and it is unclear 
whether there are mechanisms of transcriptional coordination. Response elements
present in the promoter sequences of the human catalytic (CK2alpha) and
regulatory (CK2beta) subunit genes have been examined for the significance in
transcriptional control using reporter gene assays, electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, site-directed mutagenesis, ectopic protein expressions, and
transcript assessments. Most strikingly, in both promoters the regions of highest
transcriptional activity contain two adjoining, completely identical and
conserved Ets1 response elements, and both the mutation of motifs and the
overexpression of Ets1 affect significantly transcriptional activity. Also in
common are Sp1 response elements that cooperate with Ets1, and Sp1 is
phosphorylatable by CK2 holoenzyme but not by individual CK2alpha, the
phosphorylation negatively affecting DNA binding. CK2alpha and CK2beta transcript
levels and stoichiometries of mRNA species turned out quite constant in cultured 
cells despite progressing through various stages of proliferation and
differentiation. The data seem to indicate transcriptional coordination of the
human genes encoding CK2alpha and CK2beta based on an Ets1 double motif common to
both genes cooperating with Sp1 motifs and amenable to negative feedback control 
by the gene products which, following complexation into CK2 holoenzyme, could
phosphorylate Sp1 (and Ets1?) and thus downregulate transcription and contribute 
to the observed constant cellular CK2alpha and CK2beta transcripts situation.

PMID: 11827174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mol Cell Biochem. 2001 Nov;227(1-2):175-83.

The genomic structure of two protein kinase CK2alpha genes of Xenopus laevis and 
features of the putative promoter region.

Wilhelm V(1), Neckelman G, Allende JE, Allende CC.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Biología Celular y Molecular, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas,
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Santiago.

Protein kinase CK2 is an enzyme that is ubiquitous in eukaryotes. This enzyme,
composed of catalytic (alpha and alpha') and regulatory (beta) subunits, is
responsible for the phosphorylation of a large number of proteins and is
implicated in cell division. Genomic clones coding for the CK2alpha subunit of
Xenopus laevis have been isolated. Initial restriction enzyme profiles and
subsequent PCR analysis and DNA sequencing indicated that these genomic clones
correspond to two different genes. The two genes are highly homologous in the
regions of the coding sequence (only 3 amino acid differences) but differ
considerable in their intron sequences and lengths. Gene 1 corresponds to the
cDNA of XlCK2alpha which had been previously isolated and described. The genomic 
clone for this gene was truncated. Gene 2 contains the entire coding region for
CK2alpha subunit as well as a fragment of 6.4 kb of the 5' upstream region. The
exon/intron boundaries of both genes obey the GT/AG rule with the exception of
intron V where the less common GC/AG is seen. Comparison of the size of ten
coding exons and sites where these are interrupted by introns shows strong
conservation with respect to the human CK2alpha gene. RT-PCR analysis of mRNAs
from X. laevis ovary, oocytes and early embryos using a specific primer for gene 
2 demonstrated that this gene is expressed in these tissues and cells. Analysis
of transcription start sites using 5'RACE and RNA from stage VI oocytes
demonstrated that there are multiple start sites in the XlCK2alpha mRNA. It was
also seen that a noncoding exon 1 is present 4 kb upstream of the translation
start site and that alternate splicing occurs in gene 2 to give exon 1 of
different lengths. Sequencing of the entire upstream genomic region of gene 2
revealed that there are regions of homology to the sequence of exon 1 of the
human CK2alpha gene. Other sequences with consensus to transcription factor
binding sites that are seen in the promoter region of human CK2alpha are also
found in the X. laevis CK2alpha gene 2. These sites include Ets1, E2F, CCAAT and 
GC rich regions. No canonical TATA motif is observed.

PMID: 11827169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001 Dec;947:117-23.

Role of transcription factors in angiogenesis: Ets-1 promotes angiogenesis as
well as endothelial apoptosis.

Sato Y(1), Teruyama K, Nakano T, Oda N, Abe M, Tanaka K, Iwasaka-Yagi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. y-sato@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

Angiogenesis is a complex phenomenon that requires at least migration,
proliferation, and tubular morphogenesis of endothelial cells (ECs). Some genes
are expressed in ECs during these processes, and therefore the regulation of gene
expression in ECs is critical. Increasing evidence suggests that the Ets family
of transcription factors plays an important role in angiogenesis. We observed
that Ets-1, a prototype of the Ets family of transcription factors, promoted
angiogenesis by inducing the expression of matrix metalloproteinases and integrin
beta3 in ECs, and the elimination of the transactivation activity of Ets-1 by a
dominant negative molecule inhibited angiogenesis. Apoptosis, a term used to
describe the terminal morphological and biochemical events seen in programmed
cell death, is critical for the development or reconstitution of multicellular
organs. Apoptosis of ECs is observed at the initiation of angiogenesis, at the
branching or communication with newly formed vessels, and at the regression of
neo-vessels. The Ets family of transcription factors is generally thought to be
anti-apoptotic. However, there are conflicting reports on the role of Ets-1 in
apoptosis. We examined the role of Ets-1 in apoptosis of ECs and found that Ets-1
was pro-apoptotic to ECs by modulating the expression of several
apoptosis-related genes.

PMID: 11795259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Hypertension. 2002 Jan;39(1):46-50.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha/vascular endothelial growth factor pathway for
adventitial vasa vasorum formation in hypertensive rat aorta.

Kuwahara F(1), Kai H, Tokuda K, Shibata R, Kusaba K, Tahara N, Niiyama H, Nagata 
T, Imaizumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Internal Medicine III, Kurume University
School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.

The roles of adventitial vasa vasorum have been highlighted in vascular wall
homeostasis. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent angiogenic
factor in physiological and pathophysiological conditions. However, little is
known regarding the changes in adventitial vasa vasorum and the mechanism of the 
formation in hypertensive arteries. Accordingly, endothelial cell proliferation, 
adventitial vasa vasorum count, and expression of VEGF signaling axis proteins
were examined in the ascending aorta of hypertensive Wistar rats that underwent
suprarenal aortic constriction. Hypertension not only induced medial and
adventitial thickening but also significantly increased adventitial vasa vasorum 
count by day 28. Preceding the medial thickening, BrdU(+)-proliferative
endothelial cells were observed in the adventitia but not in the media and intima
after day 3; they peaked at day 7 and remained modestly increased at day 28. The 
BrdU(+) endothelial cells showed induction of Ets-1, a transcription factor
mediating angiogenic response of VEGF. Furthermore, concomitant expression of
VEGF and a hypoxia-inducible transcription factor (HIF-1alpha) was observed in
the outer layers of medial smooth muscle cells at day 3 and extended to the
middle layers of medial smooth muscle cells at day 7, returning to lower levels
by day 28. In conclusion, adventitial vasa vasorum formation was induced by
hypertension through the HIF-1alpha/VEGF/Ets-1 pathway during hypertensive
remodeling.

PMID: 11799077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Jan;269(1):317-25.

Induction of chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor I (COUP-TFI
) gene expression is mediated by ETS factor binding sites.

Salas R(1), Petit FG, Pipaon C, Tsai MJ, Tsai SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor I (COUP-TFI, or NR2F1)
is an orphan nuclear receptor that plays a major role in the development of the
nervous system. We show here that three ETS response elements in the COUP-TFI
promoter mediate its transcription. A reporter gene containing these ETS binding 
sites is activated by Ets-1, while the same reporter with point mutations on all 
three ETS response elements is not. We also show that Ets-1 binds to these
response elements and that other ETS factors also transactivate the COUP-TFI
promoter. In addition, COUP-TFI is coexpressed with some ETS factors in the mouse
embryo. These results indicate that members of the ETS family can activate
COUP-TFI gene expression.

PMID: 11784326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Genes Dev. 2002 Jan 1;16(1):127-37.

An ERK2 docking site in the Pointed domain distinguishes a subset of ETS
transcription factors.

Seidel JJ(1), Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department of Oncological Sciences, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-5550, USA.

The ETS transcription factors perform distinct biological functions despite
conserving a highly similar DNA-binding domain. One distinguishing property of a 
subset of ETS proteins is a conserved region of 80 amino acids termed the Pointed
(PNT) domain. Using enzyme kinetics we determined that the Ets-1 PNT domain
contains an ERK2 docking site. The docking site enhances the efficiency of
phosphorylation of a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) site N-terminal to
the PNT domain. The site enhances ERK2 binding rather than catalysis. Three
hydrophobic residues are involved in docking, and the previously determined NMR
structure indicates that these residues are clustered on the surface of the Ets-1
PNT domain. The docking site function is conserved in the PNT domain of the
highly related Ets-2 but not in the ets family member GABPalpha. Ablation of the 
docking site in Ets-1 and Ets-2 prevented Ras pathway-mediated enhancement of the
transactivation function of these proteins. This study provides structural
insight into the function of a MAPK docking site and describes a unique activity 
for the PNT domain among a subset of ets family members.

PMCID: PMC155314
PMID: 11782450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8273-8. Epub 2001 Dec 28.

Identification and functional analysis of the rat caspase-3 gene promoter.

Liu W(1), Wang G, Yakovlev AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
D. C. 20007, USA.

Caspase-3 is the major effector in apoptosis triggered by various stimuli.
Previous studies demonstrated a significant increase in transcriptional activity 
of the caspase-3 gene during neuronal apoptosis. Recent findings suggest that
differential expression of the caspase-3 gene may underlie the regulation of
apoptotic susceptibility during brain development and after acute injury to the
mature brain. We identified and cloned the rat caspase-3 gene promoter,
determined its structure, and examined its regulation during a course of
apoptosis in PC12 cells. Results demonstrate that this promoter lacks a TATA-box 
and contains a cluster of Sp1 elements and multiple transcription start sites.
The first identified transcription start site is located 87-bp upstream from the 
first splicing site. A role of Sp1 elements in the regulation of caspase-3
promoter activity is demonstrated by the inhibition of Sp1 binding using
mithramycin A. Results of deletion analysis show that an Ets-1-like element
located between nucleotides -1646 and -1632 relative to the most extended
transcription start site is necessary to achieve sustained transcriptional
activity. Homology analysis revealed that the 5'-flanking region of the human
caspase-3 gene exhibits significant similarity to a regulatory region of the rat 
gene.

PMID: 11773055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Cell Biochem. 2001 Oct;226(1-2):57-65.

Ets-1 is involved in transcriptional regulation of the chick inducible nitric
oxide synthase gene in embryonic ventricular myocytes.

Takahashi T(1), Sugishita Y, Kinugawa K, Shimizu T, Yao A, Harada K, Matsui H,
Nagai R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Japan. takahashit-2im@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp

In order to elucidate roles of Ets family of transcription factors in
transcriptional activation of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) genes, we
analyzed the chick iNOS gene expression in cultured chick embryonic ventricular
myocytes (CEVM). Deletional analysis and site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated
that both the Ets/PEA3 site (-221 to -216 bp) and the kappaB site (-101 to -93
bp) of the 5'-flanking region of the chick iNOS gene were involved in the maximal
activation of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced expression of the reporter
(luciferase) gene, although the proximal kappaB site played the more essential
role. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed that LPS augmented the
nuclear protein bindings to the Ets/PEA3 as well as kappaB motifs. Ets-1, one of 
the Ets proteins, was suggested to be bound to the Ets/PEA3 oligonucleotide. By
Northern blot analysis, LPS was shown to induce iNOS mRNA in CEVM, along with a
preceding increase in the levels of c-ets-1 mRNA. Ets-1 may be involved in the
iNOS gene transcription in CEVM, presumably through interacting with the
NF-kappaB.

PMID: 11768239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Surg Res. 2001 Dec;101(2):242-7.

Clinical significance of matrix metalloproteinase-7 and Ets-1 gene expression in 
patients with lung cancer.

Sasaki H(1), Yukiue H, Moiriyama S, Kobayashi Y, Nakashima Y, Kaji M, Kiriyama M,
Fukai I, Yamakawa Y, Fujii Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagoya City University Medical School, 1 Kawasumi,
Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, 467-8601, Japan

BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) is a member of the MMP family and 
has a wide variety of substrate spectra. Ets domain transcription factors are
reported to play an important role in carcinoma invasion and metastasis. The
regulatory role of Ets-1 has been shown in several MMPs. We have hypothesized
that MMP-7 and Ets-1 mRNA levels could be predictors of the development and
invasion of lung cancer.
METHODS: The study included 73 lung cancer cases. The mRNA levels were quantified
by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using a
LightCycler.
RESULTS: No significant difference in MMP-7 and Ets-1 mRNA levels was found among
gender, age, and pathological subtype. The MMP-7 mRNA levels were elevated in
tumor tissues from stage II-IV lung cancer (1.629 +/- 2.267) compared to those
from stage I lung cancer (0.762 +/- 1.463) (P = 0.0290). There was a tendency
toward higher MMP-7 mRNA expression levels in tumors with lymph node metastasis
(1.728 +/- 2.432) compared to those without lymph node metastasis (1.141 +/-
1.838) (P = 0.1076). Thus, MMP-7 mRNA levels may serve as a marker of higher
stages in lung cancer. No significant difference in Ets-1 mRNA levels was found
among clinical stages and T-status. The Ets-1 mRNA levels were elevated in tumors
from N2 patients (7.512 +/- 13.306) compared to those from N0 patients (2.525 +/-
4.719) (P = 0.0209). Ets-1 mRNA levels showed a positive correlation with MMP-7
expression (P = 0.0042).
CONCLUSIONS: Using the LightCycler RT-PCR assay, the determination of MMP-7 and
Ets-1 mRNA levels might provide a potential marker for advanced lung cancer.
However, further studies and a longer follow-up are needed to confirm the impact 
of MMP-7 in the biological behavior of the tumor.

PMID: 11735282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Dec;60(6):1332-42.

Transcriptional mechanism of protein kinase C-induced isoform-specific expression
of the gene for endothelin-converting enzyme-1 in human endothelial cells.

Orzechowski HD(1), Günther A, Menzel S, Zimmermann A, Funke-Kaiser H, Real R,
Subkowski T, Zollmann FS, Paul M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Benjamin Franklin Medical
Center, Freie Universität, Berlin, Germany.

Isoform-specific expression of endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE)-1, the major
big endothelin-processing enzyme, is controlled by alternative promoters.
Signaling pathways and transcriptional mechanisms of ECE-1 mRNA expression are
largely unknown. To investigate ECE-1 isoform expression after protein kinase C
(PKC) activation, we used phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) to stimulate
primary cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells and the related EA.hy926 
cell line. ECE-1a mRNA was up-regulated (approximately 3-fold), whereas mRNA of
alternative isoforms (b, c, and d) was unchanged, which was confirmed on the
protein level. PMA effects on mRNA expression were suppressed by the PKC
inhibitors H-7 and Calphostin C. Because increased ECE-1a expression was preceded
by induction of the transcription factor Ets-1, we performed gel shift assays and
demonstrated specific DNA/protein interactions involving the ETS binding motif
GGAA. Luciferase reporter assays showed that PMA induced ECE-1a promoter activity
about 2.5-fold in EA.hy926 cells. Similarly, coexpression of Ets-1 protein
resulted in a dose-dependent increase in ECE-1a promoter activity (more than
8-fold). Using gel shift assays and mutation analysis, we identified two tandemly
arranged Ets-1 binding sites (EBS) at -638 and -658, respectively, that are
involved in transcriptional activation of the ECE-1a promoter by PMA or Ets-1.
Moreover, we also found evidence for binding of a transcriptional repressor to
EBS -638. The inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase, PD98059,
inhibited PMA effects on ECE-1a mRNA expression and promoter activity,
respectively. Our results provide the first detailed analysis of signaling
pathways and transcriptional mechanisms involved in isoform-specific ECE-1 gene
expression.

PMID: 11723240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cancer Detect Prev. 2001;25(5):496-501.

Prognostic impact of Ets-1 overexpression in betel and tobacco related oral
cancer.

Pande P(1), Soni S, Chakravarti N, Mathur M, Shukla NK, Ralhan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.

In oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), the presence of lymph node metastasis is
one of the most important prognostic factors, correlating locoregional spread,
recurrence, distant metastasis and survival. However, the biological factors
implicated and the mechanisms underlying these events are not completely
elucidated. We reported Ets-1 expression in oral SCC and proposed that it may
serve as a plausible marker of invasive potential and lymph node metastasis.
Herein, we investigate the prognostic significance of Ets-1 expression in oral
cancer. One hundred oral SCCs assessed for Ets-1 expression showed significant
association with tumor stage (P = .027), lymph node involvement (P < 10(-6)) and 
distant organ metastasis (P = .007). The transcription factor Ets-1 regulates the
expression of several genes involved in extracellular matrix remodeling that may 
account for its association with lymph node and distant organ metastasis.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis entailed significant association of Ets-1
expression in oral SCCs with reduced disease free survival (P = .0041),
suggesting its utility as a prognosticator for oral cancer. In conclusion, these 
findings underscore the role of Ets-1 in oral tumor invasion and metastasis and
may thus account for its association with diminished disease free survival.

PMID: 11718456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Dec;25(12):1493-500.

Ets-1 mRNA expression in effusions of serous ovarian carcinoma patients is a
marker of poor outcome.

Davidson B(1), Risberg B, Goldberg I, Nesland JM, Berner A, Tropé CG, Kristensen 
GB, Bryne M, Reich R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
bend@ulrik.uio.no

Erratum in
    Am J Surg Pathol 2002 Apr;26(4):539.

Ets-1 proto-oncogene is a transcription factor with a role in the activation of
metastasis-associated molecules. We recently found that Ets-1 mRNA expression in 
solid tumors is a marker of poor prognosis in ovarian carcinoma. The objective of
this study was to compare the expression of Ets-1 mRNA in effusions and primary
and metastatic tumors of serous ovarian carcinoma patients and to evaluate its
prognostic role in effusions. Sections from 67 malignant effusions and 90 primary
and metastatic lesions were evaluated for expression of Ets-1 using mRNA in situ 
hybridization. Expression of Ets-1 mRNA was detected in carcinoma cells in 24 of 
67 (36%) effusions. Expression in cancer cells was similar in peritoneal and
pleural effusions. In solid lesions Ets-1 expression was detected in both tumor
cells and stromal cells in 34 of 90 (38%) lesions. Ets-1 expression in tumor
cells showed a strong association with that of stromal cells (p <0.001). Ets-1
expression in effusions showed an association with mRNA expression of basic
fibroblast growth factor, previously studied in this patient cohort (p = 0.019). 
Ets-1 expression in solid lesions showed an association with mRNA expression of
vascular endothelial growth factor (p <0.001 for both carcinoma and stromal
cells), basic fibroblast growth factor (p = 0.007 for carcinoma cells, p = 0.006 
for stromal cells), and interleukin-8 (IL-8) (p = 0.001 for tumor cells). Ets-1
mRNA showed upregulation in metastases when compared with effusion specimens (p =
0.028). In univariate survival analysis Ets-1 expression in carcinoma cells in
effusions correlated with poor survival (p = 0.003). Our findings confirm the
role of Ets-1 as a novel prognostic marker in advanced-stage ovarian carcinoma
and extend it to effusion specimens. The elevated expression in solid metastases 
supports a central role in tumor progression as well. The association between
Ets-1 mRNA expression and the expression of angiogenic genes, documented also in 
our previous study, points to the close link between these molecules, in
agreement with the role of angiogenic genes in the transcriptional activation of 
Ets-1. The identical phenotype of carcinoma cells in pleural and peritoneal
effusions provides further evidence for our theory that cells at these sites
share similar genotypic and phenotypic profiles.

PMID: 11717538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 23;289(1):39-43.

Hypoxia induces transcription factor ETS-1 via the activity of hypoxia-inducible 
factor-1.

Oikawa M(1), Abe M, Kurosawa H, Hida W, Shirato K, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Institute of Development, Aging, and Cancer,
Tohoku University, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

ETS-1 plays an important role in angiogenesis and cancer invasion, and hypoxia is
a common feature in these phenomena. We examined whether hypoxia influenced ETS-1
expression. Hypoxia induced ETS-1 in a human bladder cancer cell line, T24, and
promoter analysis revealed that the deletion of -424 to -279 bp from the human
ETS-1 promoter decreased the hypoxia-mediated inducibility. This region contained
a hypoxia responsive element-like sequence, and HIF-1 bound to it under the
hypoxic condition. Double-stranded synthetic oligonucleotides of this sequence as
a decoy inhibited the hypoxia-mediated inducibility. These results indicate that 
hypoxia induces ETS-1 via the activity of HIF-1.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11708773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2001 Dec;38(6):909-21.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma ligands inhibit nuclear but not 
cytosolic extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein
kinase-regulated steps in vascular smooth muscle cell migration.

Goetze S(1), Kintscher U, Kim S, Meehan WP, Kaneshiro K, Collins AR, Fleck E,
Hsueh WA, Law RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Cardiology, Charité, Campus Virchow Klinikum, Humboldt 
University Berlin and German Heart Institute Berlin, Augustenbergerplatz 1, 13353
Berlin, Germany. goetze@dhzb.de

Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) migration involves adhesion, locomotion, and
invasion regulated by various signaling molecules, among which the extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (ERK)/mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) play a
critical role. We have shown that the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) ligands troglitazone and rosiglitazone inhibit VSMC
migration downstream of ERK MAPK. The purpose of the current study was to more
specifically determine which step(s) in VSMC migration are targeted by inhibition
of the ERK MAPK pathway or activation of PPAR-gamma. VSMC adhesion was not
affected by the ERK MAPK pathway inhibitor PD98059 or PPAR-gamma ligands.
Phosphorylation and activation of myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) play important
roles in cell locomotion. Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced MLCK
phosphorylation (1.7-fold) was completely blocked by PD98059 at 30 microM (p <
0.05), but not by troglitazone or rosiglitazone. PDGF-directed migration
(5.8-fold) was inhibited by PD98059 (-88% at 30 microM) and the MLCK inhibitor
ML9 (0.1-1 microM, -84% at 1 microM) (all p < 0.05). The transcription factor
Ets-1 mediates matrix metalloproteinase induction required for tissue invasion by
VSMC. PDGF (20 ng/ml) stimulated an Ets-1 protein expression (14-fold at 60 min) 
in VSMC, which was inhibited by PD98059 (-72% at 30 microM), troglitazone (-69%
at 20 microM), and rosiglitazone (-54% at 10 microM) (all p < 0.05).
Immunohistochemistry of rat aortae 2 h after balloon injury showed a dramatic
upregulation of Ets-1, which was markedly inhibited in animals that had received 
troglitazone treatment. In contrast, phosphorylated ERK MAPK was not affected by 
troglitazone. These data are consistent with PPAR-gamma ligands exerting their
anti-migratory effects downstream of ERK MAPK activation by blocking nuclear
events, such as Ets-1 expression, required for cell invasion in response to
arterial injury.

PMID: 11707695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Circulation. 2001 Nov 6;104(19):2344-50.

Therapeutic angiogenesis induced by human hepatocyte growth factor gene in rat
diabetic hind limb ischemia model: molecular mechanisms of delayed angiogenesis
in diabetes.

Taniyama Y(1), Morishita R, Hiraoka K, Aoki M, Nakagami H, Yamasaki K, Matsumoto 
K, Nakamura T, Kaneda Y, Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Division of Gene Therapy Science, Biomedical
Research Center, Osaka University Medical School, Suita, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Because no study has documented the angiogenic properties of
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in a diabetes model, we examined the feasibility
of gene therapy using HGF to treat peripheral arterial disease in diabetes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Because intramuscular injection of luciferase plasmid by the
hemagglutinating virus of Japan (HVJ)-liposome method had much higher efficiency 
than injection of naked plasmid, we used the HVJ-liposome method to transfect the
human HGF gene into the rat diabetic hindlimb model. As expected, transfection of
human HGF vector resulted in a significant increase in blood flow as assessed by 
laser Doppler imaging and capillary density, even in the diabetes model,
accompanied by the detection of human HGF protein. Interestingly, the degree of
natural recovery of blood flow was significantly greater in nondiabetic rats than
in diabetic rats. Thus, in an in vitro culture system, we further studied the
molecular mechanisms of how diabetes delayed angiogenesis. Importantly,
high-D-glucose treatment of endothelial cells resulted in a significant decrease 
in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 protein and ets-1 expression in human aortic 
endothelial cells. Similarly, high D-glucose significantly decreased mRNA and
protein of HGF in endothelial cells. Downregulation of MMP-1 and ets-1 by high
D-glucose might be due to a significant decrease in HGF, because HGF stimulated
MMP-1 production and activated ets-1.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, intramuscular injection of human HGF plasmid induced
therapeutic angiogenesis in a rat diabetic ischemic hindlimb model as a potential
therapy for peripheral arterial disease. The delay of angiogenesis in diabetes
might be due to downregulation of MMP-1 and ets-1 through a decrease in HGF by
high D-glucose.

PMID: 11696476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Cancer Res. 2001 Nov 1;61(21):7985-91.

Expression of dominant-negative form of Ets-1 suppresses fibronectin-stimulated
cell adhesion and migration through down-regulation of integrin alpha5 expression
in U251 glioma cell line.

Kita D(1), Takino T, Nakada M, Takahashi T, Yamashita J, Sato H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Oncology, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, 
Ishikawa 920-0934, Japan.

Ets transcription factors are associated with tumor malignancy. We reported
previously that the stable transfection of the dominant-negative form of Ets-1
(Ets-DN) in the glioma cell line U251 induced down-regulation of urokinase-type
plasminogen activator mRNA expression and invasiveness (M. Nakada et al., J.
Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol., 58: 329-334, 1999). Here we analyzed effects of Ets-DN
expression on cell adhesion, migration, and phosphorylation of focal adhesion
kinase. U251 cells expressing Ets-DN (U251-DN) showed reduced cell adhesion,
spreading, and extension of actin stress fibers on dishes coated with fibronectin
but not on dishes coated with collagen. Migration of U251-DN cells was found to
be significantly inhibited compared with that of parental cells when examined by 
wound-induced migration assay on fibronectin-coated dishes. Phosphorylation
levels of focal adhesion kinase in U251-DN cells were also attenuated on dishes
coated with fibronectin. Reduced expression level of integrin alpha5 subunit in
U251-DN cells was demonstrated by semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR
analysis. Semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR of surgical samples of brain
tumors revealed that the expression level of Ets-1 mRNA correlated with that of
integrin alpha5 mRNA in glioma. The experimental metastatic ability of U251-DN
cells examined in chick embryo was considerably lower than that of parental
cells. These results suggest that Ets-1 contributes to glioma malignancy by up-
regulating expression of the integrin alpha5 subunit, which composes integrin
alpha5beta1 and mediates intracellular signaling and the subsequent acceleration 
of the invasive process, including cell adhesion and migration.

PMID: 11691823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Atherosclerosis. 2001 Nov;159(1):93-101.

TNFalpha induces expression of transcription factors c-fos, Egr-1, and Ets-1 in
vascular lesions through extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2.

Goetze S(1), Kintscher U, Kaneshiro K, Meehan WP, Collins A, Fleck E, Hsueh WA,
Law RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Cardiology, Virchow Klinikum, Humboldt University
Berlin and German Heart Institute Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, 
Germany. stephan.goetze@charite.de

Migration, proliferation and differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMC) and macrophages are important pathological responses that contribute to
the development and progression of vascular lesions. Cytokines such as TNFalpha
are present at sites of vascular injury and regulate a variety of cellular
functions of inflammatory cells and VSMC. Cell migration, proliferation and
differentiation require de novo gene transcription resulting from extracellular
signals being transduced to the nucleus, where multiple genes are regulated to
participate in lesion formation. In VSMC and macrophages, TNFalpha induces
activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK 1/2), which
transmit signals from the cytosol to the nucleus. Potential nuclear targets of
TNFalpha-activated ERK 1/2 include the transcription factors Ets-1, Egr-1, and
c-fos, which are known to regulate cellular growth, differentiation, and
migration. The aim of this stud<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd"> 
<html>
<head>
<title>NCBI/eutils310 - WWW Error 500 Diagnostic</title>
<style type="text/css"> 
h1.error {color: red; font-size: 40pt}
div.diags {text-indent: 0.5in }
</style> 
</head>
<body>
<h1>Server Error</h1>


<p>Your request could not be processed due to a problem on
our Web server.  This could be a transient problem, please
try the query again.  If it doesn't clear up within a
reasonable period of time, e-mail a short description of your
query and the diagnostic information shown below to:</p>

<p>
pubmed@nlm.nih.gov - for problems with PubMed<br/>
webadmin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov - for problems with other services<br/>
</p>

<p>Thank you for your assistance.  We will try to fix the
problem as soon as possible.
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
Diagnostic Information:</p>

<div class="diags">Error: 500</div>

<div class="diags">URL:  h t t p : / / e u t i l s . n c b i . n l m . n i h . g o v / e n t r e z / e u t i l s / e f e t c h . f c g i ? = e f e t c h & a m p ; d b = p u b m e d & a m p ; q u e r y _ k e y = 1 & a m p ; W e b E n v = N C I D _ 1 _ 1 4 1 8 7 5 3 5 _ 1 6 5 . 1 1 2 . 9 . 3 7 _ 9 0 0 1 _ 1 4 5 9 7 0 4 1 9 3 _ 1 3 2 9 7 9 3 6 5 8 _ 0 M e t A 0 _ S _ M e g a S t o r e _ F _ 1 & a m p ; r e t m o d e = t e x t & a m p ; r e t t y p e = a b s t r a c t & a m p ; r e t s t a r t = 5 0 0 & a m p ; r e t m a x = 5 0 0 & a m p ; e m a i l = g s c h o f l  4 0 y a h o o . d e & a m p ; t o o l = r e u t i l s </div>

<div class="diags">Client: 165.112.9.141</div>

<div class="diags">Server: eutils310</div>

<div class="diags">Time: Sun Apr  3 13:24:19 EDT 2016</div>

 
<p>
NOTE: The above is an internal URL which may differ from the one you used to address the page.</p>
<hr/>
<p>Rev. 01/04/08</p>

</body>
</html>


1. Oncogene. 1997 Nov 13;15(20):2449-62.

A novel epithelial-expressed ETS gene, ELF3: human and murine cDNA sequences,
murine genomic organization, human mapping to 1q32.2 and expression in tissues
and cancer.

Tymms MJ(1), Ng AY, Thomas RS, Schutte BC, Zhou J, Eyre HJ, Sutherland GR, Seth
A, Rosenberg M, Papas T, Debouck C, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Group, Institute of Reproduction and
Development, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The ETS family of genes are implicated in cancers such as Ewings sarcoma, acute
myeloid leukemia and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Further, they have
important functions in embryonic development. Hence, identification and
characterization of members of this family are important. We identify a novel ETS
family member, ELF3, and report its human and murine cDNA sequences. The mouse
cDNA has an alternatively spliced transcript with an extra 60 bp inserted. Hence 
we present the organization of the murine Elf3 gene together with its exon/intron
structure. This gene consists of 9 exons and 8 introns spanning 4.8 kb. ELF3
binds and transactivates ETS sequences and interestingly also shows the ability
to bind a GGAT-like purine core, a preferential ETS1/ETS2 type binding site. The 
expression of ELF3, unlike most other ETS family members, is absent in
hematopoietic cells and hematopoietic organs in humans and mice. Intriguingly,
the gene is specifically expressed in cell lines of epithelial origin and in
organs such as lung, stomach, intestine, kidney that have specialized epithelial 
cells. We localize the human gene to 1q32.2, a region that is amplified in
epithelial tumors of the breast, lung and prostate. Finally, we show that ELF3
expression is increased in a lung carcinoma and adenocarcinoma, as compared to
normal tissue. ELF3 is also expressed in cell lines derived from lung cancers.
These results suggest that this novel ETS gene may be involved in lung
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9395241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 17;272(42):26188-95.

The Ets transcription factors interact with each other and with the c-Fos/c-Jun
complex via distinct protein domains in a DNA-dependent and -independent manner.

Basuyaux JP(1), Ferreira E, Stéhelin D, Butticè G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, CNRS IFR3, 1 rue Calmette, B.P. 447, 59021
Lille, France.

The transcription factors Fos, Jun, and Ets regulate the expression of human
stromelysin-1 and collagenase-1 genes. Recently, we found that ERG, an Ets family
member, activates collagenase-1 gene but not stromelysin-1 by physically
interacting with c-Fos/c-Jun. Interestingly, ERG binds to stromelysin-1 promoter 
and represses its activation by ETS2. Here, to investigate the molecular
mechanism of this regulation, we have used an in vitro protein-protein
interaction assay and studied the transcription factor interactions of ETS2. We
found that ETS2 could weakly associate with in vitro synthesized ETS1, c-Fos, and
c-Jun and strongly with c-Fos/c-Jun complex and ERG via several distinct ETS2
domains including the C-terminal region that contains the DNA-binding domain.
Strikingly, these interactions were stabilized in vitro by DNA as they were
inhibited by ethidium bromide. Both the N-terminal region, comprising the
transactivation domain, and the C-terminal region of ETS2 associated with ERG
and, interestingly, the interaction of ERG through the transactivation domain of 
ETS2 was DNA-independent. The DNA-dependent interaction of ETS2 with c-Fos/c-Jun 
was enhanced by specific DNA fragments requiring two Ets-binding sites of the
stromelysin-1 promoter. Using the two hybrid system, we also demonstrated that
ETS2 interacts with c-Jun or ERG in vivo.

PMID: 9334186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Oncogene. 1997 Sep 18;15(12):1489-95.

Modulation of ETS-1 transcriptional activity by huUBC9, a ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme.

Hahn SL(1), Wasylyk B, Criqui-Filipe P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-ULP, Illkirch, France.

Erratum in
    Oncogene 1998 Feb 5;16(5):691. Criqui P [corrected to Criqui-Filipe P].

Ets transcription factors have Ets DNA binding domains, that have a winged
helix-turn-helix structure. ETS-1, the founding member of the family, is
regulated by the Ras and Ca2+ signaling pathways and is implicated in various
physiological processes leading to cell growth, differentiation and apoptosis. We
have identified ETS-1 interacting factors with a yeast two-hybrid screen. The
majority of the positive clones turned out to encode the human homologue of the
yeast ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes UBC9 and Hus5. In two different yeast assays,
ETS-1 interacted with huUBC9. In an in vitro GST 'pull-down' assay, ETS-1 and
several other Ets family members complexed with huUBC9. Interestingly, in
mammalian cells, coexpression of huUBC9 resulted in a substantial increase in the
transcriptional activity of ETS-1. Coexpressed huUBC9 did not affect the ETS-1
protein level, and moreover, a point mutation at Cys93, an amino acid known to be
essential for ubiquitination, did not abolish the stimulation of the ETS-1
transcriptional activity. Our results indicate that the modulation of ETS-1
activity by huUBC9 results from processes other than ubiquitination and ETS-1
stabilization.

PMID: 9333025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 26;272(39):24300-7.

Thrombopoietin-induced expression of the glycoprotein IIb gene involves the
transcription factor PU.1/Spi-1 in UT7-Mpl cells.

Doubeikovski A(1), Uzan G, Doubeikovski Z, Prandini MH, Porteu F, Gisselbrecht S,
Dusanter-Fourt I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U363, Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Hopital Cochin, 27 rue 
du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is the major regulator of proliferation and differentiation 
of megakaryocytes and their progenitors. These actions can be reproduced in the
human megakaryoblastic cell line UT7 into which the murine TPO receptor, c-Mpl,
was introduced. In these cells, TPO enhanced the expression of the specific
megakaryocytic marker integrin glycoprotein (GP) IIb-IIIa while decreasing the
expression of erythroid genes (Porteu, F., Rouyez, M. -C., Cocault, L., Benit,
L., Charon, M., Picard, F., Gisselbrecht, S. , Souyri, M., and Dusanter-Fourt, I.
(1996) Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 2473-2482). We have now analyzed the effect of TPO on
the transcriptional activity of the GPIIb promoter in these cells. Using
transient transfection assays of a series of human GPIIb promoter fragments, we
delineated a TPO-responsive element within the previously reported enhancer
region of the promoter. Although this enhancer included GATA- and Ets-binding
sites (EBSs), we found that only EBS -514 was important for TPO response. We
identified PU. 1/Spi-1 as the endogenous Ets transcription factor that strongly
and preferentially interacted with this enhancer EBS. This factor did not
interact with other proximal EBSs in the GPIIb promoter. We next showed that TPO 
induced a strong and selective increase of PU. 1/Spi-1 expression and DNA binding
activity in UT7-Mpl cells. In contrast, TPO did not affect the expression of
Ets-1/2 while weakly increasing the levels of Fli-1. Overexpression of PU.1/Spi-1
was further shown to enhance GPIIb promoter activity in the absence and presence 
of TPO. Overall, our data indicated that, in UT7-Mpl cells, TPO increased the
transcriptional activity of a GPIIb gene in part due to an enhanced expression of
an unexpected transcription factor, the Ets family PU.1/Spi-1 factor. To our
knowledge, this is the first evidence of a role for the PU.1/Spi-1 factor in the 
regulation of megakaryocytic genes.

PMID: 9305885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 28;15(9):1103-10.

Cellular and viral trans-acting factors modulate N-myc2 promoter activity in
woodchuck liver tumors.

Flajolet M(1), Gegonne A, Ghysdael J, Tiollais P, Buendia MA, Fourel G.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique (INSERM U163), Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.

Activation of the N-myc2 oncogene by integration of woodchuck hepatitis virus
(WHV) DNA is a central event in woodchuck liver oncogenesis. In this study, we
have evaluated the influence of several cellular and viral trans-acting factors
and mediators of inflammation on N-myc2 promoter activity in hepatoma cell lines.
Ets oncoproteins, including Ets1, Ets2 and PEA3 efficiently activated a chimeric 
N-myc2 promoter/luciferase reporter gene. By electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, we show that Etsl and Ets2 proteins can efficiently bind two consensus
Ets sites located within a 59 bp sequence upstream of the N-myc2 transcription
start site. Site-directed mutagenesis of these Ets-binding motifs abolished
transactivation of the N-myc2 promoter by Ets proteins. Addition of interleukin-6
(IL-6) induced a weak but reproducible activation of the N-myc2 promoter, while
IL-1 was ineffective. We further show that the N-myc2 promoter can be
transactivated by the hepadna-virus X protein, and that distal promoter sequences
are required for both IL-6 and X responsiveness. Similar effects of these factors
were observed in the context of the N-myc2 promoter activated by WHV
cis-regulatory elements. In view of the high-level expression of the N-myc2
oncogene in most woodchuck liver tumors, the Ets oncoproteins,
inflammation-associated cytokine IL-6 and the viral X transactivator might play
important roles in hepadnavirus-associated tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9285565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 14;15(7):851-6.

A variant form of ETS1 induces apoptosis in human colon cancer cells.

Huang CC(1), Papas TS, Bhat NK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

We have previously shown that the human ETS1 protein (p51-ETS1), when ectopically
expressed in colon cancer cell lines, is able to reduce its tumorigenicity
without affecting its growth properties. To understand the mechanism of tumor
reduction, we have expressed two different forms of ETS1 in colon cancer cell
lines. Data presented in this paper indicate that the naturally occurring spliced
variant protein, p42-ETS1, lacking the region encoded by ETS1 exon VII, represses
the tumorigenicity, while p51-ETS1 reduces the tumorigenicity. Repression of
tumorigenicity mediated by p42-ETS1 appears to be caused by its ability to induce
apoptosis in epithelial cancer cells. This work can have profound medical
significance in that it may open up new insights into the potential role of the
p42-ETS1 in the induction of apoptosis in epithelial cell cancers and may provide
a rationale for its use for potential gene therapy experiments to initiate cell
death in cancer cells.

PMID: 9266972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Leukemia. 1997 Aug;11(8):1224-33.

ETS-1 induces increased expression of erythroid markers in the pluripotent
erythroleukemic cell lines K562 and HEL.

Clausen PA(1), Athanasiou M, Chen Z, Dunn KJ, Zhang Q, Lautenberger JA,
Mavrothalassitis G, Blair DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA.

Members of the ETS gene family are known to be expressed in hematopoietic tissues
and cell lines, and there is increasing evidence that ETS proteins may play a
role in normal hematopoietic cell development. We demonstrate that ETS-1 can
contribute to the development of an erythroid phenotype in vitro. The pluripotent
erythroleukemic K562 and HEL cell lines express messages for a number of ETS
genes, but only c-ETS-1 levels are elevated in response to treatment with hemin
or cytosine arabinofuranoside (Ara-C), agents which induce erythroid
differentiation. Furthermore, ETS-1 antisense oligonucleotides inhibit
hemoglobinization of cells treated with Ara-C or hemin, and K562 and HEL cells
infected with retrovirus expressing the c-ETS-1 gene exhibit a significant
increase in erythroid character (as indicated by benzidine staining for
hemoglobin (Hb) and surface marker analysis), a dramatic increase in
responsiveness to hemin or Ara-C, and a decreased rate of proliferation (20-40%
of control rates). In contrast, infection with virus expressing ETS-2 or vector
sequences only causes no detectable changes in the proliferation or erythroid
character of either the HEL or K562 cell lines. These data indicate a role for
ETS-1 in erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 9264374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 8;94(14):7170-5.

ETS target genes: identification of egr1 as a target by RNA differential display 
and whole genome PCR techniques.

Robinson L(1), Panayiotakis A, Papas TS, Kola I, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced BioScience Laboratories, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

ETS transcription factors play important roles in hematopoiesis, angiogenesis,
and organogenesis during murine development. The ETS genes also have a role in
neoplasia, for example in Ewing's sarcomas and retrovirally induced cancers. The 
ETS genes encode transcription factors that bind to specific DNA sequences and
activate transcription of various cellular and viral genes. To isolate novel ETS 
target genes, we used two approaches. In the first approach, we isolated genes by
the RNA differential display technique. Previously, we have shown that the
overexpression of ETS1 and ETS2 genes effects transformation of NIH 3T3 cells and
specific transformants produce high levels of the ETS proteins. To isolate ETS1
and ETS2 responsive genes in these transformed cells, we prepared RNA from ETS1, 
ETS2 transformants, and normal NIH 3T3 cell lines and converted it into cDNA.
This cDNA was amplified by PCR and displayed on sequencing gels. The
differentially displayed bands were subcloned into plasmid vectors. By Northern
blot analysis, several clones showed differential patterns of mRNA expression in 
the NIH 3T3-, ETS1-, and ETS2-expressing cell lines. Sixteen clones were analyzed
by DNA sequence analysis, and 13 of them appeared to be unique because their DNA 
sequences did not match with any of the known genes present in the gene bank.
Three known genes were found to be identical to the CArG box binding factor,
phospholipase A2-activating protein, and early growth response 1 (Egr1) genes. In
the second approach, to isolate ETS target promoters directly, we performed ETS1 
binding with MboI-cleaved genomic DNA in the presence of a specific mAb followed 
by whole genome PCR. The immune complex-bound ETS binding sites containing DNA
fragments were amplified and subcloned into pBluescript and subjected to DNA
sequence and computer analysis. We found that, of a large number of clones
isolated, 43 represented unique sequences not previously identified. Three clones
turned out to contain regulatory sequences derived from human serglycin,
preproapolipoprotein C II, and Egr1 genes. The ETS binding sites derived from
these three regulatory sequences showed specific binding with recombinant ETS
proteins. Of interest, Egr1 was identified by both of these techniques,
suggesting strongly that it is indeed an ETS target gene.

PMCID: PMC23781
PMID: 9207063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Science. 1997 Jun 27;276(5321):1957.

ETS1-DNA binding and intercalation: correction.

Werner MH, Gronenborn AM, Clore GM.

Erratum for
    Science. 1996 Feb 9;271(5250):778-84.

PMID: 9221491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Oncogene. 1997 Jun 12;14(23):2845-55.

ETS1, NFkappaB and AP1 synergistically transactivate the human GM-CSF promoter.

Thomas RS(1), Tymms MJ, McKinlay LH, Shannon MF, Seth A, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Group, Institute of Reproduction and
Development, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

Activation of helper T cells results in coordinate expression of a number of
cytokines involved in differentiation, proliferation and activation of the
haematopoietic system. Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
is one such cytokine, whose increased expression results mostly from increases in
transcription. Cis-acting elements with NFkappaB, AP1 and ETS-like binding motifs
have been identified in the promoter region of the GM-CSF gene, and are important
or essential for transcriptional activity following T cell activation. ETS1 is a 
transcription factor of the ETS family that is expressed in T cells. We have
previously shown that ETS1 can transactivate GM-CSF in Jurkat T cells, but only
after the cells have been stimulated by treatment with PMA and ionomycin, agents 
that mimic T cell activation. Thus we proposed that ETS1, which is expressed
constitutively in Jurkat cells, may act in concert with PMA/ionomycin inducible
factors. Here we show that ETS1 can transactivate a GM-CSF reporter construct in 
unstimulated Jurkat cells, providing that either NFkappaB or AP1 transcription
factors are supplied by co-transfection. We confirm that binding of endogenous
NFkappaB and AP1 is induced following PMA/ionomycin treatment of T cells.
Transactivation by ETS1, NFkappaB and AP1 is synergistic, and mutation of the
individual binding sites reveals that the transcriptional activities of these
factors are interdependent. Our results suggest that constitutive ETS1, and
inducible NFkappaB and AP1, cooperate as part of a higher order transcriptional
complex in activated T cells.

PMID: 9190901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Jun;8(6):655-65.

The ETS1 transcription factor is expressed during epithelial-mesenchymal
transitions in the chick embryo and is activated in scatter factor-stimulated
MDCK epithelial cells.

Fafeur V(1), Tulasne D, Quéva C, Vercamer C, Dimster V, Mattot V, Stéhelin D,
Desbiens X, Vandenbunder B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France. vfafeur@infobiogen.fr

In embryos and in human tumors, the expression of the ETS1 transcription factor
correlates with the occurrence of invasive processes. Although this was
demonstrated in cells of mesodermal origin, the expression of ETS1 was not
detected in epithelial cells. In the present study, we show that during early
organogenesis in the chick embryo, ETS1 mRNA expression was transiently induced
in epithelial structures, during emigration of neural crest cells and dispersion 
of somites into the mesenchymal sclerotome. In contrast, the expression of ETS1
was not detected in situations where epithelial layers stayed cohesive while
forming a new structure, such as the dermomyotome forming the myotome. The
involvement of ETS1 in epithelial cell dissociation was examined in MDCK
epithelial cells stimulated by scatter factor/hepatocyte growth factor (SF/HGF), 
a potent inducer of cell dissociation and motility. SF/HGF was found to stimulate
ETS1 mRNA and protein expressions, and these increases coincided with the
dispersion of cells and the expression of protease mRNAs, such as urokinase-type 
plasminogen activator and collagenase, but not with the protease inhibitor,
plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1. Furthermore, we showed that SF/HGF was
able to induce a transcriptional response involving ETS1 by using artificial as
well as cellular promoters, such as the urokinase-type plasminogen activator and 
collagenase 1 promoters, containing RAS-responsive elements with essential
ETS-binding sites. These data demonstrate expression of ETS1 during
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in the developing embryo and show that ETS1
can act as a downstream effector of SF/HGF in MDCK epithelial cells. Taken
together, these data identify ETS1 as a molecular actor of epithelia cell
dissociation.

PMID: 9185999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Res. 1997 May 15;57(10):2013-9.

Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor-induced endothelial cell
migration by ETS1 antisense oligonucleotides.

Chen Z(1), Fisher RJ, Riggs CW, Rhim JS, Lautenberger JA.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Applications International Corporation, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702-1201, 
USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) increased the level of ETS1 mRNA in
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and human lung microvascular
endothelial cells (HMVEC-L) over 5-fold. Protein levels were shown to increase
concordantly. VEGF was also found to stimulate the invasiveness of endothelial
cells as measured by migration through Matrigel- or gelatin-coated membranes. The
VEGF-induced invasiveness was inhibited by ETS1 antisense oligonucleotides but
not by a sense control. In addition, the ETS1 antisense oligonucleotides reduced 
the levels of ETS1 and urokinase-type plasminogen activator mRNAs. The antisense 
oligonucleotides directed against the ETS1 gene thus altered a cellular property 
of endothelial cells that is correlated with the ability of the cells to migrate 
through basement membranes. Together, these observations demonstrate a direct
role for the ETS1 gene in angiogenesis.

PMID: 9157999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. EMBO J. 1997 May 1;16(9):2463-72.

Stable co-occupancy of transcription factors and histones at the HIV-1 enhancer.

Steger DJ(1), Workman JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Center for Gene
Regulation, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park 16802-4500, USA.

To investigate mechanisms yielding DNase I-hypersensitive sites (DHSs) at gene
regulatory regions, we have initiated a biochemical analysis of transcription
factor binding and nucleosome remodeling with a region of the human
immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) 5' long terminal repeat (LTR) that harbors
constitutive DHSs in vivo. In vitro reconstitution of an HIV-1 5' LTR fragment
into nucleosome core particles demonstrates that Sp1, NF-kappaB1, LEF-1, ETS-1
and USF can gain access to their binding sites in HIV-1 nucleosomal DNA. The
factor-bound mononucleosomes resist histone displacement from the DNA by the
chromatin remodeling activity, SW1-SNF, or the histone chaperone, nucleoplasmin, 
suggesting that the binding of these factors to nucleosomal HIV-1 sequences forms
a stable complex that includes the underlying histones. However, when the HIV-1
5' LTR fragment is incorporated into a nucleosomal array, Sp1 and NF-kappaB1
binding produce regions of enhanced DNase I sensitivity specifically at the HIV-1
nucleosome. These regions resemble the observed in vivo DHSs, yet the HIV-1
nucleosome remains intact even in the presence of nucleoplasmin. Thus, the
constitutive DHSs identified at the HIV-1 enhancer in native chromatin may
reflect the presence of a ternary complex composed of transcriptional activators,
histones and DNA.

PMCID: PMC1169846
PMID: 9171359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Virol. 1997 May;71(5):3563-73.

Physical interactions between Ets and NF-kappaB/NFAT proteins play an important
role in their cooperative activation of the human immunodeficiency virus enhancer
in T cells.

Bassuk AG(1), Anandappa RT, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The transcriptional regulatory elements of many inducible T-cell genes contain
adjacent or overlapping binding sites for the Ets and NF-kappaB/NFAT families of 
transcription factors. Similar arrays of functionally important NF-kappaB/NFAT
and Ets binding sites are present in the transcriptional enhancers of human
immunodeficiency viruses types 1 and 2 (HIV-1 and HIV-2), suggesting that this
pattern of nuclear protein binding sites reflects an evolutionarily conserved
mechanism for regulating inducible T-cell gene expression that has been co-opted 
during HIV evolution. Despite these findings, the molecular mechanisms by which
Ets and NF-kappaB/NFAT proteins cooperatively regulate inducible T-cell gene
expression remained unknown. In the studies described in this report, we
demonstrated a physical interaction between multiple Ets and NF-kappaB/NFAT
proteins both in vitro and in activated normal human T cells. This interaction is
mediated by the Ets domain of Ets proteins and the C-terminal region of the Rel
homology domains of NF-kappaB/NFAT proteins. In addition, the Ets-NF-kappaB/NFAT 
interaction requires the presence of DNA binding sites for both proteins, as it
is abolished by the DNA intercalating agents propidium iodide and ethidium
bromide and enhanced by the presence of synthetic oligonucleotides containing
binding sites for Ets and NF-kappaB proteins. A dominant-negative mutant of
NF-kappaB p50 that binds DNA but fails to interact with Ets proteins inhibits the
synergistic activation of the HIV-1 and HIV-2 enhancers by NF-kappaB (p50 + p65) 
and Ets-1, suggesting that physical interaction between Ets and NF-kappaB
proteins is required for the transcriptional activity of the HIV-1 and HIV-2
enhancers. Taken together, these findings suggest that evolutionarily conserved
physical interactions between Ets and NF-kappaB/NFAT proteins are important in
regulating the inducible expression of T-cell genes and viruses. These
interactions represent a potential target for the development of novel
immunosuppressive and antiviral therapies.

PMCID: PMC191503
PMID: 9094628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Oncogene. 1997 Apr 3;14(13):1617-22.

ESX: a structurally unique Ets overexpressed early during human breast
tumorigenesis.

Chang CH(1), Scott GK, Kuo WL, Xiong X, Suzdaltseva Y, Park JW, Sayre P, Erny K, 
Collins C, Gray JW, Benz CC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute and Division of Oncology-Hematology, University of
California at San Francisco, 94143, USA.

The >30 known members of the Ets multigene family of transcriptional regulators
are increasingly being recognized for their involvement in early embryonic
development and late tissue maturation, directing stage-specific and
tissue-restricted programs of target gene expression. Identifiable primarily by
their 85 amino acid ETS DNA-binding domain and dispersed across all metazoan
lineages into distinct subfamilies, Ets genes also produce malignancies in humans
and other vertebrates when overexpressed or rearranged into chimeras retaining
the ETS domain, suggesting that their oncogenic potential is determined by the
program of target genes they regulate. Searching for Ets factors that regulate
expression of the HER2/neu (c-erbB2) oncogene in human breast cancer, we
identified a new epithelium-restricted Ets encoding an ETS domain homologous to
the Drosophila E74/human Elf-1 subfamily, an amino-terminal region (A-region or
Pointed domain) homologous to the distantly related Ets-1 subfamily, and a
serine-rich box homologous to the transactivating domain of the
lymphocyte-restricted High Mobility Group (HMG) protein, SOX4. Recombinant
protein encoded by ESX (for epithelial-restricted with serine box) exhibits
Ets-like DNA binding specificity in electrophoretic mobility shift assays and, in
transient transfection assays, transactivates Ets-responsive promoter elements
including that found in the HER2/neu oncogene. ESX is located at chromosome 1q32 
in a region known to be amplified in 50% of early breast cancers, is
heregulin-inducible and overexpressed in HER2/neu activated breast cancer cells. 
Tissue hybridization suggests that ESX becomes overexpressed at an early stage of
human breast cancer development known as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS).

PMID: 9129154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Indian J Exp Biol. 1997 Apr;35(4):315-22.

Ets oncogene family.

Dhulipal PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

First member of Ets gene family was discovered a decade ago by studying avian
erythroblastosis virus, E26. This virus encodes a tripartite protein gag-myb-ets 
with a molecular weight of 135 kDa. Subsequently, a series of cellular Ets genes 
were isolated (Ets-1, Ets-2, Erg, Elk-1, Sap-1, PEA-3, PU.1, Fli-1, Pok/Yan,
Etv-1 etc.). These genes share sequence homology to E26 Ets gene (v-ets or viral 
ets). Ets genes are highly conserved in phylogenetically divergent species from
Drosophila to man. Mammalian Ets genes are located on different chromosomes. Ets 
gene products are transcriptionally active sequence-specific DNA binding proteins
and are differentially regulated. Ets genes are involved in certain chromosomal
translocations leading to the formation of chimeric fusion proteins that are
associated with certain leukemias and soft tissue cancers. Ets genes also have a 
role in T-cell development and molecular and genetic analysis of Down Syndrome
patients have implicated the human Ets-2 and Erg genes in the disease. Down
Syndrome afflicted patients have immunologic and thymic disorders as well as a
greater risk for leukemic disease. Thus, Ets genes having homology to viral
oncogenes, may be instrumental in regulating cellular growth and differentiation,
as well as organismal development. Alteration of these genes and their products
may cause deregulation of normal cell growth and differentiation and result in a 
disease.

PMID: 9315229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 1997 Apr;33(4):248-55.

Oxidized LDL inhibits vascular endothelial cell morphogenesis in culture.

Wang DY(1), Yang VC, Chen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Tunghai University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Human umbilical cord vein endothelial cells can be induced to undergo
morphogenesis (tube formation) by phorbol ester (TPA) when cultured on or in
three-dimensional collagen gels. Induction of morphogenesis by TPA is accompanied
by increased activity of the collagenase gene transcription factors, ETS1 and
API, and the elaboration of collagenase by the endothelial cells. In the present 
study, we used endothelial cell elongation as a measure of morphogenesis and
showed that oxidized low density lipoprotein (oxLDL) inhibited endothelial cell
migration in monolayer cultures and TPA-induced morphogenesis in collagen gels in
a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, the inhibition was positively correlated with 
the extent of LDL oxidation. In contrast, native LDL stimulated cell migration
and TPA-induced morphogenesis under the same culture conditions. However, in the 
absence of TPA, LDL showed no effect on EC morphogenesis. Further studies showed 
that inhibition of TPA-induced endothelial cell morphogenesis by oxLDL is
correlated with suppression of the protein kinase C (PKC) and ETS1/AP1
activities. The results indicated that the inhibition of endothelial cell
morphogenesis by oxLDL is probably mediated through inhibition of the
TPA-activated PKC pathway and its subsequent suppression of the ETS1/AP1
activity. The results also indicated that EC migration can be mediated through
PKC-dependent and independent pathways and only the former pathway can induce EC 
morphogenesis as well.

PMID: 9156339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genes Dev. 1997 Apr 1;11(7):887-99.

Distinct roles for P-CREB and LEF-1 in TCR alpha enhancer assembly and activation
on chromatin templates in vitro.

Mayall TP(1), Sheridan PL, Montminy MR, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037-1099,
USA.

The distal enhancer of the T-cell receptor (TCR) alpha chain gene has become a
paradigm for studies of the assembly and activity of architectural enhancer
complexes. Here we have reconstituted regulated TCR alpha enhancer activity in
vitro on chromatin templates using purified T-cell transcription factors (LEF-1, 
AML1, and Ets-1) and the cyclic AMP-responsive transcription factor CREB. When
added in combination, these factors activate the TCR alpha enhancer in a highly
synergistic manner. Alternatively, the enhancer could also be activated in vitro 
by high levels of either CREB or a complex containing all of the T-cell proteins 
(LEF-1, AML1, and Ets-1). Phosphorylation of CREB by protein kinase A enhanced
transcription 10-fold in vitro, and this effect was abolished by a point mutation
affecting the CREB PKA phosphorylation site (Ser-133). Interestingly, LEF-1
strongly enhanced the binding of the AML1/Ets-1 complex on chromatin, but not
nonchromatin, templates. A LEF-1 mutant containing only the HMG DNA-binding
domain was sufficient to form a higher-order complex with AML1/Ets-1, but
exhibited only partial activity in transcription. We conclude that the T
cell-enriched proteins assemble on the enhancer independently of CREB and
function synergistically with CREB to activate the TCR alpha enhancer in a
chromatin environment.

PMID: 9106660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 7;272(10):6722-32.

A three-protein-DNA complex on a B cell-specific domain of the immunoglobulin mu 
heavy chain gene enhancer.

Rao E(1), Dang W, Tian G, Sen R.

Author information: 
(1)Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center and Departments of Biology, 
Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02254-9110, USA.

The lymphoid-specific immunoglobulin mu heavy chain gene intron enhancer (muE)
contains multiple binding sites for trans-acting nuclear factors. We have used a 
combination of in vitro and in vivo assays to reconstruct protein-DNA
interactions on a minimal B cell-specific mu enhancer that contains three motifs,
muA, muB, and muE3. Using ETS-domain proteins that transactivate the minimal
enhancer in non-lymphoid cells, we show that (i) PU.1 binds coordinately to both 
muA and muB sites in vitro and (ii) in the presence of Ets-1, this factor binds
to the muA site and PU.1 to the muB site. Two factors, TFE3 and USF, bind to the 
muE3 element. When the ETS proteins are present together with muE3 binding
proteins, a three-protein-DNA complex is generated. Furthermore, we provide
evidence for protein-protein interactions between Ets-1 and PU.1 proteins that
bind to muA and muB sites, and between Ets-1 and TFE3 bound to the muA and mu3
sites. We propose that this domain of the mu enhancer is assembled into a
nucleoprotein complex that contains two tissue-restricted ETS domain proteins
that recognize DNA from the same side of the helix and one ubiquitously expressed
bHLH-leucine zipper protein that binds between them, recognizing its site from a 
different side of the helix.

PMID: 9045705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Mar 4;94(5):1949-54.

Functional characterization of ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2 in the regulation of the MCSFR
proximal promoter.

Fears S(1), Gavin M, Zhang DE, Hetherington C, Ben-David Y, Rowley JD, Nucifora
G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The ETV6/CBFA2 (TEL/AML1) fusion gene occurs as a result of the chromosome
translocation t(12;21)(p13;q22) in up to 30% of children diagnosed with B cell
precursor (cd10+, cd19+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemic cells that have
acquired the t(12;21) usually demonstrate loss of the remaining normal ETV6 (TEL)
allele. Using reporter gene assays we have functionally characterized both the
normal ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2 fusion proteins in the regulation of the MCSFR
proximal promoter. Neither ETV6 or ETV6/CBFA2 has any significant, detectable
effect on the promoter by itself. However, both ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2 inhibit the
activation of the promoter by CBFA2B(AML1B) and C/EBPa. We have shown that a
29-bp region of the MCSFR promoter containing the binding sites for CBFA2B and
C/EBPa is sufficient for the inhibition by ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2. Mutational
analysis of the MCSFR promoter revealed that binding of both CBFA2B and C/EBPa to
their respective sites is necessary for the inhibition by ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2.
Deletion of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) region from the cDNAs of ETV6 and
ETV6/CBFA2 decreased but did not completely abrogate the ability of either
construct to inhibit promoter activation. We also found that the ETS DNA binding 
region of ETV6 is necessary for inhibition of the promoter. Addition of ETS1 and 
FLI1, two ETS family members that have homology in the 5' HLH region, but not
Spi1, an ETS family member without the 5' HLH region, also inhibited reporter
gene expression. Our data show that the inhibition mediated by ETV6 and
ETV6/CBFA2, in the context of the MCSFR promoter, depend on interactions with
other proteins, not just CBFA2B. Our results also indicate that the
transactivation characteristics of ETV6/CBFA2 are a combination of positive and
negative regulatory properties.

PMCID: PMC20023
PMID: 9050885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1997 Mar;43(2):211-25.

Multiple regulatory regions control the expression of Ets-1 in the developing
mouse: vascular expression conferred by intron I.

Jorcyk CL(1), Garrett LJ, Maroulakou IG, Watson DK, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, FCRDC, Frederick,
MD 21702-1201, USA.

Ets-1, a developmentally-regulated protooncogene, is expressed in multiple
tissues during different stages of mouse development and cellular differentiation
including high levels in lymphoid organs and endothelium. The putative roles of
this DNA-binding protein in lymphoid development and maturation, as well as in
angiogenesis and tumor vascularization, suggest that the regulation of Ets-1 may 
be critical to understanding these important developmental processes. We have
cloned the mouse Ets-1 5' flanking region which shows significant homology to the
human 5' flanking region, including potential transcription factor binding sites.
Various amounts of mouse Ets-1 5' flanking, exon and intron sequences have been
fused to the E. coli lacZ reporter gene and introduced into the mouse germline to
identify genomic regions which regulate the developmental and tissue-specific
expression of Ets-1. The 2.4 kb 5' flanking region of Ets-1 directs lacZ
expression to the folding neural tube of embryos at gestational day 8.5 which is 
identical to the endogenous expression pattern of Ets-1. However, at later times 
in gestation, up to 5.3 kb of 5' flanking region results only in aberrant
expression and is not able to confer lacZ expression in lymphoid or vascular
tissues. When the first exon and 9 kb of the first intron are included with 5'
flanking sequences, using an enhancer-trap-strategy, lacZ expression is observed 
in developing vessels, meninges and choroid plexus which correlates to endogenous
Ets-1 expression. Further characterization of the vascular-specific element
contained within intron I will provide important insights into the mechanisms
controlling gene expression during angiogenesis.

PMID: 9130605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1065-74.

Interaction of Ets-1 and the POU-homeodomain protein GHF-1/Pit-1 reconstitutes
pituitary-specific gene expression.

Bradford AP(1), Wasylyk C, Wasylyk B, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262, USA.

The pituitary-specific, POU-homeodomain factor GHF-1/Pit-1 is necessary, but not 
sufficient, for cell-specific expression of prolactin (PRL), growth hormone (GH),
and thyrotropin. Combinatorial interactions of GHF-1 with other factors are
likely to be required; however, such factors and their mechanisms of action
remain to be elucidated. Here we identify Ets-1 as a factor that functionally and
physically interacts with GHF-1 to fully reconstitute proximal PRL promoter
activity. In contrast, Ets-2 has no effect, and the alternatively spliced
GHF-2/Pit-1beta variant fails to synergize with Ets-1. The Ets-1-GHF-1 synergy
requires a composite Ets-1-GHF-1 cis element and is dependent on an
Ets-1-specific protein domain. Furthermore, the ancestrally related and
GHF-1-dependent GH promoter, which lacks this composite element, does not exhibit
this response. Finally, Ets-1, but not Ets-2, binds directly to GHF-1 and GHF-2. 
These data show that a functional interaction of GHF-1 and Ets-1, acting via a
composite DNA element, is required to establish lactotroph-specific PRL gene
expression, thus providing a molecular mechanism by which GHF-1 can discriminate 
between the GH and PRL genes. These results underscore the importance of
transcription factors that are distinct from, but interact with, homeobox
proteins to establish lineage-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC231831
PMID: 9032233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Oncogene. 1997 Feb 27;14(8):899-913.

Conserved mechanisms of Ras regulation of evolutionary related transcription
factors, Ets1 and Pointed P2.

Wasylyk C(1), Bradford AP, Gutierrez-Hartmann A, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, 
ULP, Illkirch, France.

Cell transformation by the Ras oncogene is mediated by members of the ets gene
family. To analyse the mechanisms of regulation, we have studied activation of
several ets factors by Ras expression. We show that expression of Ha-Ras strongly
activates the Ets1 p68 and p54 isoforms and Ets2 in F9 EC cells. We have mapped
the Ras responsive elements of Ets1 p68 to two domains, RI+II and RIII. Mutation 
of threonine 82 to alanine in RI+II abolishes both Ras activation and
phosphorylation by MAP kinase. Threonine 82 is part of a sequence that is
conserved in Drosophila Pointed P2, an ets protein that has been shown both
genetically and biochemically to mediate Ras signalling in Drosophila cells. We
extend the comparison of these evolutionary related proteins by showing that
Pointed P2 is activated by Ras in mammalian cells and mutation of the homologous 
threonine abolishes activation. Furthermore, we show that Pointed P2 resembles
Ets1, in that it has conserved sequences in a similar position adjacent to the
ets DNA binding domain that negatively auto-regulates DNA binding. These results 
go towards showing that the Drosophila Pointed and vertebrate Ets1 are
evolutionary related proteins that have remarkably conserved Ras regulatory
mechanisms downstream from MAP kinase.

PMID: 9050989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 21;272(8):4953-8.

Interaction of human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I Tax, Ets1, and Sp1 in
transactivation of the PTHrP P2 promoter.

Dittmer J(1), Pise-Masison CA, Clemens KE, Choi KS, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Laboratory of Molecular Virology, NCI, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5005, USA.

We have previously shown that the parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP)
promoter contains binding sites for transcription factors Ets1 and Sp1 and that
human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) Tax cooperates with Ets1 to
transactivate the PTHrP P2 promoter. Using the yeast two-hybrid interaction
system, we now provide evidence that Tax interacts with Ets1. Moreover, a double 
mutation (D22A,C23S) in the Tax protein that abrogated the Tax/Ets1 interaction
also inhibited the Tax/Ets1 cooperative effect, suggesting that the interaction
between Tax and Ets1 is important for transactivation of the PTHrP promoter. In
coimmunoprecipitation assays, we find that Tax facilitates the interaction
between Ets1 and Sp1, forming a ternary complex. When the Sp1 site in the PTHrP
promoter was mutated, the Tax/Ets1 cooperative effect was dramatically decreased.
This suggests that Sp1 plays an important role in the Ets1-dependent Tax
transactivation of the PTHrP P2 promoter. Finally, we demonstrate that Gal4-Tax
is a strong activator of the Gal PTHrP promoter, implying that Tax contributes
directly to the transcriptional activation of the promoter. We propose a model in
which the Tax/Ets1 cooperative effect on the PTHrP P2 promoter is based on the
ability of Tax, Ets1, and Sp1 to form a ternary complex on the template DNA. Tax 
facilitates the interaction of Ets1/Sp1 and participates directly in the
transcription initiation process.

PMID: 9030555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Biol Cell. 1997 Feb;8(2):313-23.

The nfkb1 promoter is controlled by proteins of the Ets family.

Lambert PF(1), Ludford-Menting MJ, Deacon NJ, Kola I, Doherty RR.

Author information: 
(1)Macfarlane Burnet Centre for Medical Research, Fairfield, Victoria, Australia.

The gene encoding NFKB1 is autoregulated, responding to NF-kappa B/Rel activation
through NF-kappa B binding sites in its promoter, which also contains putative
sites for Ets proteins. One of the Ets sites, which we refer to as EBS4, is
located next to an NF-kappa B/Rel binding site, kB3, which is absolutely required
for activity of the promoter in Jurkat T cells in response to activation by
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), PMA/ionomycin, or the Tax protein from
human T cell leukemia virus type I. We show that EBS4 is, required for the full
response of the nfkb1 promoter to PMA or PMA/ionomycin in Jurkat cells. EBS4 is
bound by Ets-1, Elf-1, and other species. Overexpression of Ets-1 augments the
response to PMA/ionomycin and this is reduced by mutation of EBS4. Elf-1 has less
effect in conjunction with PMA/ionomycin, but by itself activates the promoter
12-fold. This activation is only partly affected by mutation of EBS4, and a
mutant promoter that binds Ets-1, but not Elf-1, at the EBS4 site responds to
PMA/ionomycin as efficiently as the wild-type. Ets proteins may be responsible
for fine-tuning the activity of the nfkb1 gene in a cell-type-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC276082
PMID: 9190210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Early Hum Dev. 1997 Jan 20;47(2):147-56.

The c-ets1 protooncogene is expressed in human trophoblast during the first
trimester of pregnancy.

Luton D(1), Sibony O, Oury JF, Blot P, Dieterlen-Lièvre F, Pardanaud L.

Author information: 
(1)Maternity unit, Robert Debre Hospital, Paris, France.

Expression of the c-Ets1 protooncogene which codes for a transcription factor is 
associated with neovascularization and invasive processes. In order to determine 
c-Ets1 expression at the mRNA level, during the process of implantation during
the first trimester of human pregnancy, samples of trophoblast were retrieved at 
the time of legal abortion and processed for in situ hybridization. We found that
c-Ets1 mRNAs are transcribed in the endothelial cells of villous trophoblast and 
in the extravillous trophoblastic cells invading the uterine vessels. However, no
transcript was found in maternal endothelial cells. We conclude that c-Ets1 plays
a role in angiogenesis occurring in the development of the villous tree and is
involved during the invasive process of the endometrium and maternal vessels by
trophoblastic cells; this latter physiological event is crucial for a normal
development of the fetus, its failure leading to pathological cases. We suggest
that the role of the c-Ets1 protooncogene is related to the regulation of
metalloproteinase genes transcription, a gene family which is known to be a
target for Ets protein.

PMID: 9039964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncogene. 1997 Jan 16;14(2):213-21.

FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 function as ternary complex factors and ELK1 and SAP1a function
as ternary and quaternary complex factors on the Egr1 promoter serum response
elements.

Watson DK(1), Robinson L, Hodge DR, Kola I, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

The ETS gene products are a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins that
contain a highly conserved and structurally unique DNA binding domain, termed the
ETS domain. Several ETS proteins bind to DNA as monomers, however it has been
shown that the DNA binding activity is enhanced or modulated in the presence of
other factors. By differential display and whole genome PCR techniques, we have
recently shown that the Erg1 gene is a target for ETS proteins. The Egr1 promoter
contains multiple ETS binding sites, three of which exist as parts of two serum
response elements (SREI and SREII). The SRE is a cis-element that regulates the
expression of many growth factor responsive genes. ELK1 and SAP1a have been shown
to form ternary complexes with SRF on the SRE located in the c-fos promoter.
Similarly, we examined whether the ELK1, SAP1a, FLI1, EWS-FLI1, ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 
and PU.1 proteins can form ternary complexes with SRF on the Egr1 SREI and II.
Our results demonstrate that indeed ELK1, SAPla, FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 are able to
form ternary complexes with SRF on Egr1 SREs. In addition, ELK1 and SAP1a can
also form quarternary complexes on the Egr1 SREI. However, the proteins ETS1,
ETS2, PEA3 and PU.1 were unable to form ternary complexes with SRF on either the 
Egr1 or c-fos SREs. Our data demonstrate that FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 constitute new
members of a subgroup of ETS proteins that can function as ternary complex
factors and further implicate a novel function for these ETS transcription
factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene. By amino acid sequence comparison we 
found that, in fact, 50% of the amino acids present in the B-box of SAP1a and
ELK1, which are required for interaction with SRF, are identical to those present
in both FLI1 (amino acids 231- 248) and EWS-FLI1 proteins. This B-box is not
present in ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 or PU.1 and these proteins were unable to form
ternary complexes with SRF and Egrl-SREs or c-fos SRE. Furthermore, deletion of
194 amino terminal amino acids of FLI1 did not interfere with its ability to
interact with SRF, in fact, this truncation increased the stability of the
ternary complex. The FLI1 protein has a unique R-domain located next to the DNA
binding region. This R-domain may modulate the interaction with SRF, providing a 
mechanism that would be unique to FLI1 and EWS-FLI1, thus implicating a novel
function for these ETS transcription factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene.

PMID: 9010223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1997 Jan;17(1):1-10.

Specific binding of the ETS-domain protein to the interferon-stimulated response 
element.

Rutherford MN(1), Kumar A, Haque SJ, Ghysdael J, Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Interferon (IFN) activation of genes bearing an IFN-stimulated response element
(ISRE) is regulated through binding of IFN-stimulated gene factors (ISGF) to the 
ISRE found in many IFN-stimulated genes. Using a multimerized human 2-5A
synthetase ISRE as probe, we screened lambda gt11 expression libraries for cDNA
encoding ISRE-binding activity and isolated a clone for murine proto-oncogene
ets-1. The Ets-1 protein binds to the 2-5A synthetase ISRE at a site that also
binds ISGF3, a multicomponent factor whose ISRE binding correlates with
IFN-induced activation of transcription from ISRE-containing promoters.
IFN-induced ISGF3 complex formation on the ISRE can be inhibited by specific
Ets-1 antibody. Coexpression of Ets-1 represses ISRE-dependent reporter activity,
suggesting that one or more members of the Ets protein family may negatively
regulate transcriptional activity mediated by the 2-5A synthetase ISRE.

PMID: 9041465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 5;13(11):2331-7.

TATA-less promoters of some Ets-family genes are efficiently repressed by
wild-type p53.

Iotsova V(1), Crépieux P, Montpellier C, Laudet V, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

p53 has been reported to repress a number of TATA-containing promoters in
transient transfection assays. TATA-less promoters are generally believed to be
refractive to p53 repression. We report here that the TATA-less promoters of
Ets-family genes (Ets-1 and Ets-2) are efficiently repressed by wild-type but not
mutant p53 in transient co-transfection assays. Moreover, p53 was immunologically
detected in protein complexes formed on oligonucleotides from both the
TATA-containing and TATA-less promoters. Our data suggest that p53 is involved in
the regulation of the expression of both promoter types, most probably by
protein-protein interaction. A model for p53 function in promoter repression is
proposed.

PMID: 8957074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Cell Physiol. 1996 Dec;169(3):522-31.

Ets-1 regulates angiogenesis by inducing the expression of urokinase-type
plasminogen activator and matrix metalloproteinase-1 and the migration of
vascular endothelial cells.

Iwasaka C(1), Tanaka K, Abe M, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

The coordinate induction of protease activities and cell migration is a principal
feature of endothelial cells (ECs) invading the interstitial space in the initial
step of angiogenesis. However, the molecular mechanisms of these events are not
fully characterized. Ets-1 is a member of the ets gene family of transcription
factors, which binds to the Ets binding motif in the cis-acting elements and
regulates the expression of certain genes. Four typical angiogenic growth
factors, aFGF, bFGF, VEGF, and EGF, induced the expression of ets-1 mRNA in
either human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), ECV-304 cells
(immortalized HUVECs), or human omental microvascular endothelial cells (HOMECs).
The expression of ets-1 reached its maximum at 2 hr after factor addition and
then decreased to the basal level by 12 hr. For characterization of the role of
Ets-1 in angiogenesis, ets-1 antisense and sense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs)
were constructed. The ets-1 antisense ODN but not sense ODN efficiently blocked
the synthesis of Ets-1 protein by human ECs in response to angiogenic growth
factors. Moreover, the ets-1 antisense ODN but not sense ODN almost completely
abolished the binding of endothelial cell extract to DNA containing the Ets
binding motif. The expression of urokinase-type plasminogen activator and matrix 
metalloproteinase-1 and the migration of ECs in response to growth factors were
significantly inhibited by ets-1 antisense ODN but not by sense ODN. Tube
formation by HOMECs in type 1 collagen gel stimulated with EGF was abrogated by
ets-1 antisense ODN. Finally, the expression of Ets-1 protein in ECs during
angiogenesis in vivo was confirmed by an immunohistochemical analysis using a
murine angiogenesis model. These results indicate that the induction of ets-1
mRNA is a mutual phenomenon in ECs stimulated with angiogenic growth factors.
Ets-1 appears to play an important role in angiogenesis, regulating the
expression of proteases and the migration of ECs.

PMID: 8952701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1996 Nov 22;97(1):107-17.

Expression of the c-ets1 gene in the hypothalamus and pituitary during rat
development.

Laurent-Huck FM(1), Egles C, Kienlen P, Stoeckel ME, Felix JM.

Author information: 
(1)Université Louis Pasteur, Laboratoire de Physiologie Générale, CNRS, URA 1446,
Strasbourg, France.

The Ets gene family codes for transcription factors containing a conserved DNA
binding domain: the Ets-binding domain. The proto-oncogene c-ets1 is highly
expressed in lymphoid organs and in developing mesodermal-originating structures.
We studied c-ets1 gene expression in the developing rat hypothalamo-hypophyseal
system, using in situ hybridization on paraformaldehyde-fixed frozen sections. At
embryonic day 12 (E12) and E13, cells synthesizing c-ets1mRNA are found in the
neural tube where they form small, heavily labeled strand-like and punctate
structures; positive mesenchymatous cells, corresponding to the surface capillary
network, surround the brain and hypophysis. C-ets1mRNA is synthesized from E14 in
the neural pituitary and E15 in the adenohypophysis, during angiogenesis; no
c-ets1mRNA is detected in the avascular intermediate pituitary at any stage.
Strand-like c-ets1mRNA labeling is intense from E14 to E21 in the diencephalon.
This labeling is also detected during perinatal stages in the hypothalamic
magnocellular nuclei, one of the most richly vascularized brain areas. In the rat
hypothalamo-hypophyseal system, c-ets1 gene expression is maximal during fetal
and perinatal stages and progressively decreases thereafter until adulthood. The 
spatio-temporal correlation observed between c-ets1 gene expression and blood
vessel formation in the rat hypothalamus and pituitary suggests a role for c-ets1
in angiogenesis in this system.

PMID: 8946059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Oncogene. 1996 Nov 7;13(9):1911-7.

Ets up-regulates MET transcription.

Gambarotta G(1), Boccaccio C, Giordano S, Ando M, Stella MC, Comoglio PM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research, University of Torino Medical School, Italy.

MET, a potentially harmful oncogene controlling invasive growth, is overexpressed
in a significant percentage of human cancers. Since amplification of the MET gene
occurs only in a fraction of these cases, we investigated the transcriptional
mechanisms responsible for up-regulation of the promoter activity. The
transcription driven by the 3.1 kbp DNA fragment containing the minimal promoter 
was studied by 5' progressive deletion analysis. The patterns of MET promoter
activity suggest the presence of weak negative and positive elements in the
region between 300 and 840 bp upstream to the transcription start site. The
region encompassing the first 300 bp strongly up-regulates the promoter. This
region contains four putative binding sites for members of the Ets transcription 
factor family, known to be involved in invasive growth. Transient co-expression
of Ets1 resulted in a strong enhancement of the MET promoter activity. Increased 
expression of the Met protein was observed in cells stably transfected with ETS1.
Double stranded oligonucleotides with Ets consensus sequence were used as a
'decoy' to inhibit binding to DNA native sites. They dramatically reduced the
amount of Met protein in a human carcinoma cell line overexpressing the oncogene.
Interestingly, Met activation induces transcription of ETS1 mRNA, showing that
Ets proteins act both upstream and downstream to MET. These data indicate that
members of the Ets family promote MET transcription and suggest their
contribution to the invasive phenotype through overexpression of MET.

PMID: 8934537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 25;271(43):26706-12.

Transcriptional regulation of the N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V gene in human
bile duct carcinoma cells (HuCC-T1) is mediated by Ets-1.

Kang R(1), Saito H, Ihara Y, Miyoshi E, Koyama N, Sheng Y, Taniguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2 Yamadaoka,
Suita, Osaka 565, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1999 Jan 1;274(1):554.

N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferase V (GnT-V) catalyzes the transfer of
N-acetylglucosamine from UDP-N-acetylglucosamine to alpha-6-D-mannoside to
produce the beta1-6 linked branching of N-glycan oligosaccharides, which controls
the polylactosamine content. The expression of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V,
which contains 17 exons and spans 155 kilobase pairs, is expressed in a tissue-
and cell type-specific manner and is regulated at the level of transcription by
multiple promoters (Saito, H., Gu, J., Nishikawa, A., Ihara, Y., Fujii, J.,
Kohgo, Y., and Taniguchi, N. (1995) Eur. J. Biochem. 233, 18-26). To elucidate
the mechanism by which the GnT-V gene is expressed in a cell- and tissue-specific
manner, cell-restricted expression was analyzed using the 5'-upstream regions of 
the human GnT-V gene spanning base pairs -2760 to +23 in a human bile duct
carcinoma cell line, HuCC-T1. We characterized two cis-acting elements that are
potentially important in HuCC-T1 cell-specific expression. The two elements each 
contain an Ets-1 binding site, 5'-GGA-3'. Specific binding of Ets-1 to the
respective elements was demonstrated by competition analysis as well as by
antibody supershift experiments. Cotransfection of an Ets-1 expression plasmid
along with a GnT-V promoter-luciferase reporter plasmid revealed the
participation of Ets-1 in the regulation of the GnT-V gene transcription. These
data indicated that the transcriptional regulation of the GnT-V gene was mediated
by transcription factor Ets-1.

PMID: 8900148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 4;271(40):24639-48.

GHF-1/Pit-1 functions as a cell-specific integrator of Ras signaling by targeting
the Ras pathway to a composite Ets-1/GHF-1 response element.

Bradford AP(1), Conrad KE, Tran PH, Ostrowski MC, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Molecular Biology, and Colorado Cancer
Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, 80262, USA.

Activation of the rat prolactin (rPRL) promoter by Ras is a prototypical example 
of tissue-specific transcriptional regulation in a highly differentiated cell
type. Using a series of site-specific mutations and deletions of the proximal
rPRL promoter we have mapped the major Ras/Raf response element (RRE) to a
composite Ets-1/GHF-1 binding site located between positions -217 and -190.
Mutation of either the Ets-1 or GHF-1 binding sites inhibits Ras and Raf
activation of the rPRL promoter, and insertion of this RRE into the rat growth
hormone promoter confers Ras responsiveness. We show that Ets-1 is expressed in
GH4 cells and, consistent with their functional synergistic interaction, both
Ets-1 and GHF-1 are able to bind specifically to this bipartite RRE. We confirm
that Ets-1 or a related Ets factor is the nuclear target of the Ras pathway
leading to activation of the rPRL promoter and demonstrate that Elk-1 and Net do 
not mediate the Ras response. Thus, the pituitary-specific POU homeodomain
transcription factor, GHF-1, serves as a cell-specific signal integrator by
functionally interacting with an Ets-1-like factor, at uniquely juxtaposed
binding sites, thereby targeting an otherwise ubiquitous Ras signaling pathway to
a select subset of cell-specific GHF-1-dependent genes.

PMID: 8798730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Cell Biochem. 1996 Sep 15;62(4):506-15.

Heat shock inhibits pre-rRNA processing at the primary site in vitro and alters
the activity of some rRNA binding proteins.

Ghoshal K(1), Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, Chicago Medical School,
Illinois 60064, USA.

The effect of heat shock on pre-rRNA processing at the primary site within
external transcribed spacer region 1 (ETS1) was studied in S-100 extract derived 
from mouse lymphosarcoma cells. In vivo labeling with [32P]orthophosphate showed 
that the synthesis of the rRNA precursor and its processing to 28S and 18S rRNAs 
were inhibited significantly due to heat shock. The processing activity was
reduced by 50% at 1 h and was completely blocked following 2-h exposure of cells 
at 42 degrees C. Mixing S-100 extracts from the control and heat-treated cells
did not affect the processing activity in the control extract, which proves the
absence of a nuclease or other inhibitor(s) of processing in the extract from the
heat-shocked cells. Heat shock did not affect interaction between pre-rRNA and U3
snoRNA, a prerequisite for the processing at the primary site, but significantly 
altered RNA-protein interaction. Three polypeptides of 200, 110, and 52 kDa that 
specifically cross-link to pre-rRNA spanning the primary processing site were
inactivated after heat shock. Hyperthermia did not alter 3' end processing of
SV40L pre-mRNA.

PMID: 8891896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Oncogene. 1996 Aug 15;13(4):877-81.

Phosphorylation of Ets1 regulates the complementation of a CSF-1 receptor
impaired in mitogenesis.

Rabault B(1), Roussel MF, Quang CT, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Virale et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 146, Institut Curie,
Centre Universitaire, Orsay, France.

Ets1, the founder member of the Ets transcription factor family, is involved in a
variety of developmental and cellular processes. Previous studies have shown that
serine phosphorylation of Ets1 inhibits its DNA binding activity, suggesting that
phosphorylation is important in the regulation of Ets1 function. To further
examine Ets1 phosphorylation, we ectopically expressed Ets1 in fibroblasts and
stimulated these cells with serum. Using two-dimensional tryptic phosphopeptide
analysis and site-directed mutagenesis, we found that Ets1 was phosphorylated on 
threonine 38, a residue conserved in several Ets proteins. Substitution of this
residue with alanine enhanced CSF-1-dependent colony formation in semi-solid
medium of NIH3T3 cells expressing a mitogenically defective CSF-1 receptor
[Y809F]. Threonine 38 is part of a consensus amino-acid sequence frequently
recognized and targeted by members of the MAP kinase family. Moreover, this
residue is phosphorylated in vitro by recombinant ERK2, which suggests that the
kinase which phosphorylates threonine 38 in vivo is a member of the MAP kinase
family. In addition, phosphorylation on threonine 38 seems to negatively regulate
Ets1 activity in response to growth-factor stimulation.

PMID: 8761310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;16(8):4544-54.

Precise alignment of sites required for mu enhancer activation in B cells.

Nikolajczyk BS(1), Nelsen B, Sen R.

Author information: 
(1)Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, Department of Biology,
Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02254-9110, USA.

The lymphocyte-specific immunoglobulin mu heavy-chain gene intronic enhancer is
regulated by multiple nuclear factors. The previously defined minimal enhancer
containing the muA, muE3, and muB sites is transactivated by a combination of the
ETS-domain proteins PU.1 and Ets-1 in nonlymphoid cells. The core GGAAs of the
muA and muB sites are separated by 30 nucleotides, suggesting that ETS proteins
bind to these sites from these same side of the DNA helix. We tested the
necessity for appropriate spatial alignment of these elements by using mutated
enhancers with altered spacings. A 4- or 10-bp insertion between muE3 and muB
inactivated the mu enhancer in S194 plasma cells but did not affect in vitro
binding of Ets-1, PU.1, or the muE3-binding protein TFE3, alone or in pairwise
combinations. Circular permutation and phasing analyses demonstrated that PU.1
binding but not TFE3 or Ets-1 bends mu enhancer DNA toward the major groove. We
propose that the requirement for precise spacing of the muA and muB elements is
due in part to a directed DNA bend induced by PU.1.

PMCID: PMC231453
PMID: 8754855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Int J Oncol. 1996 Jul;9(1):9-18.

Expression of ets family of genes in systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjogren's
syndrome.

Georgiou P(1), Maroulakou I, Green J, Dantis P, Romanospica V, Kottaridis S,
Lautenberger J, Watson D, Papas T, Fischinger P, Bhat N.

Author information: 
(1)NCI, FREDERICK CANC RES & DEV CTR, SCI APPLICAT INT CORP, ONCOL MOLEC LAB,
FREDERICK, MD 21702 USA. EVANGELISMOS MED CTR, DEPT RHEUMATOL, ATHENS, GREECE.
UCSC, FAC MED, INST HYG, ROME, ITALY. HELLENIC ANTICANC INST, PAPANICOLAOU RES
CTR ONCOL & EXPT SURG, ATHENS, GREECE. MED UNIV S CAROLINA, HOLLINGS CANC CTR,
CTR MOL & STRUCT BIOL, CHARLESTON, SC USA. UNIV IOANNINA, SCH MED, DEPT INTERNAL 
MED, GR-45110 IOANNINA, GREECE.

We have examined the expression of three members of the ets family of genes,
ETS1, ETS2 and ERGB/Fli-1, in lymphocytes from patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus and in two murine autoimmune model systems. The ERGB/Fli-1 gene is 
expressed at a higher level in lymphocytes from autoimmune disease patients than 
healthy individuals. In addition, we found that the ERGB/Fli-1 gene expression is
higher in splenic T-cells from lupus prone mice and in infiltrating lymphocytes
in the salivary glands of HTLV-I tax transgenic mice. Taken together, these
results suggest that the elevated expression of the ERGB/Fli-1 gene in
lymphocytes may be a prelude to the development of autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 21541474  [PubMed]


39. Genomics. 1996 Jun 15;34(3):347-52.

Comparative genome mapping of the ataxia-telangiectasia region in mouse, rat, and
Syrian hamster.

Matsuda Y(1), Imai T, Shiomi T, Saito T, Yamauchi M, Fukao T, Akao Y, Seki N, Ito
H, Hori TA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Group, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, 4-9-1
Anagawa, Chiba, 263, Japan.

Chromosomal locations of the Atm (ataxia-telangiectasia (AT)-mutated) and Acat1
(mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase) genes in mouse, rat, and Syrian hamster 
were determined by direct R-banding FISH. Both genes were colocalized to the C-D 
band of mouse chromosome 9, the proximal end of q24.1 of rat chromosome 8, and
qa4-qa5 of Syrian hamster chromosome 12. The regions in the mouse and rat were
homologous to human chromosome 11q. Fine genetic linkage mapping of the mouse AT 
region was performed using the interspecific backcross mice. Atm, Acat1, and
Npat, which is a new gene isolated from the AT region, and 12 flanking
microsatellite DNA markers were examined. No recombinations were found among the 
Atm, Npat, Acat1, and D9Mit6 loci, and these loci were mapped 2.0 cM distal to
D9Mit99 and 1.3 cM proximal to D9Mit102. Comparison of the linkage map of mouse
chromosome 9 (MMU9) and that of human chromosome 11 (HSA11) indicates that there 
is a chromosomal rearrangement due to an inversion between Ets1 and
Atm-Npat-Acat1 and that the inversion of MMU9 originated from the chromosomal
breakage at the boundary between Gria4 and Atm-Npat-Acat1 on HSA11. This type of 
inversion appeared to be conserved in the three rodent species, mouse, rat, and
Syrian hamster, using additional comparative mapping data with the Rck gene.

PMID: 8786135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Blood. 1996 Jun 1;87(11):4678-85.

Analysis of the thrombopoietin receptor (MPL) promoter implicates GATA and Ets
proteins in the coregulation of megakaryocyte-specific genes.

Deveaux S(1), Filipe A, Lemarchandel V, Ghysdael J, Roméo PH, Mignotte V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

The MPL gene codes for the thrombopoietin receptor, whose ligand specifically
controls megakaryocytic differentiation. To understand the molecular basis for
the megakaryocyte-specific expression of MPL, we analyzed the promoter of this
gene. A 200 bp fragment is sufficient for high-level specific expression. This
fragment can bind several trans-acting factors in vitro, including GATA-1 and
members of the Ets family. GATA-1 binds with low affinity to a unique GATA motif 
at -70 in the MPL promoter, and destruction of this site yields only a modest
decrease in expression level in HEL cells. Ets proteins also bind with low
affinity to two sites. One is located at position -15 and its destruction reduces
expression to 50%; the other is located immediately downstream of the GATA motif 
and plays a crucial role in expression of the promoter in HEL cells, as its
inactivation reduces expression to 15%. Furthermore, GATA-1 and two Ets proteins,
Ets-1 and Fli-1, can trans-activate the MPL promoter in heterologous cells. The
effects of GATA-1 and these two Ets proteins are additive. Together with our
previous results on the glycoprotein IIb (GpIIb) promoter, this study indicates a
molecular basis for the coregulation of early markers of megakaryocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 8639837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Circ Res. 1996 Apr;78(4):589-95.

Regulated expression of the ets-1 transcription factor in vascular smooth muscle 
cells in vivo and in vitro.

Hultgårdh-Nilsson A(1), Cercek B, Wang JW, Naito S, Lövdahl C, Sharifi B,
Forrester JS, Fagin JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA Medical School, Los 
Angeles, Calif, USA.

Ets-1 regulates the transcription of several genes encoding extracellular matrix 
proteins (ie, osteopontin and tenascin) as well as enzymes involved in
degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ie, stromelysin and
urokinase plasminogen activator). In the present study, we investigated the
regulation of c-ets-1 in cultured rat vascular smooth muscle cells as well as in 
the arterial wall after balloon injury in vivo. Serum-starved smooth muscle cells
exposed to serum for various time points express a major c-ets-1 mRNA transcript 
of 5.3 kb and minor bands of 4.0 and 2.5 kb with a peak at 2 hours after
stimulation. These effects were concentration dependent. Western blotting
revealed an increase in 55- and 40-kD immunoreactive ets-1 proteins in cells
treated with serum for 2 hours, and binding to an oligonucleotide containing the 
ets-1 consensus cis-acting motif was demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. Ets-1 mRNA abundance was induced with a peak at 2 hours after
stimulation with platelet-derived growth factor-BB and with angiotensin II. There
was a distinct increase of ets-1 immunoreactivity in the inner layer of the media
2 hours after balloon catheter injury of rat arteries, which declined after 6
hours and returned to the basal level 1 day after vessel wall damage. Arterial
c-ets-1 mRNA content was induced with an identical time course. These findings
suggest that c-ets-1 may be of importance in the mitogenic signaling pathway of
smooth muscle cells grown in culture. In addition, ets-1 may play a role in the
activation of smooth muscle cells in vivo after mechanical injury of the vessel
wall. Because the ets-1 transcription factor activates the gene expression of a
number of mRNA species involved in matrix deposition and degradation, these data 
are compatible with a role for ets-1 in vascular remodeling and/or cell
migration.

PMID: 8635216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncogene. 1996 Mar 21;12(6):1199-1204.

ETS1 and ETS2 in p53 regulation: spatial separation of ETS binding sites (EBS)
modulate protein: DNA interaction.

Venanzoni MC(1), Robinson LR, Hodge DR, Kola I, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute-FCRDC, Frederick, 
Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

p53 is an extensively studied tumor suppressor gene implicated in the genesis of 
a large number of varied tumors. However, the pathways of regulation for the
wild-type p53 gene and its product are as yet unknown. In situ hybridization
analyses of ETS1 and ETS2 expression during mouse embryogenesis, have shown a
pattern similar to that of p53 gene expression. Significantly, we have identified
several ETS-binding sites (EBS) in the promoter regions of the human and mouse
p53 genes. In the human promoter two of these EBS are present in the form of a
palindrome, with the two EBS cores being separated by four nucleotides. This
report shows that the EBS palindrome of the human p53 promoter has a high
affinity for ETS1 and ETS2 and that such binding interaction intracellularly is
able to activate the transcription of a CAT reporter gene by 5-10-fold using COS 
cells. To investigate whether the spacing between the two EBS cores influences
the DNA binding activity, we synthesized oligonucleotides with increasing
distances (4,12,16, and 20 bases respectively) between the two EBS cores of the
palindrome. We observed an inverse correlation between an increasing distance in 
the two EBS cores of the palindrome and the ETS1 and ETS2 DNA binding activity
respectively. Interestingly, optimal DNA binding activity was observed when the
distance between the two EBS cores was four bases, identical to that which occurs
in the natural promoter. Furthermore we show that the p53 mRNA is expressed at
higher levels in NIH3T3 cells overexpressing ETS2 gene product, suggesting that
the ETS2 transcription factor is a likely candidate for regulating the expression
of p53 in vivo.

PMID: 8649821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Mar 15;24(6):1015-9.

During in vivo maturation of eukaryotic nuclear mRNA, splicing yields excised
exon circles.

Bailleul B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unite 124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille, France.

Circular splicing has already been described on nuclear pre-mRNA for certain
splice sites far apart in the multi exonic ETS-1 gene and in the single 1.2 kb
exon of the Sry locus. To date, it is unclear how splice site juxtaposition
occurs in normal and circular splicing. The splice site selection of an internal 
exon is likely to involve pairing between splice sites across that exon. Based on
this, we predict that, albeit at low frequency, internal exons yield circular RNA
by splicing as an error-prone mechanism of exon juxtaposition or, perhaps more
interestingly, as a regulated mechanism on alternative exons. To address this
question, the circular exon formation was analyzed at three ETS-1 internal exons 
(one alternative spliced exon and two constitutive), in human cell line and blood
cell samples. Here, we show by RT-PCR and sequencing that exon circular splicing 
occurs at the three individual exons that we examined. RNase protection
experiments suggest that there is no correlation between exon circle expression
and exon skipping.

PMCID: PMC145744
PMID: 8604331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Virol. 1996 Mar;70(3):1331-9.

ras oncogene-dependent activation of the P4 promoter of minute virus of mice
through a proximal P4 element interacting with the Ets family of transcription
factors.

Fuks F(1), Deleu L, Dinsart C, Rommelaere J, Faisst S.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Tumor Virology Unit, Abteilung 0610, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg, Germany.

The P4 promoter of parvovirus minute virus of mice (MVMp) directs transcription
of the genes coding for nonstructural proteins. The activity of promoter P4 is
regulated by several cis-acting DNA elements. Among these, a promoter-proximal GC
box was shown to be essential for P4 activity (J.K. Ahn, B.J. Gavin, G. Kumar,
and D.C. Ward, J. Virol. 63:5425-5439, 1989). In this study, a motif homologous
to an Ets transcription factor-binding site (EBS), located immediately upstream
from the GC box, was found to be required for the full activity of promoter P4 in
the ras-transformed rat fibroblast cell line FREJ4. In normal parental FR3T3
cells, the transcriptional function of P4 EBS was insignificant but could be
restored by transient cell transfection with the c-Ha-ras oncogene. P4 EBS may
thus contribute to the stimulation of promoter P4 in ras-transformed cells.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using crude extracts from FREJ4 cells
revealed the binding of a member(s) of the Ets family of transcription factors to
the P4 EBS, as well as the interaction of two members of the Sp1 family, Sp1 and 
Sp3, with the adjacent GC box. When produced in Drosophila melanogaster SL2
cells, Ets-1 and Sp1 proteins acted synergistically to transactivate promoter P4 
through their respective cognate sites.

PMCID: PMC189952
PMID: 8627649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Protein Sci. 1996 Feb;5(2):296-309.

Structural coupling of the inhibitory regions flanking the ETS domain of murine
Ets-1.

Skalicky JJ(1), Donaldson LW, Petersen JM, Graves BJ, McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Several members of the ets gene family of transcription factors show negative
regulation of DNA binding by intramolecular interactions. A structural mechanism 
for this auto-inhibition is investigated using a 161-residue N-terminal deletion 
mutant of murine Ets-1, Ets-1 delta N280. This protein shows a similar reduced
affinity for DNA as native Ets-1 because it contains the ETS domain in context of
the flanking amino- and carboxy-terminal regions that together mediate repression
of DNA binding. The secondary structure of Ets-1 delta N280 was determined using 
NMR chemical shift, NOE, J coupling, and amide hydrogen exchange information. In 
addition to the winged helix-turn-helix ETS domain, Ets-1 delta N280 contains two
alpha-helices in the amino-terminal inhibitory region and one alpha-helix in the 
carboxy-terminal inhibitory region. Chemical shift comparisons were made between 
this protein and an activated form of Ets-1 lacking the amino-terminal inhibitory
region. The spectral differences demonstrate that the amino- and carboxy-terminal
inhibitory sequences are structurally coupled to one another, thus explaining the
observation that both regions are required for the repression of DNA binding.
Furthermore, these data show that the inhibitory sequences also interact directly
with the first helix of the intervening ETS domain, thereby providing a pathway
for the repression of DNA binding. These results lead to a model of an inhibitory
module in Ets-1 composed of both the amino- and carboxy-terminal regions
interfaced with the ETS domain. This establishes the structural framework for
understanding the intramolecular inhibition of Ets-1 DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC2143348
PMID: 8745408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Feb;16(2):538-47.

Ras-mediated phosphorylation of a conserved threonine residue enhances the
transactivation activities of c-Ets1 and c-Ets2.

Yang BS(1), Hauser CA, Henkel G, Colman MS, Van Beveren C, Stacey KJ, Hume DA,
Maki RA, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

The Ras oncogene products regulate the expression of genes in transformed cells, 
and members of the Ets family of transcription factors have been implicated in
this process. To determine which Ets factors are the targets of Ras signaling
pathways, the abilities of several Ets factors to activate Ras-responsive
enhancer (RRE) reporters in the presence of oncogenic Ras were examined. In
transient transfection assay, reporters containing RREs composed of Ets-AP-1
binding sites could be activated 30-fold in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and 80-fold in
the macrophage-like line RAW264 by the combination of Ets1 or Ets2 and Ras but
not by several other Ets factors that were tested in the assay. Ets2 and Ras also
superactivated an RRE composed of Ets-Ets binding sites, but the Ets-responsive
promoter of the c-fms gene was not superactivated. Mutation of a threonine
residue to alanine in the conserved amino-terminal regions of Ets1 and Ets2
(threonine 38 and threonine 72, respectively) abrogated the ability of each of
these proteins to superactivate reporter gene expression. Phosphoamino acid
analysis of radiolabeled Ets2 revealed that Ras induced normally absent
threonine-specific phosphorylation of the protein. The Ras-dependent increase in 
threonine phosphorylation was not observed in Ets2 proteins that had the
conserved threonine 72 residue mutated to alanine or serine. These data indicate 
that Ets1 and Ets2 are specific nuclear targets of Ras signaling events and that 
phosphorylation of a conserved threonine residue is a necessary molecular
component of Ras-mediated activation of these transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC231032
PMID: 8552081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 12;271(2):774-82.

Synergistic transcriptional activation of the tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases-1 promoter via functional interaction of AP-1 and Ets-1
transcription factors.

Logan SK(1), Garabedian MJ, Campbell CE, Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiobiology and Environmental Health, University of California,
San Francisco 94143, USA.

The tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1) is an inhibitor of the
extracellular matrix-degrading metalloproteinases. We characterized response
elements that control TIMP-1 gene expression. One contains a binding site that
selectively binds c-Fos and c-Jun in vitro and confers a response to multiple
AP-1 family members in vivo. Adjacent to this is a binding site for Ets domain
proteins. Although c-Ets-1 alone did not activate transcription from this
element, it enhanced transcription synergistically with AP-1 either in the
context of the natural promoter or when the sequence was linked upstream of a
heterologous promoter. Furthermore, a complex of c-Jun and c-Fos interacted with 
c-Ets-1 in vitro. These results suggest that AP-1 tethers c-Ets-1 to the TIMP-1
promoter via protein-protein interaction to achieve Ets-dependent transcriptional
regulation. Collectively, our results indicate that TIMP-1 expression is
controlled by several DNA response elements that respond to variations in the
level and activity of AP-1 and Ets transcriptional regulatory proteins.

PMID: 8557686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. EMBO J. 1996 Jan 2;15(1):125-34.

Solution structure of the ETS domain from murine Ets-1: a winged helix-turn-helix
DNA binding motif.

Donaldson LW(1), Petersen JM, Graves BJ, McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 
V6T 1Z3.

Ets-1 is the prototypic member of the ets family of transcription factors. This
family is characterized by the conserved ETS domain that mediates specific DNA
binding. Using NMR methods, we have determined the structure of a fragment of
murine Ets-1 composed of the 85 residue ETS domain and a 25 amino acid extension 
that ends at its native C-terminus. The ETS domain folds into a helix-turn-helix 
motif on a four-stranded anti-parallel beta-sheet scaffold. This structure places
Ets-1 in the winged helix-turn-helix (wHTH) family of DNA binding proteins and
provides a model for interpreting the sequence conservation of the ETS domain and
the specific interaction of Ets-1 with DNA. The C-terminal sequence of Ets-1,
which is mutated in the v-Ets oncoprotein, forms an alpha-helix that packs
anti-parallel to the N-terminal helix of the ETS domain. In this position, the
C-terminal helix is poised to interact directly with an N-terminal inhibitory
region in Ets-1 as well as the wHTH motif. This explains structurally the
concerted role of residues flanking the ETS domain in the intramolecular
inhibition of Ets-1 DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC449924
PMID: 8598195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cell. 1995 Dec 1;83(5):761-71.

The solution structure of the human ETS1-DNA complex reveals a novel mode of
binding and true side chain intercalation.

Werner MH(1), Clore M, Fisher CL, Fisher RJ, Trinh L, Shiloach J, Gronenborn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-0520, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell 1996 Oct 18;87(2):following 355.

The solution structure of a 24.4 kDa specific complex of the DNA-binding domain
(DBD) of the human ETS1 (hETS1) oncoprotein with a 17-mer DNA has been solved by 
NMR. The interaction of the hETS1 DBD with DNA reveals a surprising twist on the 
general features of helix-turn-helix (HTH)-DNA interactions. Major groove
recognition involves the C-terminal two thirds of the HTH recognition helix,
while minor groove recognition occurs via true intercalation of the side chain of
Trp-28, which extends from the minor to the major groove. This results in a sharp
kink of approximately 60 degrees and a widening of the minor groove over one-half
turn of the DNA. The orientation of the HTH element of the hETS1 DBD with respect
to the major groove is significantly rotated relative to other HTH proteins.
These observations establish the ETS family of DNA-binding proteins as a distinct
family of HTH proteins.

PMID: 8521493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Exp Med. 1995 Dec 1;182(6):1943-9.

Anti-immunoglobulin M activates nuclear calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase II in human B lymphocytes.

Valentine MA(1), Czernik AJ, Rachie N, Hidaka H, Fisher CL, Cambier JC, Bomsztyk 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

We and others have previously shown that the nuclear protein, Ets-1, is
phosphorylated in a calcium-dependent manner after ligation of immunoglobulin
(Ig) M on B lymphocytes. As this phosphorylation was independent of protein
kinase C activity, we tested whether a calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase (CaM kinase) might phosphorylate the Ets-1 protein after elevation of
intracellular free calcium concentrations. The dephosphorylated form of Ets-1 has
been shown to bind to chromatin, suggesting that the operative kinase should be
detectable in the nucleus. We prepared nuclear extracts from two human B cell
lines in which increased intracellular free calcium levels correlated with
increased phosphorylation of the Ets-1 protein. Activity of the CaM kinases was
determined using a synthetic peptide substrate both in the absence and presence
of an inhibitor specific for the CaM kinase family, KN-62. Stimulation of cells
with anti-IgM led to increased activity of a nuclear kinase that could
phosphorylate the peptide, and this activity was reduced by 10 microM KN-62.
Kinase activity was reduced in lysates preadsorbed using an antibody specific for
CaM kinase II. Two-dimensional phosphopeptide maps of the Ets-1 protein from
cells incubated with ionomycin or anti-IgM contained two unique phosphopeptides
that were absent in untreated cells. Incubation of isolated Ets-1 protein with
purified CaM kinase II produced phosphorylation of peptides that migrated
identically to those found in cells incubated with either anti-IgM or ionomycin. 
These data suggest a model of signal transduction by the antigen receptor on B
lymphocytes in which increased intracellular free calcium can rapidly activate
nuclear CaM kinase II, potentially resulting in phosphorylation and regulation of
DNA-binding proteins.

PMCID: PMC2192239
PMID: 7500040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Oncogene. 1995 Nov 16;11(10):2135-43.

ETS1 transactivates the human GM-CSF promoter in Jurkat T cells stimulated with
PMA and ionomycin.

Thomas RS(1), Tymms MJ, Seth A, Shannon MF, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Monash University Institute of Reproduction and Development, Monash Medical
Centre, Clayton, Melbourne, Australia.

Activation of T helper cells results in coordinate expression of a number of
cytokines involved in differentiation, proliferation and activation of the
haematopoietic system. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
is one such cytokine whose increased expression results partly from increases in 
transcription. Cis-acting elements with NF kappa B, AP-1 and ETS-like motifs have
been identified in the promoter region of the GM-CSF gene, which are important
for transcriptional activity following PMA and ionomycin stimulation. A number of
the ETS family of transcription factors are expressed in T cells, including ETS1 
and ELF1. Here we describe the ability of these factors to interact with a site
(GM5), located within the CLE0 element, -47 to -40 upstream of the GM-CSF
transcription initiation site. Exogenous ETS1, but not ELF1, can transactivate
GM-CSF, through the GM5 site, in a PMA/ionomycin dependent manner. Other
unidentified ETS-like factors present in Jurkat cells are also capable of binding
GM5. Mutation of the core ETS binding site from -GGAA- to -GGAT- prevents the
binding of ETS-like factors with the exception of ETS1. The GM-CSF promoter,
modified in this way to be ETS1 specific, is fully responsive to PMA/ionomycin
induction, in addition to ETS1 transactivation in the presence of PMA and
ionomycin. Together these data suggest that ETS1 may be involved in mediating the
increased GM-CSF production associated with T cell activation.

PMID: 7478534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochem Cell Biol. 1995 Nov-Dec;73(11-12):845-58.

Small nucleolar RNA.

Gerbi SA.

A growing list of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) has been characterized in
eukaryotes. They are transcribed by RNA polymerase II or III; some snoRNAs are
encoded in the introns of other genes. The nonintronic polymerase II transcribed 
snoRNAs receive a trimethylguanosine cap, probably in the nucleus, and move to
the nucleolus. snoRNAs are complexed with proteins, sometimes including
fibrillarin. Localization and maintenance in the nucleolus of some snoRNAs
requires the presence of initial precursor rRNA (pre-rRNA). Many snoRNAs have
conserved sequence boxes C and D and a 3' terminal stem; the role of these
features are discussed. Functional assays done for a few snoRNAs indicate their
roles in rRNA processing for cleavage of the external and internal transcribed
spacers (ETS and ITS). U3 is the most abundant snoRNA and is needed for cleavage 
of ETS1 and ITS1; experimental results on U3 binding sites in pre-rRNA are
reviewed. 18S rRNA production also needs U14, U22, and snR30 snoRNAs, whereas U8 
snoRNA is needed for 5.8S and 28S rRNA production. Other snoRNAs that are
complementary to 18S or 28S rRNA might act as chaperones to mediate RNA folding. 
Whether snoRNAs join together in a large rRNA processing complex (the
"processome") is not yet clear. It has been hypothesized that such complexes
could anchor the ends of loops in pre-rRNA containing 18S or 28S rRNA, thereby
replacing base-paired stems found in pre-rRNA of prokaryotes.

PMID: 8722000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nature. 1995 Oct 19;377(6550):639-42.

Defective activation and survival of T cells lacking the Ets-1 transcription
factor.

Muthusamy N(1), Barton K, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The Ets-1 proto-oncogene is a member of the Ets family of eukaryotic
transcription factors. Members of this family play important roles in regulating 
gene expression in response to multiple developmental and mitogenic signals.
Ets-1 is preferentially expressed at high levels in B and T cells of adult mice
and is regulated during both thymocyte development and T-cell activation. To
study the role of Ets-1 in T-cell development and function we have used the
RAG-2-/- complementation system and murine embryonic stem (ES) cells containing
homozygous deletions in the Ets-1 gene (Ets-1-/-). Ets-1-/(-)-RAG-2-/- chimaeric 
mice displayed markedly decreased numbers of mature thymocytes and peripheral T
cells. Ets-1-/- T cells expressed normal levels of CD3 and T-cell antigen
receptor (TCR)-alpha/beta. However, they displayed a severe proliferative defect 
in response to multiple activational signals and demonstrated increased rates of 
spontaneous apoptosis in vitro. These findings demonstrate that Ets-1 is required
for the normal survival and activation of murine T cells.

PMID: 7566177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nature. 1995 Oct 19;377(6550):635-8.

Increased T-cell apoptosis and terminal B-cell differentiation induced by
inactivation of the Ets-1 proto-oncogene.

Bories JC(1), Willerford DM, Grévin D, Davidson L, Camus A, Martin P, Stéhelin D,
Alt FW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The Ets-1 proto-oncogene is a member of a transcription factor family
characterized by homology to the v-ets oncogene. In adult mice, Ets-1 is
expressed predominantly in lymphoid cells where it has been implicated in
regulating transcription of lymphocyte-specific genes. Following T-cell
activation, the specific DNA binding activity of Ets-1 is inactivated by
transient phosphorylation, suggesting a function in the transition from the
resting to activated state. Ets-1 has also been suggested to cooperate with the
AP-1 transcription factor complex to mediate cellular growth factor responses.
Here we show, by using RAG-2-deficient blastocyst complementation, that Ets-1
deficiency has dramatic, but different, effects on development and function of T-
and B-lineage cells. Ets-1-deficient T cells were present in reduced numbers and 
were highly susceptible to cell death in vitro. In contrast, Ets-1-deficient B
cells were present in normal numbers but a large proportion were IgM plasma
cells. Our data demonstrate that Ets-1 is essential for maintenance of the normal
pool of resting T- and B-lineage cells.

PMID: 7566176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 8;270(36):20930-6.

A composite Ets/Pit-1 binding site in the prolactin gene can mediate
transcriptional responses to multiple signal transduction pathways.

Howard PW(1), Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland 97201, USA.

Binding sites for the tissue-specific transcription factor, Pit-1, are required
for basal and hormonally induced prolactin gene transcription. Although Pit-1 is 
phosphorylated in response to several signaling pathways, the mechanism by which 
Pit-1 contributes to hormonal induction of gene transcription has not been
defined. Recent reports suggest that phosphorylation of Pit-1 may not be required
for hormonal regulation of the prolactin promoter. Analysis of the contribution
of individual Pit-1 binding sites has been complicated due to the fact that some 
of the elements appear to be redundant. To better understand the role of Pit-1
sites in mediating hormonal regulation of the prolactin gene, we have performed
enhancer tests using the three most proximal Pit-1 binding sites of the rat
prolactin gene which are designated the 1P, 2P, and 3P sites. The results
demonstrate that multimers of the 3P Pit-1 binding site are much more responsive 
to several hormonal and intracellular signaling pathways than multimers of the 1P
or 2P sites. The 3P DNA element was found to contain a consensus binding site for
the Ets family of proteins. Mutation of the Ets binding site greatly decreased
the ability of epidermal growth factor, phorbol esters, Ras, or the Raf kinase to
induce reporter gene activity. Mutation of the Ets site had little effect on
basal enhancer activity. In contrast, mutation of the consensus Pit-1 binding
site in the 3P element essentially abolished all basal enhancer activity.
Overexpression of Ets-1 in GH3 pituitary cells enhanced both basal and Ras
induced activity from the 3P enhancer. These data describe a composite element in
the prolactin gene containing binding sites for two different factors and the
studies suggest a mechanism by which Ets proteins and Pit-1 functionally
cooperate to permit transcriptional regulation by different signaling pathways.

PMID: 7673116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genes Dev. 1995 Sep 1;9(17):2090-104.

Activation of the HIV-1 enhancer by the LEF-1 HMG protein on nucleosome-assembled
DNA in vitro.

Sheridan PL(1), Sheline CT, Cannon K, Voz ML, Pazin MJ, Kadonaga JT, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037-1099, USA.

Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1 (LEF-1) is a regulatory high mobility group
(HMG) protein that activates the T cell receptor alpha (TCR alpha) enhancer in a 
context-restricted manner in T cells. In this paper we demonstrate that the
distal region of the human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) enhancer, which
contains DNA-binding sites for LEF-1 and Ets-1, also provides a functional
context for activation by LEF-1. First, we show that mutations in the
LEF-1-binding site inhibit the activity of multimerized copies of the HIV-1
enhancer in Jurkat T cells, and that LEF-1/GAL4 can activate a GAL4-substituted
HIV-1 enhancer 80- to 100-fold in vivo. Second, recombinant LEF-1 is shown to
activate HIV-1 transcription on chromatin-assembled DNA in vitro. By using a
nucleosome-assembly system derived from Drosophila embryos, we find that the
packaging of DNA into chromatin in vitro strongly represses HIV-1 transcription
and that repression can be counteracted efficiently by preincubation of the DNA
with LEF-1 (or LEF-1 and Ets-1) supplemented with fractions containing the
promoter-binding protein, Sp1. Addition of TFE-3, which binds to an E-box motif
upstream of the LEF-1 and Ets-1 sites, further augments transcription in this
system. Individually or collectively, none of the three enhancer-binding proteins
(LEF-1, Ets-1, and TFE-3) could activate transcription in the absence of Sp1. A
truncation mutant of LEF-1 (HMG-88), which contains the HMG box but lacks the
trans-activation domain, did not activate transcription from nucleosomal DNA,
indicating that bending of DNA by the HMG domain is not sufficient to activate
transcription in vitro. We conclude that transcription activation by LEF-1 in
vitro is a chromatin-dependent process that requires a functional
trans-activation domain in addition to the HMG domain.

PMID: 7657162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Genomics. 1995 Aug 10;28(3):411-9.

Structure of the gene for the catalytic subunit of human DNA polymerase delta
(POLD1).

Chang LS(1), Zhao L, Zhu L, Chen ML, Lee MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital, Ohio State University, Columbus
43205, USA.

We have isolated genomic DNA clones covering the gene for human DNA polymerase
delta catalytic subunit (POLD1) and its 5' flanking sequence. This gene is
divided into 27 exons and is distributed over at least 32 kb of DNA. The exons
and most of the introns are relatively small. The sizes of the exons range from
55 to 201 bp. Seven introns are smaller than 100 bp. Intron 1 is the largest
intron, with a size of greater than 10 kb. All of the intron-exon junctions match
well with the reported consensus sequences. Multiple copies of the Alu repetitive
sequence and the variable number of tandem repeats were found in several introns.
Transcription of POLD1 appears to initiate at multiple sites. The major start
site was 53 nucleotides upstream of the ATG start codon. The sequence of the
promoter and upstream DNA is G+C rich and does not contain a TATA sequence.
Several potential transcription factor-binding sites, including the AP2-, CTF-,
Ets1-, GCF-, MBF-1-, NF-E1-, and Sp1-binding sites, were found in this region. A 
1.8-kb pol delta promoter DNA directed the expression of a luciferase reporter
gene when transfected into HeLa cells.

PMID: 7490075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Immunity. 1995 Aug;3(2):223-37.

A direct physical association between ETS and AP-1 transcription factors in
normal human T cells.

Bassuk AG(1), Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The Ets and AP-1 families of transcription factors bind distinct DNA elements and
subserve diverse functions in multiple lymphoid and nonlymphoid cell types.
Functionally important Ets and AP-1 binding sites have been identified in a large
number of enhancer elements, suggesting important cooperative interactions
between these two families of transcription factors. In this report, we have
demonstrated a direct physical interaction between Ets and AP-1 proteins both in 
vitro and in activated human T cells. This interaction is mediated by the binding
of the basic domain of Jun to the Ets domain of Ets proteins. Jun, in association
with Ets, is capable of interacting with Fos family members to form a
trimolecular protein complex. The physical association between Ets-1 and AP-1
proteins is required for the transcriptional activity of enhancer elements
containing adjacent Ets and AP-1 binding sites. We conclude that direct physical 
interactions between Ets and AP-1 transcription factors play an important role in
regulating mammalian gene expression.

PMID: 7648395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Virol. 1995 Aug;69(8):4941-9.

Transactivation of the Moloney murine leukemia virus and T-cell receptor
beta-chain enhancers by cbf and ets requires intact binding sites for both
proteins.

Sun W(1), Graves BJ, Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, USA.

The Moloney murine leukemia virus (Mo-MLV) enhancer contains binding sites (LVb
and LVc) for the ets gene family of proteins and a core site that binds the
polyomavirus enhancer-binding protein 2/core-binding factor (cbf) family of
proteins. The LVb and core sites in the Mo-MLV enhancer contribute to its
constitutive activity in T cells. All three binding sites (LVb, LVc, and core)
are required for phorbol ester inducibility of the Mo-MLV enhancer. Adjacent
binding sites for the ets and cbf proteins likewise constitute a phorbol ester
response element within the human T-cell receptor beta-chain (TCR beta) enhancer 
and contribute to constitutive transcriptional activity of the TCR beta enhancer 
in T cells. Here we show that the CBF alpha subunit encoded by the mouse Cbfa2
gene (the murine homolog of human AML1) and three ets proteins, Ets-1, Ets-2, and
GA-binding protein (GABP), transactivate both the Mo-MLV and mouse TCR beta
enhancer in transient-expression assays. Moreover, we show that transactivation
by Cbf alpha 2 requires both intact ets and cbf binding sites. Transactivation by
Ets-1, Ets-2, and GABP likewise requires intact binding sites for ets proteins
and CBF. Supportive biochemical analyses demonstrate that both proteins can bind 
simultaneously to a composite enhancer element. These findings suggest that ets
and cbf proteins cooperate in vivo to regulate transcription from the Mo-MLV and 
TCR beta enhancers.

PMCID: PMC189309
PMID: 7609063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Jun;9(6):717-24.

An Ets site in the whey acidic protein gene promoter mediates transcriptional
activation in the mammary gland of pregnant mice but is dispensable during
lactation.

McKnight RA(1), Spencer M, Dittmer J, Brady JN, Wall RJ, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism (R.A.M., L.H.), National Institute
of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The whey acidic protein (WAP) gene is specifically expressed in mammary tissue,
and its transcription is induced several thousand-fold during pregnancy and
remains high throughout lactation. A purine-rich sequence (PRS) located around
-110 of the WAP gene promoter is conserved between mice, rats, and rabbits,
suggesting that it features a regulatory element. This PRS contains an invariant 
GGAA/T core motif characteristic of the binding site for Ets transcription
factors. Electromobility shift assays demonstrate that Ets1 binds specifically to
the PRS. Experiments in transgenic mice further demonstrate that this PRS/Ets
site plays a critical role in the activation of WAP transgenes during pregnancy, 
but that its presence is not required for high expression throughout lactation.
Transgenes with an intact PRS/Ets site are expressed at high levels at day 13 of 
pregnancy, with little further increase during late pregnancy and lactation. In
contrast, WAP transgenes with a mutation in the PRS/Ets site, which abrogates the
binding of Ets1, are not expressed at midpregnancy, but their transcriptional
activity is not affected during lactation. These results demonstrate that
Ets-signaling pathways can function as stage-specific transcriptional activators 
of milk protein genes in the developing mammary gland. In addition, this work
extends earlier findings that gene activation during pregnancy and lactation is
mediated, in part, by different mechanisms.

PMID: 8592517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 9;92(10):4442-6.

ETS1 suppresses tumorigenicity of human colon cancer cells.

Suzuki H(1), Romano-Spica V, Papas TS, Bhat NK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA.

We have ectopically expressed transcription factor ETS1 in two different highly
tumorigenic human colon cancer cell lines, DLD-1 and HCT116, that do not express 
endogenous ETS1 protein and have obtained several independent clones. The
expression of wild-type ETS1 protein in these colon cancer cells reverses the
transformed phenotype and tumorigenicity in a dose-dependent manner. By contrast,
expression in DLD-1 cells of a variant form of ETS1, lacking transcriptional
activity, did not alter the tumorigenic properties of the cells, suggesting that 
the reduction in tumorigenicity in these clones was specific for the wild-type
ETS1 gene products. Since these colon cancer cells have multiple genetic
alterations, the system described in this paper could be a good model to study
the suppression of tumorigenicity at a transcriptional level, which could lead to
the design and development of novel drugs for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC41960
PMID: 7753825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Genes Dev. 1995 Apr 15;9(8):995-1008.

Assembly and function of a TCR alpha enhancer complex is dependent on
LEF-1-induced DNA bending and multiple protein-protein interactions.

Giese K(1), Kingsley C, Kirshner JR, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology, University of
California, San Francisco 94143-0414, USA.

In this study we examine the molecular basis for the synergistic regulation of
the minimal TCR alpha enhancer by multiple proteins. We find that reconstitution 
of TCR alpha enhancer function in nonlymphoid cells requires expression of the
lymphoid-specific proteins LEF-1, Ets-1 and PEBP2 alpha (CBF alpha), and a
specific arrangement of their binding sites in the enhancer. We show that Ets-1
cooperates with PEBP2 alpha to bind adjacent sites at one end of the enhancer,
forming a ternary complex that is unstable by itself. Stable occupancy of the
Ets-1- and PEBP2 alpha-binding sites in a DNase I protection assay was found to
depend on both a specific helical phasing relationship with a nonadjacent
ATF/CREB-binding site at the other end of the enhancer and on LEF-1. The HMG
domain of LEF-1 was found previously to bend the DNA helix in the center of the
TCR alpha enhancer. We now show that the HMG domain of the distantly related SRY 
protein, which also bends DNA, can partially replace LEF-1 in stimulating
enhancer function in transfection assays. Taken together with the observation
that Ets-1 and members of the ATF/CREB family have the potential to associate in 
vitro, these data suggest that LEF-1 can coordinate the assembly of a specific
higher-order enhancer complex by facilitating interactions between proteins bound
at nonadjacent sites.

PMID: 7774816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 14;270(15):8763-71.

Myb and Ets proteins cooperate to transactivate an early myeloid gene.

Shapiro LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38101, USA.

The earliest progenitor cell committed to the granulocyte/monocyte developmental 
pathway can be identified by the appearance of a 150-kDa glycoprotein on the cell
surface (CD13/aminopeptidase N (CD13/APN), EC 3.4.11.2). A 455-base pair genomic 
fragment from the CD13/APN gene containing a Myb consensus-binding site as well
as three potential Ets-binding sites was found to regulate tissue-appropriate
expression of reporter genes in hematopoietic cell lines. Transactivation
experiments with plasmids expressing either a full-length or truncated Myb
protein and the full-length Ets-1 or Ets-2 protein demonstrated that these
proteins cooperate to positively regulate CD13/APN gene expression. This
cooperation is synergistic, as levels of transcriptional activity produced by Myb
and Ets in combination were higher than those expected from a purely additive
effect. Mutation of the Myb consensus-binding site completely abolished CD13/APN 
promoter activity in myeloid cells. Introduction of a dominant interfering Myb
allele disrupted the ability of endogenous c-Myb in myeloid cells to
transactivate the CD13/APN construct. Other myeloid cell-expressed Ets family
members (PU.1, Fli-1, and Elf-1) failed to produce a cooperative transactivating 
effect when combined with the Myb expression construct. These data contrast with 
previous studies indicating that full-length c-Myb is unable to positively
cooperate with Ets proteins in the regulation of myeloid genes. Because intact
c-Myb and Ets-2 proteins, both endogenously expressed in myeloid cells, act
synergistically to transactivate the CD13/APN promoter, this gene may represent a
physiological target for dissection of the roles of these transcription factors
in normal and malignant myelopoiesis.

PMID: 7721782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Oncogene. 1995 Apr 6;10(7):1423-30.

Human ERG is a proto-oncogene with mitogenic and transforming activity.

Hart AH(1), Corrick CM, Tymms MJ, Hertzog PJ, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Birth Defects Laboratory, Monash University, Monash
Medical Centre, Victoria, Australia.

The ETS related gene, ERG, is one of 20 or more genes belonging to the ETS family
of transcription factors. Translocation of the ERG gene t(21;22) results in the
chimeric fusion transcript seen in approximately 10% of Ewings sarcomas. In
addition, recent studies have shown that a reciprocal translocation t(21;16) of
ERG gives rise to two aberrant transcripts seen in some forms of acute myeloid
leukaemia. In vitro studies have linked the up regulation of ERG expression with 
stromal cell independence in erythroleukemic clones and shown that the ERG
related genes ETS1 and ETS2 have a mitogenic and transforming activity when
overexpressed in NIH3T3 cells. Interestingly ERGB/FLI-1, which is also involved
in Ewings sarcoma translocations and shares a very high sequence identify with
ERG has been reported to be unable to transform NIH3T3 cells. In this study we
investigate the effects of overexpression of ERG on cell proliferation, factor
dependence, growth in soft agar and tumorigenesis in nude mice. An ERG expression
construct with the human ERG2 cDNA driven by the sheep metallothionein la
promoter (sMTERG) was transfected into NIH3T3 cells. Clonal cell lines
overexpressing ERG were established. The cell lines became morphologically
altered, grew in low serum and serum free media and gave rise to colonies in soft
agar suspension. Furthermore, we demonstrate that after subcutaneous injection
these clones grow as solid tumors in nude mice. These data demonstrate that c-ERG
is a proto-oncogene capable of transforming NIH3T3 cells. Therefore,
overexpression or inappropriate expression of ERG may contribute to oncogenesis.

PMID: 7731694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Immunol. 1995 Mar 15;154(6):2724-32.

Role of ETS1 in IL-2 gene expression.

Romano-Spica V(1), Georgiou P, Suzuki H, Papas TS, Bhat NK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702.

The ETS1 gene encodes a sequence-specific transcription factor binding to
purine-rich DNA sequences (-GGAA-) present in the transcriptional regulatory
regions of many cellular and viral promoters/enhancers, including many lymphokine
genes. The ETS1 gene is expressed at high levels in resting T cells and at very
low levels after T cell activation, suggesting it may suppress the expression of 
genes induced during T cell activation. To find out if ETS1 regulates expression 
of the IL-2 gene, we have ectopically expressed antisense (AS) ETS1 in Jurkat T
cells to block the formation of ETS1 proteins. AS ETS1 transfectants produce
higher levels of IL-2 compared with sense ETS1 transfectants. Expression of ETS1 
DNA binding domain in Jurkat T cells also decreased the production of IL-2. In AS
ETS1 transfectants, IL-2 formation was completely inhibited by cyclosporin A and 
FK590. The IL-2 promoter linked to a chloramphenicol acetyl transferase reporter 
gene has high activity in AS ETS1 transfectants, indicating that increased IL-2
production seems to be a result of transcriptional induction. Taken together,
these results suggest the possibility that ETS1 may act as a negative regulator
of IL-2 gene transcription and provide a rational approach toward engineering the
endogenous expression of IL-2 in T cells.

PMID: 7876544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Feb;15(2):925-31.

ets-1 in astrocytes: expression and transmitter-evoked phosphorylation.

Fleischman LF(1), Holtzclaw L, Russell JT, Mavrothalassitis G, Fisher RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland.

The ets-1 protein has been primarily studied as a sequence-specific
transcriptional regulator that is predominately expressed in lymphoid cells. In
this report, we show that ets-1 is also expressed in astrocytes and astrocytoma
cells and is regulated during both signal transduction and differentiation. Both 
isoforms of ets-1, p51 and p42, were found in astrocytes and astrocytoma cells,
but whereas expression of p51 was strong, p42, the alternate splice product
previously shown to lack the phosphorylation domain, was difficult to detect and 
was present at a level 10- to 40-fold lower than that of p51. This differed by
roughly an order of magnitude from the ratio generally observable in T cells and 
thymocytes. In two astrocytoma lines of human origin, CCF and 1321N1, ets-1
phosphorylation was stimulated by bradykinin and carbachol, respectively.
Glutamate, norepinephrine, and bradykinin elicited phosphorylation of p51 in
cultures of primary rat type 1 astrocytes. ets-1 phosphorylation was dramatically
blocked by KT5926, an inhibitor of myosin light-chain kinase, suggesting that
this kinase may be involved in phosphorylation of ets-1 in vivo. Investigations
of retinoic acid-induced differentiation in P19 cells provided further support
for a strong correlation of ets-1 with the pathway for astrocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC231978
PMID: 7823957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biol Cell. 1995;84(1-2):53-61.

Invasive tumors induce c-ets1 transcription factor expression in adjacent stroma.

Calmels TP(1), Mattot V, Wernert N, Vandenbunder B, Stéhelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS-URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The stroma reaction plays a central role in tumor growth, invasion and
metastasis. Tumor growth is dependent on angiogenesis and requires the vascular
supply provided by new capillary blood vessels of the stroma. The expression of
the gene encoding the transcription factor c-ets1 is localized within fibroblasts
and endothelial cells of the stromal compartment. This expression correlates with
the accumulation of transcripts for potential target genes such as collagenase I 
and stromelysin I in stromal fibroblasts surrounding malignant cells in invasive 
tumors. We suggest that c-Ets1 protein might regulate the transcription of the
genes coding for matrix-degrading proteases necessary for both angiogenesis and
tumor invasion.

PMID: 8574198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 23;269(51):32649-54.

ETS transcription factors regulate the expression of the gene for the human
mitochondrial ATP synthase beta-subunit.

Villena JA(1), Martin I, Viñas O, Cormand B, Iglesias R, Mampel T, Giralt M,
Villarroya F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Fisiologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Spain.

Elements responsible for the transcriptional activity of the human ATP synthase
beta-subunit (ATPsyn beta) gene promoter have been studied through transient
expression in HepG2 hepatoma cells of a CAT gene connected with various
5'-deletion mutants of the 5'-flanking region. Promoter activity was mostly
dependent upon a single CCAAT motif as well as a nearby Ets domain binding
region. This last region contains two sites that bind Ets-related proteins
present in liver nuclear extracts as well as recombinant purified Ets-1 protein. 
The ATPsyn beta promoter was trans-activated by Ets-1 and Ets-2 expression
vectors, and this effect was lost when the Ets binding region was deleted. The
Ets binding region of the ATPsyn beta promoter increased basal expression and
conferred Ets-1- and Ets-2-dependent trans-activation to the herpes symplex
thymidine kinase minimal promoter. A double-point mutation of the main
Ets-binding site, which suppresses Ets binding, blocks Ets-dependent
trans-activation. It is concluded that the gene for the mitochondrial ATPsyn beta
is a target of transcriptional activation by members of the Ets family of
transcription factors. It is suggested that Ets transcription factors may be
involved in the enhanced expression of the ATPsyn beta gene in highly
proliferating cells and in the coordinate transcription of nuclear genes for
mitochondrial proteins.

PMID: 7798271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncogene. 1994 Dec;9(12):3609-15.

Myb and Ets related transcription factors are required for activity of the human 
lck type I promoter.

McCracken S(1), Leung S, Bosselut R, Ghysdael J, Miyamoto NG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess 
Margaret Hospital, University of Toronto, Canada.

The lck gene, which encodes a lymphoid-specific Src family tyrosine kinase, is
transcribed from two promoters that are differentially utilized during T cell
development. We have shown previously that the human lck type I promoter, which
is preferentially expressed in immature thymocytes, requires a binding site (-97 
to -90) for the Ets family of transcription factors for its activity in Jurkat T 
leukemia cells. Three putative Myb binding sites (-86 to -82, -77 to -72 and -59 
to -54) were analysed for their ability to activate the lck type I promoter. In
vitro assays demonstrated specific binding of purified, bacterially expressed
c-Myb DNA binding domain to the Myb (-59 to -54) site. Transient transfection
assays using the site-directed mutants of the lck type I promoter in Jurkat cells
revealed that mutation of the Myb (-59 to -54) site abolished transcriptional
activity. In transiently transfected HeLa cells, the lck type I promoter was
activated by co-transfection with a vector that expresses c-Myb. This c-Myb
dependent activation required the presence of intact Myb and Ets binding sites,
indicating that the expressed c-Myb functions with endogenous Ets related
transcription factors to activate the lck type I promoter. This effect was
further enhanced by co-transfection with vectors that express either Ets1 or
Ets2. These results demonstrate that Myb and Ets related transcription factors
synergistically activate the human lck type I promoter.

PMID: 7970721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochemistry. 1994 Nov 22;33(46):13509-16.

Secondary structure of the ETS domain places murine Ets-1 in the superfamily of
winged helix-turn-helix DNA-binding proteins.

Donaldson LW(1), Petersen JM, Graves BJ, McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The members of the ets gene family of transcription factors are characterized by 
a conserved 85-residue DNA-binding region, termed the ETS domain, that lacks
sequence homology to structurally characterized DNA-binding motifs. The secondary
structure of the ETS domain of murine Ets-1 was determined on the basis of NMR
chemical shifts, NOE and J-coupling constraints, amide hydrogen exchange,
circular dichroism, and FT-IR spectroscopy. The ETS domain is composed of three
alpha-helices (H) and four beta-strands (S) arranged in the order
H1-S1-S2-H2-H3-S3-S4. The four-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet is the scaffold
for a putative helix-turn-helix DNA recognition motif formed by helices 2 and 3. 
The 25 residues extending beyond the ETS domain to the native C-terminus of the
truncated Ets-1 also contain a helical segment. On the basis of the similarity of
this topology with that of catabolite activator protein (CAP), heat shock factor 
(HSF), and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF-3 gamma), we propose that ets proteins 
are members of the superfamily of winged helix-turn-helix DNA-binding proteins.

PMID: 7947760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 11;269(45):28143-51.

Calcium-induced phosphorylation of ETS1 inhibits its specific DNA binding
activity.

Rabault B(1), Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Virale et Cellulaire, CNRS URA 1443, Institut Curie,
Centre Universitaire, Orsay, France.

Ets1, the founding member of the Ets gene family of transcriptional regulators,
is a phosphoprotein which is highly expressed in cells of the T and B lymphoid
lineages. Previous studies have shown that Ets1 becomes rapidly and transiently
phosphorylated following antigen receptor (T cell (antigen) receptor (TCR) and
membrane Ig) triggering a response which is absolutely dependent on
ligand-induced calcium mobilization. By a combination of two-dimensional tryptic 
phosphopeptide and mutational analyses, the target residues of these
calcium-dependent phosphorylation events are identified as 4 serine residues
clustered in a domain of Ets1 adjacent to its DNA binding domain (Ets domain).
From the comparison of the properties of wild type Ets1 with those of mutant
proteins carrying serine-to-alanine substitution in target residues,
calcium-dependent phosphorylation of Ets1 is shown to inhibit its binding to
specific DNA sequences but does not affect its ability to accumulate in the
nucleus, another property dependent on the Ets domain. Our data are consistent
with a model in which the calcium-dependent phosphorylation of Ets1 represent the
first step of a general clearance of Ets1 function during T and B cell
activation.

PMID: 7961750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 1994 Nov;9(11):3259-71.

A model for gene evolution of the ets-1/ets-2 transcription factors based on
structural and functional homologies.

Albagli O(1), Soudant N, Ferreira E, Dhordain P, Dewitte F, Begue A, Flourens A, 
Stehelin D, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The chicken c-ets-1 locus encodes two transcription factors, p54c-ets-1 and
p68c-ets-1 that differ in their N-termini, encoded respectively by the I54 and
alpha beta exons. p68c-ets-1 equivalents are only found in birds and reptiles
while p54c-ets-1 is widely conserved in vertebrates, from amphibians to mammals. 
Thus, the classical view concerning the evolution of the c-ets-1 gene has been to
consider that I54 is of ancient origin whereas alpha and beta, which provide an
additional activating domain in p68c-ets-1, would have been acquired much more
recently. Sequencing the alpha and beta exons in various species pinpointed a
highly conserved region of 13 amino acids which is rich in acidic and hydrophobic
residues, a feature of some other transactivating domains. Strikingly, this
subdomain is also present in the otherwise unrelated N-terminal activating region
of p58c-ets-2 and was thus named BEC for Ets-1-beta/Ets-2-Conserved sequence.
Moreover, the two N-termini share the BEC sequence at a homologous position in
their highly similar genomic organization indicating a common origin. This
structural homology underlies a functional similarity since fusion of the
heterologous GAL4 DNA-binding domain with either of the two isolated domains
demonstrates that BEC is essential in both cases for the transactivating
activity. The function of the alpha beta domain in the context of p68c-ets-1 also
strictly depends on the presence of the BEC sequence. Finally, the whole
N-terminus of p58c-ets-2 can functionally substitute for its counterpart in
p68c-ets-1 further demonstrating that p68c-ets-1 and p58c-ets-2 are structurally 
and functionally more closely related than previously thought. Besides, we also
found BEC in the N-terminus of the Drosophila pointed gene which may be
considered as closely related to the uncommitted 'ets1/2' common ancestor. These 
data demonstrate that the alpha and beta exons are not a recent and specific
acquisition but stem, like the p58c-ets-2 N-terminus, from the invertebrate
unduplicated 'ets 1/2' gene. This work unravels a new model for the ets-1/ets-2
gene's evolution, based for the first time on both structural and functional
evidences. Accordingly, p68c-ets-1 and p58c-ets-2 are the direct descendants of
the ancestral 'ets1/2' gene whereas I54 may have been acquired as a second
promoter in the c-ets-1 gene after the duplication. Indeed, I54 is not found in
the Drosophila pointed gene. The high degree of similarity, and hence of
functional redundancy, between p68c-ets-1 and p58c-ets-2 may have led to the
rapid divergence (and even loss in mammals) of alpha and beta during evolution
whereas I54, which provided a novel function unique to c-ets-1, was maintained
within the presently widespread p54c-ets-1 version.

PMID: 7936650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7569-80.

Identification of ETS domain proteins in murine T lymphocytes that interact with 
the Moloney murine leukemia virus enhancer.

Gunther CV(1), Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular, Viral and Molecular Biology, University of Utah,
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84132.

The enhancer of Moloney murine leukemia virus (Mo-MuLV) contains an array of
transcriptional control elements that direct viral gene expression in diverse
cell types. The murine transcription factor Ets-1 was shown to bind to the LVb
and LVc elements of the enhancer by DNase I protection and methylation
interference assays. Enhancers containing disrupted Ets-1 binding sites were
tested in transient expression assays in the murine T-cell line EL4.E1;
alterations in the LVb element affected constitutive enhancer activity, while
mutation of either the LVb or LVc element disrupted phorbol ester-induced
enhancer activity. Members of the ets gene family of proteins display similar
DNA-binding properties; therefore, we speculated that ets proteins other than
Ets-1 also might bind these elements. Crude nuclear extracts of EL4.E1 cells were
assayed to identify the protein(s) that potentially functions at the LVb element.
The predominant binding activity was not Ets-1 but rather two independent
DNA-protein complexes that comigrated in mobility shift assays. UV cross-linking 
and denaturing gel electrophoresis sized the two DNA-binding species, which we
denoted p55 and p100. Immunoprecipitation combined with UV cross-linking
identified p55 as the alpha subunit of GA-binding protein. The DNA-binding
properties of p100 and several ets proteins were compared. Similarities suggested
that p100 is also an ETS domain protein, possibly Elf-1. This strategy could be
used to identify other ETS domain proteins in crude nuclear extracts. These
findings suggest multiple ETS domain proteins could regulate gene expression of
Mo-MuLV.

PMCID: PMC359293
PMID: 7935472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7314-21.

Ets-1 activates the DRA promoter in B cells.

Jabrane-Ferrat N(1), Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California at San Francisco,
94143-0724.

The X box in promoters of class II major histocompatibility complex genes plays a
crucial role in the B-cell-specific and gamma interferon-inducible expression of 
these genes. The sequence TTCC is located in the pyrimidine tract which extends
5' to and partially overlaps the X box of the DRA promoter. This sequence
resembles the core binding site for the Ets family of DNA-binding proteins. In
this study, we demonstrate that mutations within the pyrimidine tract which
change the TTCC motif, but do not affect the binding of regulatory factor X to
the X box, decrease the activity of the DRA promoter in B cells. Furthermore,
using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and cotransfection experiments, we
demonstrate that Ets-1, but not Ets-2 or PU.1, functionally interacts with the
pyrimidine tract and activates the DRA promoter.

PMCID: PMC359266
PMID: 7935445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cancer Res. 1994 Nov 1;54(21):5683-8.

Stromal expression of c-Ets1 transcription factor correlates with tumor invasion.

Wernert N(1), Gilles F, Fafeur V, Bouali F, Raes MB, Pyke C, Dupressoir T, Seitz 
G, Vandenbunder B, Stéhelin D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The stroma reaction has an important role in tumor growth, invasion, and
metastasis. In various invasive human carcinomas, as well as in a mouse model for
tumor invasion, transcripts encoding the transcription factor c-Ets1 were
detected within stromal fibroblasts, whereas they were absent in epithelial tumor
cells. This expression of c-Ets1 was often increased in fibroblasts directly
adjacent to neoplastic cells. Endothelial cells of stromal capillaries were also 
positive for c-Ets1 expression. In contrast, fibroblasts of corresponding
noninvasive lesions and of normal tissues were consistently negative. In cultured
human fibroblasts stimulated by basic fibroblast growth factor and tumor necrosis
factor alpha, the expression of c-Ets1 correlated with the accumulation of
transcripts for potential target genes, collagenase-1 and stromelysin-1. The same
correlation was observed in some of the invasive carcinomas investigated. These
results suggest that c-Ets1 participates in the regulation of tumor invasion in
vivo.

PMID: 7923216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Reprod Dev. 1994 Oct;39(2):208-14.

Regulation of gene expression by transcription factors Ets-1 and Ets-2.

Tymms MJ(1), Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Birth Defects Laboratory, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

The ETS family of transcription factors have a DNA-binding domain in common that 
binds a core GGA(A/T) DNA sequence. A large number of proteins have now been
identified that contain an ETS DNA-binding domain (see review by Wasylyk et al., 
1993). Ets-1 was first described as the cellular homolog of v-ets. which is
translated as a 135-kDa gag-myb-ets fusion protein from the replication-deficient
retrovirus E26 in chickens. Ets-2 was subsequently described as a closely related
protein that contains the highly conserved ETS DNA-binding domain. This paper
considers the manner by which the two closely related genes, Ets-1 and Ets-2,
apparently play distinct roles in embryo development and in the immune system of 
adult mice. Although both Ets-1 and Ets-2 transform fibroblasts (Seth et al.,
1989), the temporal and tissue-specific expression patterns suggest that these
two proteins play distinct biological roles and consequently transactivate
different downstream cellular target genes.

PMID: 7826624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Contracept Fertil Sex. 1994 Oct;22(10):656-60.

[How tumors abuse their host: the transcription factor c-ets1 and the regulation 
of tumor angiogenesis or invasion].

[Article in French]

Vandenbunder B(1), Wernert N, Stéhelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille.

During their progression, epithelial tumors induce a stromal reaction essential
for their development and for metastasis. In situ hybridization studies have
revealed that the protooncogene c-ets1 is expressed in endothelial cells at the
beginning tumor angiogenesis, and in stromal fibroblasts surrounding invasive
tumors. C-ets1 encodes a transcription factor that may activate the transcription
of genes encoding collagenase 1, stromelysin 1 and urokinase plasminogen
activator, proteases involved in extracellular matrix degradation. A working
hypothesis is that c-Ets1 takes part in regulating invasive processes by
controlling the transcription of these genes. Experimental evidences that may
confirm this hypothesis will be discussed.

PMID: 7528601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 30;269(39):24335-42.

In vitro interactions between nuclear proteins and uncoupling protein gene
promoter reveal several putative transactivating factors including Ets1, retinoid
X receptor, thyroid hormone receptor, and a CACCC box-binding protein.

Cassard-Doulcier AM(1), Larose M, Matamala JC, Champigny O, Bouillaud F, Ricquier
D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherches sur l'Endocrinologie Moléculaire et le Développement,
CNRS, Meudon, France.

Previous studies of rat ucp (uncoupling protein) gene organization carried out in
this laboratory identified regulatory sequences located in the 5'-flanking
region. In this work, DNase I footprint analysis of the enhancer revealed two
domains at base pairs (bp) -2444 to -2423 and bp -2352 to -2319. The former
domain can bind in vitro, in a cooperative manner, factors related to nuclear
factor 1 and Ets1; the latter domain contains a type 3 directly repeated sequence
that was shown to be able to bind the retinoid X and triiodothyronine receptors. 
Moreover, a positive effect of retinoic acid on ucp mRNA levels in immortalized
brown adipocytes was observed. DNase I footprint analysis identified two
hypersensitive regions, A and B, at bp -509 to -472 and bp -403 to -350,
respectively; region A contains a repeated CACCC box, and region B can bind
protein related to Ets1. The A box differentially binds liver and brown adipose
tissue nuclear proteins and could be involved in uncoupling protein induction.
Further analysis showed three foot-printed boxes, C-E, at bp -182 to -159, -147
to -120, and -111 to -85, able to bind in vitro proteins related to nuclear
factor 1, cAMP response element-binding protein, and Sp1, respectively.

PMID: 7929091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Sep 25;22(19):3871-9.

A residue of the ETS domain mutated in the v-ets oncogene is essential for the
DNA-binding and transactivating properties of the ETS-1 and ETS-2 proteins.

Soudant N(1), Albagli O, Dhordain P, Flourens A, Stéhelin D, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille,
France.

The c-ets-1 locus encodes two transcription factors, p54c-ets-1 and p68c-ets-1
that recognize purine-rich motifs. The v-ets oncogene of the avian retrovirus E26
differs from its cellular progenitor p68c-ets-1 by two amino acid substitutions
(alanine 285 and isoleucine 445 in c-ets-1 both substituted by valine in v-ets,
mutations A and B respectively) and its carboxy-terminal end (mutation C). The B 
mutation affects a well conserved residue in the carboxy-terminal 85 amino acids,
ETS DNA-binding domain. To address the biological relevance of the B mutation
found between v-ets and c-ets-1, we have randomly mutagenized isoleucine 445 of
p68c-ets-1 by polymerase chain reaction. Using in vitro gel mobility shift
assays, we show that this residue is crucial for the binding properties of
c-ets-1 since the 12 mutations we have generated at this position, all diminish
or even abolish the binding, to the 'optimized' Ets-1 binding site (EBS), of 35
kDa proteins corresponding to the 311 carboxy-terminal residues of c-ets-1. Among
them, substitutions of isoleucine to glutamic acid, glycine or proline have the
highest inhibitory effects. Similar results were obtained when the same mutations
were introduced either in full-length p68c-ets-1 protein or into a
carboxy-terminal polypeptide of 109 amino acids encompassing the ETS-domain which
has previously been shown to display a very high binding activity as compared
with the full-length protein. Consistent with the in vitro results, point
mutations in p68c-ets-1 that decrease binding activity to EBS abrogate its
ability to transactivate reporter plasmids carrying either the TPA Oncogene
Response Unit of the Polyoma virus enhancer (TORU) or a sequence derived from the
HTLV-1 LTR. Furthermore, as this isoleucine residue is rather well-conserved
within the ETS gene family, we show that mutation of the corresponding isoleucine
of c-ets-2 into glycine also abrogates its DNA-binding and hence, transactivating
properties. Thus, the v-ets B mutation highlights the isoleucine 445 as an
essential amino acid of the c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 DNA-binding domains.

PMCID: PMC308383
PMID: 7937106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Oncogene. 1994 Sep;9(9):2691-8.

Ras-15A protein shares highly similar dominant-negative biological properties
with Ras-17N and forms a stable, guanine-nucleotide resistant complex with CDC25 
exchange factor.

Chen SY(1), Huff SY, Lai CC, Der CJ, Powers S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854.

We show that expression of Ras-15A, previously shown to be a dominant-negative
mutant in yeast, is a potent inhibitor of endogenous Ras protein function in
mammalian cells. Expression of Ras-15A did not inhibit the growth of cells
containing an oncogenic ras gene nor did it interfere with the ability of
transiently expressed oncogenic ras or raf genes to activate transcription from a
Ras-responsive ets1/AP-1 promoter. In contrast, expression of Ras-15A completely 
blocked growth of normal cells and activation of the ets1/AP-1 promoter by
transiently overexpressed SOS1 and normal Ras proteins. These results suggest
that Ras-15A, like Ras-17N, blocks endogenous Ras function by interfering with
upstream activation of Ras proteins rather than downstream effects. To test
whether Ras-15A and Ras-17N interfere with Ras function by blocking GDP-GTP
exchange proteins, we examined their physical interaction with the CDC25 exchange
protein. All three proteins formed stable complexes with CDC25 in the absence of 
guanine-nucleotides, but only Ras-15A was not released from CDC25 by
physiological concentrations of GDP or GTP. These results establish that Ras-15A 
blocks the activation of normal Ras proteins by sequestering GDP-GTP exchange
factors into non-productive complexes. In contrast, it would appear that the
similar biological properties of Ras-17N are mediated by a reversible,
competitive sequestration of exchange factors.

PMID: 8058333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 1994 Aug 26;269(34):21428-34.

Regulation of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) gene expression. Sp1
binds through an inverted CACCC motif and regulates promoter activity in
cooperation with Ets1.

Dittmer J(1), Gégonne A, Gitlin SD, Ghysdael J, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We have previously shown that mutations in the GGAA core motif of the Ets1
binding site, EBSI, or deletion of EBSI, reduced basal and Tax1 transactivation
of the PTHrP P2 promoter. Here we demonstrate that, in addition to EBSI, a
CACCC-like motif located between -53 and -58 is required for full basal activity 
of this promoter in Jurkat T-cells. Site-specific mutations in the CACCC motif
decreased promoter activity approximately 5-fold. In an effort to identify
transcription factors that bind to the CACCC element, we found that purified
human Sp1, as well as Sp1 in HeLa nuclear extract, can specifically bind to a DNA
probe that corresponds to the PTHrP-specific sequence between -94 and -34. Gel
shift competition studies and DNase I footprinting analyses revealed that Sp1
specifically interacts with the CACCC motif. In the presence of Ets1, the
mobility of the Sp1-specific gel shift complex with the PTHrP DNA decreased.
DNase I footprint analysis of this gel shift complex showed an extended footprint
over both the Sp1 and the Ets1 binding site, demonstrating that Sp1 and Ets1 form
a ternary complex with the PTHrP DNA. Cotransfection of an Ets1 and Sp1
expression vector into Drosophila Schneider cells demonstrated that Sp1 can
functionally cooperate with Ets1 to transactivate the PTHrP promoter. We conclude
from these data that Ets1 and Sp1 can cooperatively regulate PTHrP P2 promoter
activity.

PMID: 8063775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 3;269(22):15652-60.

An intricate arrangement of binding sites for the Ets family of transcription
factors regulates activity of the alpha 4 integrin gene promoter.

Rosen GD(1), Barks JL, Iademarco MF, Fisher RJ, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110.

alpha 4 integrins mediate cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions
that are critical for maturation and function of the immune system as well as
differentiation of skeletal muscle. Here we examine molecular mechanisms
controlling the pattern of alpha 4 expression. The activity of constructs
containing 5' deletion mutants of the alpha 4 gene promoter was compared in
transfection assays into cell lines that express alpha 4 and cell lines that do
not. The sequence between position -42 and -76 base pairs (bp) was required for
efficient transcription in cells that express alpha 4, but it showed no activity 
in HeLa cells, which do not express alpha 4. Three binding sites for the Ets
family of transcription factors are found in this region: two adjacent sites at
positions -50 and -54 bp and a more 5' site at position -67 bp. Using a series of
constructs containing deletions and mutations in this region, we found that the
3'-most site alone was sufficient for binding GA-binding protein alpha (GABP
alpha)/GABP beta and for a low level of transcriptional activation. When all
three sites were present, a second complex "a" was detected, which contains an
unknown member of the Ets family. Formation of complex a was cell-type specific
and correlated with a high level of transcription. Deletion of the 5'-most Ets
site had no effect on binding to GABP alpha/GABP beta, but it eliminated a.
Concomitant with this loss of a, a new Ets-1-containing complex "c" appeared.
Complex c substituted efficiently for complex a in transcriptional activation. We
conclude that although neither of the two 5'-most Ets sites alone binds nuclear
protein, they appear to act as modulators which control the pattern of Ets
proteins that bind the alpha 4 gene promoter. This arrangement of Ets sites,
coupled with the tissue- and developmental-specific expression of Ets members,
likely play a key role in defining the pattern of alpha 4 integrin.

PMID: 8195215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Oncogene. 1994 Jun;9(6):1551-65.

Differential expression of ets-1 and ets-2 proto-oncogenes during murine
embryogenesis.

Maroulakou IG(1), Papas TS, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

ets-1 and ets-2 genes have previously been identified by their sequence homology 
to the v-ets oncogene of the avian erythroblastosis virus, E26. These cellular
genes have been shown to function as transcription factors important in lymphoid 
differentiation and activation and cellular proliferation. In this study, we have
broadly analysed the differential expression of ets-1 and ets-2 during murine
development using in situ hybridization. Our results indicate that these
transcription factors are expressed in multiple tissues during critical stages of
embryo formation and organogenesis, suggesting that these genes may serve
multiple functions during mouse development. The patterns of expression of both
genes are quite different as early as day 8.0 of gestation. ets-1 expression is
clearly observed during a narrow developmental stage in the developing nervous
system, including the presumptive hindbrain regions, the neural tube, as well as 
neural crest and the first and second branchial arches, ets-2 expression is
limited to the developing limb buds and distal tail. At later times, ets-1
expression is observed in developing vascular structures, including the heart,
arteries, capillaries and meninges, whereas ets-2 is highly expressed in
developing bone, tooth buds, epithelial layers of the gut, nasal sinus and
uterus, and several regions of the developing brain. Both ets-1 and ets-2 are
expressed in developing lung, gut and skin. High levels of expression in both
genes is observed in adult lymphoid tissues, but in different tissue subsets.
ets-1 is expressed in the adult lung, gut mesenchyme and bone marrow. ets-2
continues to be expressed at low levels in several adult tissues, except in the
differentiated brain, where substantial levels of expression are found in
particular regions of the mature brain. These results demonstrate that ets-1 and 
ets-2 are differentially regulated, are widely expressed in many tissues during
murine embryogenesis and may play important roles in cellular proliferation and
differentiation during mouse development.

PMID: 8183549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jun;14(6):4116-25.

Participation of Ets transcription factors in the glucocorticoid response of the 
rat tyrosine aminotransferase gene.

Espinás ML(1), Roux J, Ghysdael J, Pictet R, Grange T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod du CNRS, Université Paris, France.

We have previously shown that two remote glucocorticoid-responsive units (GRUs)
of the rat tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) gene contain multiple binding sites
for several transcription factor families, including the glucocorticoid receptor 
(GR). We report here the identification of two novel binding sites for members of
the Ets family of transcription factors in one of these GRUs. One of these
binding sites overlaps the major GR-binding site (GRBS), whereas the other is
located in its vicinity. Inactivation of the latter binding site leads to a
twofold reduction of the glucocorticoid response, whereas inactivation of the
site overlapping the GRBS has no detectable effect. In vivo footprinting analysis
reveals that the active site is occupied in a glucocorticoid-independent manner, 
in a TAT-expressing cell line, even though it is located at a position where
there is a glucocorticoid-dependent alteration of the nucleosomal structure. This
same site is not occupied in a cell line that does not express TAT but expresses 
Ets-related DNA-binding activities, suggesting the existence of an inhibitory
effect of chromatin structure at a hierarchical level above the nucleosome. The
inactive Ets-binding site that overlaps the GRBS is not occupied even in
TAT-expressing cells. However, this same overlapping site can confer
Ets-dependent stimulation of both basal and glucocorticoid-induced levels when it
is isolated from the GRU and duplicated. Ets-1 expression in COS cells mimics the
activity of the Ets-related activities present in hepatoma cells. These
Ets-binding sites could participate in the integration of the glucocorticoid
response of the TAT gene with signal transduction pathways triggered by other
nonsteroidal extracellular stimuli.

PMCID: PMC358777
PMID: 7910945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. FEBS Lett. 1994 May 30;345(2-3):125-30.

Refolding proteins by gel filtration chromatography.

Werner MH(1), Clore GM, Gronenborn AM, Kondoh A, Fisher RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

We have developed a facile means for the refolding of milligram quantities of
purified proteins that employs gel filtration chromatography. We demonstrate by
electrophoretic mobility shift and NMR spectroscopy that human ETS-1 protein,
bovine ribonuclease A and E. coli integration host factor can be refolded into
the native conformation using this technique. We have extended this strategy to
the preparation of milligram quantities of macromolecular complexes suitable for 
structural analysis by NMR spectroscopy or X-ray crystallography. The diverse
challenges to overcome in refolding these proteins illustrates the potential of
this technique as a general approach for recovery of recombinant proteins
produced as insoluble inclusion bodies.

PMID: 8200443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Virol. 1994 Apr;68(4):2632-48.

A transcriptional regulatory element is associated with a nuclease-hypersensitive
site in the pol gene of human immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Van Lint C(1), Ghysdael J, Paras P Jr, Burny A, Verdin E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral and Molecular Pathogenesis, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

Analysis of the chromatin organization of the integrated human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) genome has previously revealed a major constitutive DNase
I-hypersensitive site associated with the pol gene (E. Verdin, J. Virol.
65:6790-6799, 1991). In the present report, high-resolution mapping of this site 
with DNase I and micrococcal nuclease identified a nucleosome-free region
centered around nucleotides (nt) 4490 to 4766. A 500-bp fragment encompassing
this hypersensitive site (nt 4481 to 4982) exhibited transcription-enhancing
activity (two- to threefold) when it was cloned in its natural position with
respect to the HIV-1 promoter after transient transfection in U937 and CEM cells.
Using in vitro footprinting and gel shift assays, we have identified four
distinct binding sites for nuclear proteins within this positive regulatory
element. Site B (nt 4519 to 4545) specifically bound four distinct nuclear
protein complexes: a ubiquitous factor, a T-cell-specific factor, a
B-cell-specific factor, and the monocyte/macrophage- and B-cell-specific
transcription factor PU.1/Spi-1. In most HIV-1 isolates in which this PU box was 
not conserved, it was replaced by a binding site for the related factor Ets1.
Factors binding to site C (nt 4681 to 4701) had a DNA-binding specificity similar
to that of factors binding to site B, except for PU.1/Spi-1. A GC box containing 
a binding site for Sp1 was identified (nt 4623 to 4631). Site D (nt 4816 to 4851)
specifically bound a ubiquitously expressed factor. These results identify a
transcriptional regulatory element associated with a nuclease-hypersensitive site
in the pol gene of HIV-1 and suggest that its activity may be controlled by a
complex interplay of cis-regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC236741
PMID: 8139041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Virol. 1994 Apr;68(4):2320-30.

Effects of provirus integration in the Tpl-1/Ets-1 locus in Moloney murine
leukemia virus-induced rat T-cell lymphomas: levels of expression,
polyadenylation, transcriptional initiation, and differential splicing of the
Ets-1 mRNA.

Bellacosa A(1), Datta K, Bear SE, Patriotis C, Lazo PA, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, 
Tsichlis PN.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111.

The Tpl-1 locus was defined as a genomic DNA region which is targeted by provirus
insertion during progression of Moloney murine leukemia virus-induced rat T-cell 
lymphomas. Using a panel of 156 (Mus musculus x Mus spretus) x Mus musculus
interspecific backcross mice, we mapped Tpl-1 to mouse chromosome 9 at a distance
of 1.2 +/- 0.9 centimorgans from the Ets-1 proto-oncogene (S.E. Bear, A.
Bellacosa, P.A. Lazo, N.A. Jenkins, N.G. Copeland, C. Hanson, G. Levan, and P.N. 
Tsichlis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86:7495-7499, 1989). In this report, we
present evidence that all the known Tpl-1 provirus insertions occurred
immediately 5' of the first exon of Ets-1 (exon A) and that the earlier detected 
distance between Tpl-1 and Ets-1 was due to the high frequency of meiotic
recombination in the region between the site of provirus integration and exon
III. Northern (RNA) blot analysis of polyadenylated RNA from normal adult rat
tissues and Moloney murine leukemia virus-induced T-cell lymphomas and
hybridization to a Tpl-1/Ets-1 probe derived from the 5' end of the gene revealed
two lymphoid cell-specific RNA transcripts, of 5.5 and 2.2 kb. Sequence analysis 
of a near-full-length (4,991-bp) cDNA clone of the 5.5-kb RNA revealed a
441-amino-acid open reading frame encoding a protein identical to the human and
mouse Ets-1 proteins with the exception of five and nine species-specific
conservative amino acid differences, respectively. The steady-state level of the 
Tpl-1/Ets-1 RNA and of the Ets-1 protein was modestly elevated in tumors carrying
a provirus in the Tpl-1 locus. The relative ratio of the two Ets-1 transcripts,
which were shown to arise by differential polyadenylation, was not affected by
provirus insertion. Moreover, the major site of transcriptional initiation, which
was localized by primer extension 250 bp upstream of the 5' end of the Ets-1 cDNA
clone, was shown to be identical in normal cells and tumors carrying a provirus
in the Tpl-1 locus. Finally, the differential splicing of Ets-1 exon VII was
shown by RNase protection to occur at a rate of 15 to 26% and to remain
unaffected by provirus insertion. The subtlety of these effects, in contrast to
the strong growth selection of cells with a provirus in the Tpl-1/Ets-1 locus,
suggests that provirus insertion may affect the fine regulation of the gene,
perhaps during cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC236708
PMID: 8139017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Oncol. 1994 Mar;4(3):521-31.

Expression of ets family genes in hematopoietic-cells.

Romanospica V(1), Suzuki H, Georgiou P, Chen S, Ascione R, Papas T, Bhat N.

Author information: 
(1)NCI,MOLEC ONCOL LAB,POB B,FREDERICK,MD 21702. MED UNIV S CAROLINA,HOLLINGS
CANC CTR,CTR MOLEC & STRUCT BIOL,CHARLESTON,SC 29425. FREDERICK CANC RES & DEV
CTR,DYNCORP,PROGRAM RESOURCES INC,FREDERICK,MD 21702.

We have examined the expression of the ets family of transcription factors in
different types of hematopoietic cells. Our results demonstrate that several
members of the ets gene family are expressed differentially in hematopoietic
cells. During phorbol ester induced differentiation of HL60 cells, ETS2, PEA3, as
well as GABPalpha and GABPbeta mRNAs are coordinately induced. During the
activation of T-cells, ETS2 proteins are induced; however, the expression of the 
ETS1 and ERGB gene products are reduced. These results demonstrate that the
regulation of ets family of genes is complex and depends on cell type. This
observation leads to the conclusion that the regulation of ets target genes, will
be dependent, in part, upon the type of ets genes expressed in each particular
cell type.

PMID: 21566954  [PubMed]


89. Oncogene. 1994 Feb;9(2):425-35.

Structural inferences of the ETS1 DNA-binding domain determined by mutational
analysis.

Mavrothalassitis G(1), Fisher RJ, Smyth F, Watson DK, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

The ets family of transcription factors is characterized by a conserved region
that harbors the DNA-binding activity. We performed extensive deletion and
mutational analyses, as well as DNA-peptide interaction studies necessary to
identify the determinants of the DNA-binding activity of the ETS1 oncoprotein. We
found that amino acids beyond the 85 amino acid conserved region are required in 
order to afford maximum DNA-binding activity in a heterologous system. Mutation
throughout the binding domain can have a detrimental effect on binding activity, 
indicating that proper folding of the entire domain is necessary for DNA binding.
A peptide, as small as 37 residues (K37N), derived from the basic region of the
ETS1 binding domain, is sufficient to exhibit sequence-specific DNA recognition. 
Total randomization of Lysine 379, Lysine 381 and Arginine 391 within this region
fails to provide functional substitutions, indicating that these specific amino
acids within the basic region are required for binding. Transactivation activity 
of the ETS1 proteins bearing mutations was consistent with their DNA-binding
activity, indicating that the primary (if not only) function of this domain is to
provide sequence-specific DNA recognition activity. Our mutational analysis, as
well as modeling predictions, lead us to propose a helix-turn-helix structure for
the basic region of the ETS1 binding domain that is able to interact directly
with DNA. We also propose that the hydrophobic alpha-helical region, surrounding 
tryptophan 338, is fundamental for proper protein folding and functioning of the 
ets binding domain.

PMID: 8290254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Oncogene. 1994 Feb;9(2):405-15.

Dual control of myc expression through a single DNA binding site targeted by ets 
family proteins and E2F-1.

Roussel MF(1), Davis JN, Cleveland JL, Ghysdael J, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105.

NIH3T3 cells expressing a mutant colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R)
containing a phenylalanine for tyrosine substitution in the tyrosine kinase
domain at codon 809 exhibit defective myc regulation and do not enter S phase
when stimulated by CSF-1. Enforced expression of either ets-1 or ets-2 in these
cells restores their mitogenic response, albeit less efficiently than myc itself,
suggesting that ets proteins may regulate c-myc expression. Ets-1 transactivates 
reporter genes driven by the human and mouse c-myc promoters through the binding 
site for the transcription factor E2F, the latter being required for E1A- and
serum-induced c-myc expression. Analysis of E2F-1 sequences identified a minimal 
DNA binding domain that is related to those of ets proteins. Although E2F and ets
proteins interact with similar consensus DNA binding sites, in vitro binding
assays revealed that E2F can bind DNA as a homodimer, whereas ets proteins bind
these sites as monomers. E2F and ets proteins do not form heterodimers in vitro
and do not transactivate c-myc synergistically. Thus, E2F-1 and ets family
members may independently regulate c-myc transcription through the same binding
site at different times following growth factor stimulation.

PMID: 8290253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Protein Sci. 1994 Feb;3(2):257-66.

Real-time DNA binding measurements of the ETS1 recombinant oncoproteins reveal
significant kinetic differences between the p42 and p51 isoforms.

Fisher RJ(1), Fivash M, Casas-Finet J, Erickson JW, Kondoh A, Bladen SV, Fisher
C, Watson DK, Papas T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, PRI/DynCorp, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702.

The sequence-specific DNA binding of recombinant p42 and p51 ETS1 oncoprotein was
examined quantitatively to determine whether the loss of the Exon VII
phosphorylation domain in p42 ETS1 or the phosphorylation of expressed Exon VII
in p51 ETS1 had an effect on DNA binding activity. The kinetics of
sequence-specific DNA binding was measured using real-time changes in surface
plasmon resonance with BIAcore (registered trademark, Pharmacia Biosensor)
technology. The real-time binding of p42 and p51 ETS1 displayed significant
differences in kinetic behavior. p51 ETS1 is characterized by a fast initial
binding and conversion to a stable complex, whereas p42 ETS1 exhibits a slow
initial binding and conversion to a stable complex. All of the p51 ETS1 DNA
binding states are characterized by rapid turnover, whereas the p42 ETS1 DNA
binding states are 4-20 times more stable. A model describing these kinetic steps
is presented. Stoichiometric titrations of either p42 or p51 ETS1 with specific
oligonucleotides show 1:1 complex formation. The DNA sequence specificity of the 
p42 and p51 ETS1 as determined by mutational analysis was similar. The in vitro
phosphorylation of p51 ETS1 by CAM kinase II obliterates its binding to specific 
DNA, suggesting that the regulation of p51 ETS1 sequence-specific DNA binding
occurs through phosphorylation by a calcium-dependent second messenger. The p42
ETS1 lacks this regulatory domain (Exon VII), and binding to its specific DNA
sequence is not sensitive to calcium signaling.

PMCID: PMC2142800
PMID: 8003962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hybridoma. 1994 Feb;13(1):1-8.

Epitope mapping of human ETS1 monoclonal antibody.

Bhat NK(1), Romano-Spica V, Georgiou P, Chen SL, Kui PG, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201.

The epitope for E44 monoclonal antibody (mAb) was mapped using mutated ETS1
proteins lacking different carboxy-terminal regions and by the employment of
synthetic oligopeptides spanning the epitope region. This epitope lies around
Arg211 of the human ETS1 protein since substitution of Arg211 by Gln211 in the
epitope region results in the loss of recognition of the mouse ETS1 protein by
E44 mAb. Substitution of Leu214 by valine214 in the epitope region (as is found
in the chicken ETS1 and viral Ets proteins) does not alter the capacity of the
E44 mAb to recognize this antigen. Taken together, these results suggest that a
specific ionic interaction is able to play a pivotal role in the recognition of
the ETS1 protein by the E44 mAb.

PMID: 7515374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Oncogene. 1994 Feb;9(2):469-77.

The EndoA enhancer contains multiple ETS binding site repeats and is regulated by
ETS proteins.

Seth A(1), Robinson L, Panayiotakis A, Thompson DM, Hodge DR, Zhang XK, Watson
DK, Ozato K, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

EndoA is a type II keratin and with EndoB (type I keratin), constitutes
intermediate filaments in various simple epithelial tissues. EndoA is
developmentally regulated and has an enhancer that is located at the 3'- end of
the gene. This enhancer contains two single and five dual Ets binding sites. Thus
far, no other promoter or enhancer has been shown to contain as many potential
clustered Ets binding sites. To study the transcriptional regulation of EndoA by 
the ETS family proteins, we amplified the EndoA enhancer fragment from mouse
genomic DNA by PCR, and cloned it into the pBLCAT2 vector upstream from the CAT
reporter gene. Several pBLCAT-ENDOA clones were sequenced to verify the presence 
of all the ETS binding sites. Clones that did not show any point mutations in the
ETS binding sites were chosen to study the transcription regulation by ETS1, ETS2
and ERGB/FLI-1 gene products. EMSA results indicated that the ETS1, ETS2 and
ERGB/FLI-1 proteins bind to the enhancer sequence, and DNase I protection data
demonstrated that the ETS proteins protect all seven EBS core sequences.
Cotransfection of the COS cells with the pBLCAT-ENDOA construct, along with
increasing amounts of different ETS expression vectors, resulted in a significant
induction of CAT reporter gene expression. Previously, we have shown that the
overexpression of the ETS1 gene transforms NIH3T3, and these transformed cells
(7AQS2.1) produce high levels of ETS1 protein (Seth & Papas, 1990). In this
report, we show that the undifferentiated P19 EC cells do not express detectable 
levels of ETS1; however, an elevated level of ETS1 is expressed in differentiated
derivatives of these cells. We therefore used these two cell lines to examine the
activity of the EndoA enhancer with the ETS1 product. Transfection of the
pBLCAT-ENDOA construct alone in undifferentiated P19 EC cells results in very low
CAT gene expression; however, upon differentiation with retinoic acid the level
of CAT gene activity increases dramatically. Similarly, an increase in CAT
expression from the same construct (pBLCAT-ENDOA) was also observed in 7AQS2.1
cells. Our results therefore indicate that the EndoA enhancer is regulated by ETS
proteins via interaction with multiple ETS-binding site sequences.

PMID: 7507230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jan;14(1):840-50.

Cooperative binding of Ets-1 and core binding factor to DNA.

Wotton D(1), Ghysdael J, Wang S, Speck NA, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, United Kingdom.

Two phorbol ester-inducible elements (beta E2 and beta E3) within the human
T-cell receptor beta gene enhancer each contain consensus binding sites for the
Ets and core binding factor (CBF) transcription factor families. Recombinant
Ets-1 and purified CBF bound individually to beta E2 and beta E3, in which the
Ets and core sites are directly adjacent. In this report, we show that CBF and
Ets-1 bind together to beta E2 and beta E3 and that Ets-1-CBF-DNA complexes are
favored over the binding of either protein alone to beta E2. Formation of
Ets-1-CBF-DNA complexes increased the affinity of Ets-1-DNA interactions and
decreased the rate of dissociation of CBF from DNA. Ets-1-CBF-DNA complexes were 
not observed when either the Ets or core site was mutated. The spatial
requirements for the cooperative interaction of Ets-1 and CBF were analyzed by
oligonucleotide mutagenesis and binding site selection experiments. Core and Ets 
sites were coselected, and there appeared to be little constraint on the relative
orientation and spacing of the two sites. These results demonstrate that CBF and 
Ets-1 form a high-affinity DNA-binding complex when both of their cognate sites
are present and that the relative spacing and orientation of the two sites are
unimportant. Ets and core sites are found in several T-cell-specific enhancers,
suggesting that this interaction is of general importance in T-cell-specific
transcription.

PMCID: PMC358432
PMID: 8264651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Invasion Metastasis. 1994-1995;14(1-6):198-209.

Expression of the transcription factor c-Ets1 correlates with the occurrence of
invasive processes during normal and pathological development.

Vandenbunder B(1), Queva C, Desbiens X, Wernert N, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS-URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The protein encoded by the c-ets1 proto-oncogene is a member of a new family of
transcription factors. Cellular regulatory sequences responsive to the c-Ets1
proteins include a urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene enhancer, the 
stromelysin 1 and the collagenase 1 gene promoters. During normal as well as
pathological development, the expression of c-ets1 is associated with the
occurrence of invasive processes, either in invading cells or in the invaded
tissue. Since these invasive processes are thought to require the remodeling of
the extracellular matrix, we investigate the relationships between c-Ets1 and the
expression patterns of transcripts encoding the matrix-degrading proteases uPA,
stromelysin 1 and collagenase 1, in embryos and in solid tumors.

PMID: 7657513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Folia Biol (Praha). 1994;40(5):301-13.

Does the transcription factor c-ets1 take part in the regulation of angiogenesis 
and tumor invasion?

Vandenbunder B(1), Wernert N, Queva C, Desbiens X, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS-URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The c-ets1 proto-oncogene encodes a transcription factor that binds a GGAA/T
purine rich core DNA sequence. During normal as well as pathological development,
the expression of c-ets1 is associated with the occurrence of invasive processes,
either in invading cells or in the invaded tissue. Cellular regulatory sequences 
responsive to the c-Ets1 proteins include a urokinase-type plasminogen activator 
(u-PA) gene enhancer, the stromelysin-1 and the collagenase-1 gene promoters.
Since invasive processes are thought to require the remodeling of the
extra-cellular matrix, we investigate the relationships between c-Ets1 and the
expression pattern of transcripts encoding these matrix degrading proteases, in
embryos and in solid tumors.

PMID: 7534726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Dec 30;197(3):1229-33.

Sequence specific binding of the transcription factor c-Ets1 to the human
immunodeficiency virus type I long terminal repeat.

Holzmeister J(1), Ludewig B, Pauli G, Simon D.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie, Robert Koch-Institut, Berlin, Germany.

Human immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR) driven
transcription is regulated by a variety of cellular transcription factors. Most
work has focused on the two nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB) elements indispensable
for HIV-1 LTR enhancer function. We demonstrate here the specific binding of the 
transcription factor c-Ets1 to an U3 region of the HIV-1 LTR (nt -141 to -149)
using electrophoretic mobility shift analysis with T-cell nuclear extract and in 
vitro translated protein. This previously not identified Ets binding site is
highly conserved among different HIV-1 isolates and maps to an U3 region recently
shown to be necessary for viral growth in vitro. The c-Ets proto-oncogene family 
of transcription factors has yet been associated with HTLV-I and HIV-2
transcription. Our present analysis suggests an important role of c-Ets proteins 
in HIV-1 transcription.

PMID: 8280137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Dec 11;21(24):5636-43.

Ets transcription factor binding site is required for positive and TNF
alpha-induced negative promoter regulation.

von der Ahe D(1), Nischan C, Kunz C, Otte J, Knies U, Oderwald H, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Haemostasis Research Unit, Kerckhoff-Klinik, Max-Planck-Institut, Bad Nauheim,
Germany.

Thrombomodulin (TM) is expressed on vascular endothelial cells and plays an
important role in the anticoagulant pathway by maintaining the thrombo-resistance
of the blood vessel wall. We show that in primary human endothelial cells TM gene
expression is repressed at the transcriptional level by Tumour necrosis factor
(TNF alpha) through a protein kinase C independent pathway. The TM promoter is
highly active in endothelial cells and is inhibited by TNF alpha. The -76/-56
region mediates both specific high basal activity and TNF alpha-repression. It
binds a nuclear factor specific to endothelial cells, that appears to belong to
the Ets-family by various criteria. The -76/-56 region contains three direct
repeats of the ets-core sequence GGAA that are important for specific high basal 
activity, TNF alpha repression and trans-activation by expression of Ets-1 and 2.
Although human Ets-1 (h-Ets-1) and chicken c-Ets-1 and 2 stimulate the TM
promoter through the -76/-56 element, their activity is not suppressed by TNF
alpha. c-Ets-1 competes and overrides TNF alpha repression in a concentration
dependent manner. We propose that either a different member of the Ets domain
protein family, or an Ets-associated co-factor, is the target of the TNF alpha
signalling cascade in endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC310528
PMID: 8284209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncogene. 1993 Dec;8(12):3375-83.

PEA3, Oct 1 and Oct 2 positively regulate the human ETS1 promoter.

Chen JH(1), Wright CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pediatrics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston 77030.

The promoter of the human ETS1 gene contains binding site motifs for
transcription factors Sp1, Ap1, Ap2, ETS, PEA3 and Oct. It has been shown
previously that Ap1, Ap2, and ETS are positive regulators for the transcription
of the ETS1 gene and that the ETS1 gene is autoregulated. In addition, two
regions on the ETS1 promoter that contain negative regulatory sequences have also
been identified. In this study, GST/PEA3 and GST/ets1 fusion proteins were used
in gel mobility assays to analyse the interaction between these transcription
factors with the binding motifs of PEA3 and ETS in the ETS1 promoter. Promoter
constructs in which the binding site motifs are mutated were used to examine the 
effect of mutation on the activities of transcription factors PEA3, ets1 and Oct.
Reporter plasmids containing different deletion mutants of the ETS1 promoter were
used to examine the effect of different transcription factors (PEA3, Oct 1 and
Oct 2) upon the expression of the ETS1 gene. The results of these studies
indicate that PEA3 is a strong positive regulator of the ETS1 promoter and that
other transcription factors increase the activity of the ETS1 promoter in an
additive rather than synergistic fashion.

PMID: 8247540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Virol. 1993 Dec;67(12):7307-16.

Transcriptional activation of the human T-lymphotropic virus type I long terminal
repeat by functional interaction of Tax1 and Ets1.

Gitlin SD(1), Dittmer J, Shin RC, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

Transcription regulation of the oncogenic retrovirus human T-lymphotropic virus
type I (HTLV-I) involves the composite activity of both viral and cellular
transcription factors. The HTLV-I transforming protein, Tax1, modulates the
activity of several cellular transcription factors, upregulating the level of
viral gene expression. In addition, cellular transcription factors, such as Ets1,
independently bind to the viral long terminal repeat in a sequence-specific
manner and activate transcription. It was of interest to analyze the possible
interaction of Tax1 and Ets1 in viral gene regulation. We now report that Tax1
and Ets1 increase expression from the HTLV-I promoter in a cooperative manner.
The level of expression was increased 5- to 10-fold above the combined individual
effect of Tax1 and Ets1. S1 nuclease analysis demonstrated that the cooperative
effect was due to an increase in the levels of steady-state RNA. The functional
interaction between Tax1 and Ets1 required the presence of the Tax1-responsive
21-bp repeat element TRE-1 and the Ets1-responsive element ERR-1. These results
suggested the possible interaction of Ets1 with transcriptional regulatory
proteins that bind to the 21-bp repeats. This interaction is demonstrated by
decreased electrophoretic mobility of specific 21-bp repeat gel shift complexes
in the presence of Ets1. Furthermore, interaction of Ets1 with the 21-bp
repeat-binding proteins enhances the relative efficiency of binding to the DNA.
This cooperative interaction between Ets1 and proteins which bind to the
Tax1-responsive 21-bp repeats suggests a possible role for Ets1 in the regulation
of viral gene expression.

PMCID: PMC238194
PMID: 8230454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Dev Biol. 1993 Dec;37(4):519-29.

Involvement of the proto-oncogene c-ets 1 and the urokinase plasminogen activator
during mouse implantation and placentation.

Grevin D(1), Chen JH, Raes MB, Stehelin D, Vandenbunder B, Desbiens X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille,
France.

Many of the Ets proteins have been shown to be transcription activators. In
vitro, Ets 1 proteins are involved in the transcriptional induction of genes such
as stromelysin 1, collagenase 1 or urokinase type plasminogen activator, which
are proteases responsible for extracellular matrix degradation. In vivo, c-ets 1 
is expressed in a wide variety of embryonic tissues in migrating cells,
especially in endothelial cells during blood vessel formation. C-ets 1 is also
expressed in stromal cells of invasive carcinomas. In the present work, we have
investigated the expression of both c-ets 1 and u-PA, a putative target gene of
the Ets 1 proteins, within a biological model which includes both embryonic and
tumoral aspects. Implantation and placentation of the mouse embryo display
migration of the trophoblastic cells, which invade the stroma of the uterine
endometrium and trigger the establishment of a new vascular frame. Using in situ 
hybridization, we show that the overlapping of expression of c-ets 1 and u-PA is 
restricted to some maternal cell populations from the invasive front and to the
endothelial cells of the endometrial vasculature. C-ets 1 is never expressed in
trophoblasts. In contrast, u-PA expression in trophoblasts is strong and
coincides with the embryo invasive phase. In the embryo proper, c-ets 1 displays 
a spatio-temporal expression pattern similar to that described in the chick
embryo. Until E 10.5, u-PA is expressed neither in embryonic nor in
extra-embryonic structures. The respective roles of c-ets 1 and u-PA and their
relationship during mammalian placentation are discussed.

PMID: 8179996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Nov 11;21(22):5184-91.

A single amino-acid substitution in the Ets domain alters core DNA binding
specificity of Ets1 to that of the related transcription factors Elf1 and E74.

Bosselut R(1), Levin J, Adjadj E, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1443, Institut Curie, Section de Biologie, Orsay, France.

Ets proteins form a family of sequence specific DNA binding proteins which bind
DNA through a 85 aminoacids conserved domain, the Ets domain, whose sequence is
unrelated to any other characterized DNA binding domain. Unlike all other known
Ets proteins, which bind specific DNA sequences centered over either GGAA or GGAT
core motifs, E74 and Elf1 selectively bind to GGAA corecontaining sites. Elf1 and
E74 differ from other Ets proteins in three residues located in an otherwise
highly conserved region of the Ets domain, referred to as conserved region III
(CRIII). We show that a restricted selectivity for GGAA core-containing sites
could be conferred to Ets1 upon changing a single lysine residue within CRIII to 
the threonine found in Elf1 and E74 at this position. Conversely, the reciprocal 
mutation in Elf1 confers to this protein the ability to bind to GGAT core
containing EBS. This, together with the fact that mutation of two invariant
arginine residues in CRIII abolishes DNA binding, indicates that CRIII plays a
key role in Ets domain recognition of the GGAA/T core motif and lead us to
discuss a model of Ets proteins--core motif interaction.

PMCID: PMC310635
PMID: 8255775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Nov;13(11):6690-701.

Identification of a killer cell-specific regulatory element of the mouse perforin
gene: an Ets-binding site-homologous motif that interacts with Ets-related
proteins.

Koizumi H(1), Horta MF, Youn BS, Fu KC, Kwon BS, Young JD, Liu CC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Cell Biology, Rockefeller University,
New York, New York 10021.

The gene encoding the cytolytic protein perforin is selectively expressed by
activated killer lymphocytes. To understand the mechanisms underlying the
cell-type-specific expression of this gene, we have characterized the regulatory 
functions and the DNA-protein interactions of the 5'-flanking region of the mouse
perforin gene (Pfp). A region extending from residues +62 through -141, which
possesses the essential promoter activity, and regions further upstream, which
are able to either enhance or suppress gene expression, were identified. The
region between residues -411 and -566 was chosen for further characterization,
since it contains an enhancer-like activity. We have identified a 32-mer sequence
(residues -491 to -522) which appeared to be capable of enhancing gene expression
in a killer cell-specific manner. Within this segment, a 9-mer motif
(5'-ACAGGAAGT-3', residues -505 to -497; designated NF-P motif), which is highly 
homologous to the Ets proto-oncoprotein-binding site, was found to interact with 
two proteins, NF-P1 and NF-P2. NF-P2 appears to be induced by reagents known to
up-regulate the perforin message level and is present exclusively in killer
cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and UV cross-linking experiments
revealed that NF-P1 and NF-P2 may possess common DNA-binding subunits. However,
the larger native molecular mass of NF-P1 suggests that NF-P1 contains an
additional non-DNA-binding subunit(s). In view of the homology between the NF-P
motif and other Ets proto-oncoprotein-binding sites, it is postulated that NF-P1 
and NF-P2 belong to the Ets protein family. Results obtained from the binding
competition assay, nevertheless, suggest that NF-P1 and NF-P2 are related to but 
distinct from Ets proteins, e.g., Ets-1, Ets-2, and NF-AT/Elf-1, known to be
expressed in T cells.

PMCID: PMC364732
PMID: 8413265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Leukemia. 1993 Nov;7(11):1777-85.

Quantitative and qualitative variation of ETS-1 transcripts in hematologic
malignancies.

Collyn d'Hooghe M(1), Galiègue-Zouitina S, Szymiczek D, Lantoine D, Quief S,
Loucheux-Lefebvre MH, Kerckaert JP.

Author information: 
(1)U 124 INSERUM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer, Lille, France.

The ETS family proteins have a conserved DNA-binding domain and act as
transcription factors. Three domains have been recently defined in human ETS-1
proteins and their role could depend upon the nature of alternative transcripts
according to whether they possess or lack DNA binding and/or transcriptional
activation domain and also point mutation that could affect these important
domains. Expression of ETS-1 gene is very complex and is controlled at several
levels: the initiation of transcription, alternative splicing, post-translational
modification, and protein stability. As a selection apparently exists for ETS-1
gene activation in hematopoietic cells, we investigated a relation between
quantitative and qualitative ETS-1 expression and leukemogenesis. Using Northern 
blot, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and single strand conformation
polymorphism (SSCP) methods, we analyzed quantitative and qualitative ETS-1
expression in a variety of hematological pathologies and cell lines of different 
origin. Two ETS-1 transcripts of 6.8 and 2.7 kb, resulting from differential
polyadenylation site utilization and exhibiting different stability, were
observed. We identified, in a great number of patients, the four alternative
ETS-1 products, but the relative extent significance of the four transcripts was 
very different from one patient to another. A non-conservative mutation observed 
in one case of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and in the ETS-1
transactivation domain raised the question of suppressor activity for some ETS-1 
products, as it is now known that activators and repressors can be encoded by the
same gene and consistently co-expressed in vivo.

PMID: 8231246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1993 Nov;119(11):1238-43.

Chromosome 11Q13 amplification in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Williams ME(1), Gaffey MJ, Weiss LM, Wilczynski SP, Schuuring E, Levine PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville.

OBJECTIVE: To establish the frequency and clinicopathologic correlates of 11q13
amplification in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
DESIGN: Retrospective clinicopathologic analysis.
SETTING: University and private cancer centers.
PATIENTS: Eighty-five patients with pathologically confirmed head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma.
MEASUREMENTS: The degree of DNA amplification in each tumor was determined using 
chromosome 11q13 probes for the bcl-1 major translocation cluster, PRAD1/cyclin
D1 (CCND1), the fibroblast growth factor gene HST1, EMS1, and glutathione S
transferase, pi-1. The presence or absence of amplification was correlated with
anatomic site, tumor stage, cytologic grade, histologic pattern, and mitotic
activity.
RESULTS: Thirty-one patients (36%) showed a twofold to 10-fold amplification of
11q13 loci compared with the chromosome 11q23 ETS1 control probe. Twenty-nine of 
these encompassed bcl-1 through EMS1 loci; one sample showed only bcl-1 and
PRAD1/cyclin D1 plus HST1 amplification, with another amplified at HST1 and EMS1 
with minimal or no bcl-1 and PRAD1/cyclin D1 amplification. Amplification was
significantly correlated with high cytologic grade, a diffusely infiltrative
growth pattern, and with a hypopharyngeal primary site.
CONCLUSIONS: Chromosome 11q13 amplification in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma is correlated with an aggressive histologic appearance and
hypopharyngeal primary site and should be assessed in prospective clinical trials
to determine its utility for treatment stratification and prognosis. Although
PRAD1/cyclin D1 and EMS1 have been implicated in the pathogenesis of neoplasms
with 11q13 amplification, rare cases with more limited amplicon size suggest that
another relevant gene or genes may exist between these loci.

PMID: 8217084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Int J Oncol. 1993 Oct;3(4):565-73.

Characterization of ectopically-expressed ets1 in human colon-cancer cells -
induction of putative ets1-target gene.

Suzuki H(1), Romanospica V, Georgiou P, Fisher R, Papas T, Bhat N.

Author information: 
(1)NCI,MOLEC ONCOL LAB,POB B,FREDERICK,MD 21702. INC DYNCORP,PROGRAM
RESOURCES,FREDERICK,MD 21702.

We have previously shown that the ETS1 gene is expressed in a tissue-specific
manner, and encodes a transcription factor, that may be involved in lymphocyte
development, activation and proliferation. To understand the ETS1 function in
non-lymphoid cells, we have ectopically expressed ETS1 protein in a human colon
cancer cell line, and studied its biochemical properties. The 51 kDa ETS1 protein
expressed in transfected cells localized in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm,
has similar biochemical properties compared to ETS1 protein expressed in lymphoid
cells. The ectopically expressed ETS1 binds to the DNA in sequence-specific
manner and the binding activity is affected by the flanking sequences outside the
'GGA' core. Our results also demonstrate that the DNA-binding activity of
full-length ETS1 is similar in lymphoid and non-lymphoid cells. The ETS1
expressed in DLD-1 cells is biologically active since it induces a 54.5 kDa
polypeptide, whose expression level correlates with the expression of ETS1 in
DLD-1 cells.

PMID: 21573401  [PubMed]


107. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Oct;13(10):6479-89.

XrpFI, an amphibian transcription factor composed of multiple polypeptides
immunologically related to the GA-binding protein alpha and beta subunits, is
differentially expressed during Xenopus laevis development.

Marchioni M(1), Morabito S, Salvati AL, Beccari E, Carnevali F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Università degli Studi di Roma
La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

XrpFI, first identified in the extract of Xenopus laevis oocyte nuclei, binds to 
a proximal sequence of the L14 ribosomal protein gene promoter. Its target
sequence, 5'-TAACCGGAAGTTTGT-3', is required to fully activate the promoter, and 
the two G's of the central motif are essential for factor binding and
transcriptional activation; our data also suggest that XrpFI may play a role in
cap site positioning. The binding site of XrpFI is homologous to the sequence
recognized by the family of ets genes. Antibodies specific for Ets-1 and Ets-2
proteins did not react with XrpFI, but those raised against the rat alpha and
beta GA-binding proteins both supershifted the retarded bands formed by XrpFI.
The Xenopus polypeptides related to GA-binding protein alpha interact with DNA
both as monomers and as heterodimers associated with beta-related proteins.
Oocyte nuclei contain multiple forms of alpha- and beta-related proteins: the
alpha-like proteins remain throughout development, while the pattern of the beta 
species changes in the embryonic stages examined. beta-like proteins are
undetectable in the cleavage period up to the neurula stage, but at later stages,
when ribosomal protein genes are actively transcribed, two beta-related
polypeptides reappear.

PMCID: PMC364707
PMID: 8413247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Oct;13(10):6201-10.

Characterization of the human interleukin-2 receptor beta-chain gene promoter:
regulation of promoter activity by ets gene products.

Lin JX(1), Bhat NK, John S, Queale WS, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Pulmonary and Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R) beta chain (IL-2R beta) is an essential
signaling component of high- and intermediate-affinity IL-2Rs. Our laboratory
previously reported that a DNA fragment containing 857 bp of 5'-flanking sequence
of the human IL-2R beta gene exhibited promoter activity. We have now further
characterized the promoter and delineated cis-acting regulatory regions. The
region downstream of -363 is critical for basal and phorbol myristate
acetate-inducible IL-2R beta promoter activity and contains at least three
enhancer-like regions. Among them, the -56 to -34 enhancer was the most potent
and had high-level activity in two T-cell lines but not in nonlymphoid HeLaS3 and
MG63 cells. This enhancer contains a GGAA Ets binding site which bound two Ets
family proteins, Ets-1 and GA-binding protein in vitro. Mutation of the Ets motif
strongly diminished both promoter and enhancer activities. We conclude that this 
Ets binding site plays a key role in regulating basal and phorbol myristate
acetate-inducible IL-2R beta promoter activity and may also contribute to
tissue-specific expression of the IL-2R beta gene.

PMCID: PMC364679
PMID: 8413220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Virology. 1993 Oct;196(2):442-50.

Regulatory elements involved in tax-mediated transactivation of the HTLV-I LTR.

Seeler JS(1), Muchardt C, Podar M, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Microbiology, Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, 
Texas 75235.

HTLV-I is the etiologic agent of adult T-cell leukemia. In this study, we
investigated the regulatory elements and cellular transcription factors which
function in modulating HTLV-I gene expression in response to the viral
transactivator protein, tax. Transfection experiments into Jurkat cells of a
variety of site-directed mutants in the HTLV-1 LTR indicated that each of the
three motifs A, B, and C within the 21-bp repeats, the binding sites for the Ets 
family of proteins, and the TATA box all influenced the degree of tax-mediated
activation. Tax is also able to activate gene expression of other viral and
cellular promoters. Tax activation of the IL-2 receptor and the HIV-1 LTR is
mediated through NF-kappa B motifs. Interestingly, sequences in the 21-bp repeat 
B and C motifs contain significant homology with NF-kappa B regulatory elements. 
We demonstrated that an NF-kappa B binding protein, PRDII-BF1, but not the rel
protein, bound to the B and C motifs in the 21-bp repeat. PRDII-BF1 was also able
to stimulate activation of HTLV-I gene expression by tax. The role of the Ets
proteins on modulating tax activation was also studied. Ets 1 but not Ets 2 was
capable of increasing the degree of tax activation of the HTLV-I LTR. These
results suggest that tax activates gene expression by either direct or indirect
interaction with several cellular transcription factors that bind to the HTLV-I
LTR.

PMID: 8372429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Virol. 1993 Oct;67(10):6087-95.

Transactivation of the P2 promoter of parathyroid hormone-related protein by
human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I Tax1: evidence for the involvement of
transcription factor Ets1.

Dittmer J(1), Gitlin SD, Reid RL, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

Expression of the parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), a protein that
plays a primary role in the development of the humoral hypercalcemia of
malignancy, is regulated by two distinct promoters, P1 and P2. PTHrP is
overexpressed in lymphocytes from adult T-cell leukemia patients. We now
demonstrate that in the human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I-transformed cell
line MT-2, RNA synthesis is initiated primarily at the P2 promoter. Furthermore, 
in cotransfection experiments, Tax1 transactivates the P2 promoter 10- to
12-fold. By using deletion and site-specific point mutations, we have identified 
a promoter-proximal sequence (positions -72 to -40) which is important for Tax1
transactivation. The PTHrP promoter-proximal element contains two potential
overlapping Ets1 binding sites, EBS I and EBS II. Gel shift analysis demonstrated
that Ets1 binds specifically to both EBS I and EBS II. Mutation of the consensus 
GGAA core motif in EBS I abolished binding and Tax1 transactivation in Jurkat T
lymphocytes. In Ets1-deficient cells, cotransfection of Tax1 and Ets1 expression 
plasmids stimulates PTHrP promoter activity. In the absence of Ets1, minimal
transactivation of the PTHrP promoter is observed. These data suggest that Ets1
binds to EBS I and cooperates with Tax1 to transactivate the PTHrP P2 promoter.

PMCID: PMC238030
PMID: 8371355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1993 Oct;9(10):1017-23.

ETS family proteins activate transcription from HIV-1 long terminal repeat.

Seth A(1), Hodge DR, Thompson DM, Robinson L, Panayiotakis A, Watson DK, Papas
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

ets is a multigene family and its members share a common ETS DNA-binding domain. 
ETS proteins activate transcription via binding to a purine-rich GGAA core
sequence located in promoters/enhancers of various genes, including several that 
are transcriptionally active in T cells. The ETS1, ETS2, and ERBG/Hu-FLI-1 gene
expression pattern also suggests a role for these genes in cells of hematopoietic
lineage. The HIV-1 LTR core enhancer contains two 10-base pair direct repeat
sequences (left and right) that are required for regulation of HIV-1 mRNA
expression by host transcription factors, including NF kappa B. Two ETS-binding
sites are present in the core enhancer of all the HIV-1 isolates reported so far.
In our studies, we utilized HIV-1 HXB2 and HIV-1 Z2Z6 core enhancers because the 
Z2Z6 strain has a single point mutation flanking the right ETS-binding site. We
demonstrate that the ETS1, ETS2, and ERGB/Hu-FLI-1 proteins can trans-activate
transcription from both the HXB2 and Z2Z6 core enhancer when linked to a reporter
(cat) gene. In addition, we show that the DNA binding and trans-activation with
the Z2Z6 core enhancer is at least 40-fold higher than that observed with the
HXB2 core enhancer. Further, we provide evidence that the marked increase in
binding and trans-activation with Z2Z6 core enhancer sequences is due to the
substitution of a flanking T residue in HXB2 TGGAA) by a C residue in Z2Z6
(CGGAA) isolate, thus generating an optimal ETS-binding core (CGGAA) sequence.

PMID: 8280476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Oct 1;90(19):8837-41.

v-jun cooperates with v-erbB to transform the thrombocytic/megakaryocytic
lineage.

Garcia M(1), Samarut J.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, France.

The transforming properties of v-jun, the viral counterpart of the transcription 
factor AP1, were investigated in avian hematopoietic cells. Two retroviruses,
called JB and JBN, expressing both v-jun and v-erbB, were constructed using an
avian erythroblastosis-based vector. We show that the cooperative action of both 
oncogenes allowed the virus to efficiently transform bone marrow cells. No such
transformation was obtained with either oncogene alone. JB-transformed bone
marrow cells expressed GATA-1, TAL-1, and histone H5, suggesting that they belong
to the erythrocytic/thrombocytic lineage. (Thrombocytes are the avian homologues 
of mammal megakaryocytes.) Moreover, after induction with phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate JB-transformed bone marrow cells began to differentiate and
synthesized high levels of platelet glycoproteins, indicating that they were of
thrombocytic origin. These results were confirmed by c-ets1 analysis since this
transcription factor, specifically found in cells with megakaryocytic but not
erythrocytic features, was clearly detected in these cells.

PMCID: PMC47455
PMID: 8105467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Virol. 1993 Sep;67(9):5522-8.

Activation of the human T-cell leukemia virus type I enhancer is mediated by
binding sites for Elf-1 and the pets factor.

Clark NM(1), Smith MJ, Hilfinger JM, Markovitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109-0680.

Infection with human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) is associated with
adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia. This disease occurs in only a small minority of
people infected with HTLV-I and manifests itself many years after infection.
Therefore, it appears that a fine balance exists between HTLV-I and the host
T-cell factors with which it interacts. HTLV-I encodes a transactivating protein,
Tax, which activates viral transcription via cellular mechanisms which are
incompletely understood. As viral gene expression is negligible during latency,
it is doubtful that Tax controls the initial transition to the replicative state.
Tax-independent cellular factors which control HTLV-I transcription, and
presumably latency, have received little study. Recently, the product of the
chicken proto-oncogene ets-1 has been shown to bind to the HTLV-I enhancer and
modestly activate transcription in certain cell types (S. C. Gitlin, R. Bosselut,
A. Gégonne, J. Ghysdael, and J. N. Brady, J. Virol. 65:5513-5523, 1991). However,
the functional significance of the ets-binding site in the intact enhancer has
not previously been shown. We now demonstrate that site-specific mutation of the 
purine-rich ets-binding site significantly diminishes inducible enhancer
function, but not Tax response, in the human Jurkat T-cell line. Similarly,
mutation of the peri-ets (pets) site, not previously noted in the HTLV-I
enhancer, markedly inhibits inducible enhancer function but not Tax response.
Further, we show that the predominant protein binding the purine-rich HTLV-I
enhancer element in human T cells is not ets-1 but Elf-1, a member of the ets
family which is very similar to the Drosophila morphogen E74. Regulation of
HTLV-I through Elf-1/pets enhancer motifs resembles that seen with human
immunodeficiency virus type 2 (D. M. Markovitz, M. Smith, J. Hilfinger, M. C.
Hannibal, B. Petryniak, and G. J. Nabel, J. Virol. 66:5479-5484, 1992; J. M.
Leiden, C.-W. Wang, B. Petryniak, M. Smith, D. M. Markovitz, G. J. Nabel, and C. 
B. Thompson, J. Virol. 66:5890-5897, 1992), another human pathogenic retrovirus
with a relatively long incubation period.

PMCID: PMC237955
PMID: 8350410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cell Adhes Commun. 1993 Sep;1(2):151-60.

Expression of C-ETS1 in early chick embryo mesoderm: relationship to the
hemangioblastic lineage.

Pardanaud L(1), Dieterlen-Lièvre F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire du CNRS et du Collège de
France, Nogent-sur-Marne.

In situ hybridization was used to detect the expression of the c-ets1
protooncogene during formation of the germ layers in the chick blastodisc. c-ets1
transcripts were present during the gastrulation process, i.e. when the
mesodermal cells invaginated. The expression became down-regulated in lateral
plate and the dorsal part of the somites while an intense signal was retained in 
the intermediate cell mass. When vasculogenesis started, c-ets1 transcripts
labelled blood islands and endothelial cells. Before the mesoderm split,
transcripts were present over the whole layer, more abundant however on its
ventral side in contact with the endoderm. After the mesoderm split, silver
grains became distributed asymmetrically: splanchnopleural mesoderm expressed
c-ets1 messengers all over while expression in the somatopleural mesoderm was
restricted to a few profiles corresponding to small endothelial cell groups. This
asymmetrical distribution of c-ets1 transcripts is in agreement with our previous
experimental findings establishing the different potentialities of the two
mesodermal layers regarding hemopoiesis, vasculogenesis and angiogenesis
processes.

PMID: 8081877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. C R Acad Sci III. 1993 Sep;316(9):892-901.

Developmental relationships between hemopoiesis and vasculogenesis.

[Article in English, French]

Dieterlen-Lièvre F(1), Pardanaud L, Godin I, Garcia-Porrero J, Cumano A, Marcos
M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire du CNRS, Collège de France,
Nogent-sur-Marne.

Using avian chimeras, we have demonstrated earlier that the stem cells seeding
the definitive hemopoietic organs form within the embryo rather than in the yolk 
sac. We now report experimental evidence indicating that hemopoietic progenitors 
appear in mouse embryos in the para-aortic splanchnopleura, a location similar to
the one that produces stem cells in avian embryos. This structure obtained from
E8.5 embryos was grafted under the kidney capsule of adult SCID mice. One
compartment of the B lymphoid system became reconstituted with cells derived from
the graft, that were identified with genetic and antigenic markers. In vitro data
are also in favor of the production of progenitors from this structure. Finally a
strategy designed to understand the developmental links between the endothelial
network and hemopoietic cells is described. It is based on the expression
patterns of two protooncogenes, c-ets1 and c-myb, activated during the
amplification period of each of these lineages.

PMID: 7521268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Aug 15;90(16):7739-43.

Characterization of the human CD4 gene promoter: transcription from the CD4 gene 
core promoter is tissue-specific and is activated by Ets proteins.

Salmon P(1), Giovane A, Wasylyk B, Klatzmann D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie et Génétique des Pathologies Immunitaires, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Hopital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris,
France.

We analyzed the 5' transcription control sequences of the human CD4 gene. We
located the transcription initiation site and showed that the CD4 core promoter
(positions -40 to +16) lacks a classical "TATA" or initiator positioning
consensus sequence but directs precise and efficient transcription when coupled
to the ubiquitously active simian virus 40 enhancer. The transcriptional activity
of the CD4 gene promoter correlated with CD4 expression in various cell types.
Interestingly, the CD4 core promoter also displayed a tissue-specific
transcriptional activity. Within this fragment, three nucleic acid sequences are 
completely conserved in the murine CD4 gene. One of these sequences contains a
perfect ETS consensus sequence. Another ETS consensus sequence is located 1060 nt
upstream. Electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays showed that the core promoter ETS
motif binds an Ets-related protein specifically expressed at high levels in CD4+ 
cells. Moreover, in CD4- cells, overexpression of Ets-1 or Ets-2 efficiently and 
specifically activated transcription from the CD4 promoter and core promoter.
These data indicate that Ets transcription factors play a central role in
controlling CD4 gene expression, by binding to both a classical remote site and
an unusual proximal activator sequence.

PMCID: PMC47218
PMID: 8356078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Aug 15;90(16):7588-92.

The Ets1 transcription factor is widely expressed during murine embryo
development and is associated with mesodermal cells involved in morphogenetic
processes such as organ formation.

Kola I(1), Brookes S, Green AR, Garber R, Tymms M, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Birth Defects Laboratory, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

The Ets family of genes encodes a class of transcription factors. Ets1 is
predominantly expressed in the lymphoid organs of neonatal and adult mice,
whereas Ets2 is expressed in every organ examined. In this study, we investigate 
the expression of Ets1 and Ets2 during murine embryonic development. Our data
show that Ets1 expression increases in embryos after implantation and during
organogenesis such that it is expressed in all the organs of day-15 embryos
studied. In later fetal stages, Ets1 expression is predominant in the lymphoid
tissues, brain, and organs that are undergoing branching morphogenesis (e.g.,
lung) but is dramatically reduced in other organs such as the stomach and
intestine. In neonatal development, Ets1 is expressed only in the lymphoid organs
and brain. In situ hybridization analysis demonstrates that expression of Ets1
occurs in mesenchymal cells of developing organs, in the nervous system, and in
forming bone. Furthermore, expression of Ets1 is upregulated in P19 cells induced
to differentiate into mesoderm-like cells. Ets2, on the other hand, is expressed 
in differentiated and undifferentiated P19 and F9 cells and in all organs of
embryonic, neonatal, and adult mice studied. These data suggest that Ets1 plays
an important role in mesodermal cells associated with morphogenetic processes
such as organ formation and tissue modeling, whereas Ets2 plays a more
fundamental role in cells.

PMCID: PMC47187
PMID: 7689222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Leukemia. 1993 Aug;7 Suppl 2:S55-60.

Regulation of human T cell receptor beta gene expression by Ets-1.

Wotton D(1), Prosser HM, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

Expression of the human TcR beta gene is controlled by an enhancer located 6kb 3'
to the C beta 2 gene segment. The activity of this enhancer has been shown to be 
inducible with phorbol esters. Within the enhancer the beta E2 element is
responsible for the major part of the inducibility, multimerised beta E2 alone is
also highly phorbol ester inducible. The beta E2 element contains a consensus
ets-binding site as well as a core motif, and we have shown that the beta E2 ets 
site binds both Ets-1 and Ets-2 in vitro and that purified core binding factor
(CBF) can bind the core site present in beta E2. Mutations which specifically
disrupt Ets-1 and Ets-2 binding abolish inducibility as well as reducing
activity, whereas mutants which cannot bind CBF have only reduced basal activity.
In Jurkat, which has a high level of endogenous Ets-1, multimerized beta E2 was
inactive unless treated with PMA. However when transfected into cells with no
detectable Ets-1 the beta E2 multimer was highly active in the absence of PMA.
Co-transfection of an Ets-1 expression construct with the full enhancer into
Jurkat cells led to a repression of enhancer activity, suggesting a repressive
role for Ets-1. Co-transfection of Ets-1 was also able to repress strongly the
activity of the beta E2 multimer. Repression of activity from both the full
enhancer construct and the beta E2 multimer was most dramatic in the presence of 
PMA, suggesting that Ets-1 could block TcR beta activation. The Ets-1 expression 
construct used transactivated the HTLV-1 LTR which has also been shown to bind
Ets-1. The repression of beta E2 activity by Ets-1 appears therefore to be
specific. In conclusion, the combination of ets and core sites in beta E2
constitutes a novel inducible element, which is specifically transrepressed by
Ets-1.

PMID: 8361234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Science. 1993 Jul 2;261(5117):82-6.

Regulation of lymphoid-specific immunoglobulin mu heavy chain gene enhancer by
ETS-domain proteins.

Nelsen B(1), Tian G, Erman B, Gregoire J, Maki R, Graves B, Sen R.

Author information: 
(1)Rosenstiel Research Center, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02254.

The enhancer for the immunoglobulin mu heavy chain gene (IgH) activates a
heterologous gene at the pre-B cell stage of B lymphocyte differentiation. A
lymphoid-specific element, microB, is necessary for enhancer function in pre-B
cells. A microB binding protein is encoded by the PU.1/Spi-1 proto-oncogene.
Another sequence element, microA, was identified in the mu enhancer that binds
the product of the ets-1 proto-oncogene. The microA motif was required for
microB-dependent enhancer activity, which suggests that a minimal B cell-specific
enhancer is composed of both the PU.1 and Ets-1 binding sites. Co-expression of
both PU.1 and Ets-1 in nonlymphoid cells trans-activated reporter plasmids that
contained the minimal mu enhancer. These results implicate two members of the Ets
family in the activation of IgH gene expression.

PMID: 8316859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Oncogene. 1993 Jul;8(7):1783-90.

Transactivation of GATA-1 promoter with ETS1, ETS2 and ERGB/Hu-FLI-1 proteins:
stabilization of the ETS1 protein binding on GATA-1 promoter sequences by
monoclonal antibody.

Seth A(1), Robinson L, Thompson DM, Watson DK, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

Ets family proteins activate transcription via binding to the GGAA core sequence 
located in the promoter/enhancer elements of many cellular and viral genes.
GATA-1 is an erythroid-specific transcription factor. The promoter of the chicken
GATA-1 gene contains multiple ets binding sites (EBS), two of them are present in
palindromic form. The GATA-1 promoter has been shown to be activated by the E26
virus. In this study, we have analysed whether the palidromic EBS of the chicken 
GATA-1 promoter is a target for binding and activation by members of the cellular
ets gene family products. The results herein indicate that both EBS in the
palindrome are required for DNA-binding because mutations in either site reduces 
the activity by at least 95%. Moreover, DNA binding of ETS1 to the EBS palindrome
is dramatically stabilized in the presence of a specific monoclonal antibody
whose epitope maps between amino acid positions 240-260. Although each of the
single sites bind, the efficiency of binding is extremely low. Furthermore, for
efficient binding the two sites must be in an inverted configuration because of
the fact that the oligonucleotide containing the left and right EBS in the same
orientation binds 10-fold less than the oligonucleotide containing the EBS
palindrome. Additionally, we show that the transcription of a reporter gene (CAT)
either linked to the GATA-1 EBS palindrome or GATA-1 promoter can be activated by
cotransfection with ETS1, alternatively-spliced ETS1, ETS2 or ERGB/Hu-FLI-1
expression vectors.

PMID: 8510925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1993 Jul 1;68(1):34-41.

DNA fragments of altered electrophoretic mobility in leukemia samples can arise
from double-strand DNA breaks at nuclease hypersensitive sites of active genes.

Miesfeldt S(1), Kim S, Hanson CA, Bohjanen PR, Leiden JM, Crist WM, Carroll AJ,
Thompson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chicago, IL 60637.

Chromosome translocations that disrupt or alter gene function have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of a variety of malignancies. Therefore,
identification of a translocation breakpoint has become a more important means by
which to identify genes involved in cellular transformation. A common site of
translocation in myeloid and lymphoid malignancies involves 11q23. One human
protooncogene, ETS1, has been localized to this chromosomal segment, and several 
tumours with 11q23 translocations have been shown to have altered ETS1 DNA
migration after restriction enzyme digestion. Two laboratories, however, have
recently localized the 11q23 breakpoint region to a small region of DNA telomeric
of the CD3 loci, a region at considerable distance from the ETS1 gene locus.
Therefore, it is difficult to reconcile the studies that suggest altered
migration of fragments associated with ETS1 and lack of a localization of the
breakpoint to a region near the ETS1 gene. Recently, in our studies to
characterize the promoter/enhancer region of the ETS1 protooncogene, we had the
opportunity to analyze DNA from 18 patients with acute leukemia involving
chromosome 11q23 aberrations. We were unable to demonstrate rearrangement of the 
ETS1 gene in this group, thus confirming that the 11q23 breakpoint does not
involve ETS1 protooncogene. In one patient, however, a DNA break in the region of
the ETS1 promoter was detected reproducibly. This DNA break was mapped to the
major DNaseI hypersensitive site in the ETS1 promoter. Mapping from both sides of
the break demonstrated that the break must have occurred during processing of the
leukemic cells for DNA analysis. Therefore, artifactual DNA breaks can occur at
nuclease-hypersensitive sites of active genes. These data suggest that previous
reports of chromosomal translocations involving the ETS1 protooncogene may have
resulted from DNA breaks at nuclease hypersensitive sites. This mechanism may
account for sporadic case reports of altered restriction enzyme fragment
migration involving genes that are not ultimately shown to be associated with the
chromosome translocation being examined.

PMID: 8330281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mech Dev. 1993 May;41(2-3):163-74.

The c-ets-1 proto-oncogenes in Xenopus laevis: expression during oogenesis and
embryogenesis.

Stiegler P(1), Wolff CM, Meyer D, Sénan F, Durliat M, Hourdry J, Befort N, Remy
P.

Author information: 
(1)UPR Mécanismes Moléculaires, Division Cellulaire et du Développement, CNRS,
Strasbourg, France.

We previously reported the cloning and sequencing of two cDNAs derived from the
Xenopus laevis ets-1 gene (Stiegler et al., 1990). The Xl-ets-1a cDNA encodes a
polypeptide highly homologous to known ets-1 proteins. The 3'-UTR contains two
AATAAA polyadenylation signals together with three copies of the TTTTTAT sequence
thought to confer a maturation-specific polyadenylation and implicated in the
deadenylation of dormant mRNAs. Several transcripts with maternal characteristics
were detected in oogenesis and early embryogenesis. A marked augmentation of the 
major transcript in the poly(A)+ fraction was detected at fertilization. Ets-1
transcripts were observed at constant levels during the cleavage stages but
decreased abruptly at gastrulation, to reappear from neurulation to late
embryogenesis. The possible contribution of 3'-UTR sequence elements to this
behavior is discussed.

PMID: 8518193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 May;13(5):2982-92.

Both LyF-1 and an Ets protein interact with a critical promoter element in the
murine terminal transferase gene.

Ernst P(1), Hahm K, Smale ST.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
UCLA School of Medicine 90024-1662.

Terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase (TdT) is a template-independent DNA
polymerase that is expressed transiently during the earliest stages of B- and
T-cell ontogeny. Previously, we characterized the promoter for the murine TdT
gene and identified a novel DNA-binding protein, called LyF-1, that interacts
with a DNA sequence element found to be critical for transcriptional activity in 
lymphoid cell lines. Here, we present a more detailed analysis of this 30-bp
control element, called the TdT D' element, which is centered approximately 60 bp
upstream of the transcription start site. We found that both the murine and human
D' elements are recognized by multiple proteins, including LyF-1 and at least two
Ets family proteins, Ets-1 and Fli-1. Additional protein-DNA interactions were
identified through studies using unfractionated nuclear extracts, in which the D'
element was apparently incorporated into a multiprotein complex, possibly
containing an Ets protein as a core component. By analyzing a series of
substitution mutations, two adjacent binding sites for LyF-1 were identified in
the murine D' element, with the Ets protein binding site closely coinciding with 
the proximal, lower-affinity LyF-1 site. Transient transfection analysis with
these mutations revealed that only a 10-bp region, containing precisely the Ets
and proximal LyF-1 binding sites, was needed for D' activity. These results
suggest an important role for an Ets family protein in the expression of the TdT 
gene. The role of LyF-1 is less clear; it might act in conjunction with the Ets
protein bound at the D' element or it might be unnecessary for D' activity.

PMCID: PMC359691
PMID: 8474456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Apr 30;192(2):430-8.

Sequence specific binding of Ets-1 to the mouse cytokeratin EndoA gene enhancer.

Hamazato F(1), Fujimura Y, Tamai Y, Takemoto Y, Matsushiro A, Nozaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Genetics, Osaka University, Japan.

Expression of the mouse cytokeratin EndoA gene is regulated by an enhancer that
is located 1 kilobases (kb) 3' downstream from the gene. The EndoA enhancer
consists of six direct repeats with homology to the PEA3 motif in the polyoma
virus enhancer core. The PEA3 motif binds to the proto-oncogene Ets product. In
this report we show that GST-c-Ets-1 fusion protein binds specifically to the
EndoA enhancer unit sequence by gel shift analysis. Footprinting showed that the 
Ets-1 binding site consisted of 20 bases in each repeat. Ets-1 also moderately
activated the EndoA enhancer. These results demonstrate that Ets-1 binds in a
sequence specific fashion to the mouse EndoA enhancer and suggest that c-Ets-1 or
other related Ets family genes function in regulating EndoA gene expression.

PMID: 7683460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Oncogene. 1993 Apr;8(4):989-97.

Requirement of an ETS-binding element for transcription of the human lck type I
promoter.

Leung S(1), McCracken S, Ghysdael J, Miyamoto NG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess 
Margaret Hospital, Toronto, Canada.

The requirement for cis-acting DNA sequences for transcriptional activity of the 
human lck type I promoter was investigated in two human cell lines that express
type I transcripts, the leukemic T-cell line, Jurkat, and the colon carcinoma
line, SW620. Transient transfection assays in Jurkat and SW620 cells revealed
negative and positive cis-acting regulatory elements in the lck type I promoter
between -570 and -480 and between -128 and -63 respectively. For the latter, a
triple point mutation of a sequence, GCAGGAAGT, from -99 and -91 resulted in
complete loss of lck type I promoter activity in both Jurkat and SW620 cells. In 
vitro binding assays indicated that this sequence, denoted the ETS-binding
element or EBE, can interact with the lymphoid-specific transcription factor
ETS-1. Thus, a protein(s) in the ETS family appears to be required for
transcription of the lck type I promoter in T cells and may be important for the 
activation of the lck gene in human colon carcinoma.

PMID: 8455950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. EMBO J. 1993 Mar;12(3):1169-78.

Synergistic activation of the HTLV1 LTR Ets-responsive region by transcription
factors Ets1 and Sp1.

Gégonne A(1), Bosselut R, Bailly RA, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-URA 1443, Institut Curie, Section de Biologie, Orsay, France.

Ets1 is the prototype of a family of transcriptional activators whose activity
depends on the binding to specific DNA sequences characterized by an invariant
GGA core sequence. We have previously demonstrated that transcriptional
activation by Ets1 of the long terminal repeat (LTR) of human T cell lymphotropic
virus type 1 is strictly dependent on the binding of Ets1 to two sites, ERE-A and
ERE-B, localized in a 44 bp long Ets-responsive region (ERR1). We report here
that the activity of ERR1 as an efficient Ets1 response element in HeLa cells
also depends on the integrity of an Sp1 binding site localized immediately
upstream of ERE-A. The response to Ets1 of an element restricted to the SP1/ERE-A
binding sites is also strictly dependent on both the Ets1 and Sp1 binding sites. 
In vitro, Sp1 and Ets1 are shown to cooperate to form a ternary complex with the 
SP1/ERE-A element. Reconstitution experiments in Drosophila melanogaster
Schneider cells show that Ets1 and Sp1 act synergistically to activate
transcription from either the ERR1 or the SP1/ERE-A elements and that synergy
requires the binding of both Sp1 and Ets1 to their cognate sites. SP1/ERE-A
elements are found in the enhancer/promoter region of several cellular genes,
suggesting that synergy between Ets1 and Sp1 is not restricted to the ERR1 region
of the HTLV1 LTR. These results strengthen the notion that Ets1 as well as other 
members of the Ets family usually function as components of larger transcription 
complexes to regulate the activity of a variety of viral and cellular genes.

PMCID: PMC413320
PMID: 8458329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Oncogene. 1993 Mar;8(3):771-80.

c-Ets-1 protein is hyperphosphorylated during mitosis.

Fleischman LF(1), Pilaro AM, Murakami K, Kondoh A, Fisher RJ, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

The ets-1 and ets-2 proto-oncogene products can serve as transcription factors
and become phosphorylated in response to Ca(2+)-mediated signals. We have
examined expression of Ets proteins during the cell cycle in cells synchronized
by centrifugal elutriation or nocodazole-induced mitotic block. Both methods
revealed the presence of a hyperphosphorylated isoform of Ets-1 during the
mitotic phase. This isoform showed a characteristic mobility shift and was
observed during mitosis in each of four cell lines (three human T-cell lines and 
a human astrocytoma) that express ets-1. In elutriated cells, only a small
portion of the Ets-1 in cells from the G2/M fractions was hyperphosphorylated,
while in nocodazole-arrested cells more of the Ets-1 was shifted. When cells were
released from nocodazole arrest, this isoform disappeared within 1-2 h as cells
completed mitosis and entered G1. This suggests that hyperphosphorylated Ets-1 is
present transiently during early mitosis, before or around the time of the
metaphase-anaphase transition. Exposure of unsynchronized cells to okadaic acid
resulted in a dramatic hyperphosphorylation of virtually all Ets-1, suggesting
that changes in cellular phosphatase activity are important for cell cycle
regulation of Ets-1. Hyperphosphorylated Ets-1 appears to arise from multiple
phosphorylations on serine in the exon 7-encoded domain of the protein and did
not appear to alter sequence-specific DNA-binding activity. Although enhanced
phosphorylation of Ets-2 was detected in nocodazole-arrested cells, no Ets-2
hyperphosphorylation was seen.

PMID: 8437861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Oncogene. 1993 Jan;8(1):133-9.

Negative regulatory elements in the human ETS1 gene promoter.

Chen JH(1), Jeha S, Oka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pediatric, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

The human ETS1 gene promoter contains binding sites for transcription factors
AP1, AP2 and ETS. These factors have been previously shown to be positive
regulators for the expression of the ETS1 gene. In our previous report it was
inferred that the ETS1 gene promoter also contains negative regulatory elements
that might balance and prevent the overexpression of the ETS1 gene product. The
studies reported here show that the ETS1 gene promoter also contains binding site
motifs for transcription factors PEA3 and OCT. By subjecting deletion constructs 
of the ETS1 gene promoter to functional analysis, two negative regulatory
elements (NREs) were located: NRE1 was mapped to 230 nt at the 5' end of the
promoter, and NRE2 was mapped to 350 nt located between the second OCT motif and 
a 120-base sequence downstream from the SacI site. These NREs can also reduce the
activity of a heterogenous promoter. Gel mobility-shift assays showed that
nuclear extracts from B-lymphoid (Daudi), T-lymphoid (HPB) and erthyromyeloid
(K562) cells each form one major and several minor complexes with NRE1 and NRE2. 
The nuclear extract from promyelocytic (HL60) cells does not form complexes with 
either NRE1 or NRE2. The identification of NREs in the ETS1 gene promoter
suggests that these elements play an important role in regulating the ETS1 gene
expression in hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 8423991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jan;13(1):668-76.

GATA and Ets cis-acting sequences mediate megakaryocyte-specific expression.

Lemarchandel V(1), Ghysdael J, Mignotte V, Rahuel C, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.91, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Creteil, France.

The human glycoprotein IIB (GPIIB) gene is expressed only in megakaryocytes, and 
its promoter displays cell type specificity. We show that this specificity
involved two cis-acting sequences. The first one, located at -55, contains a GATA
binding site. Point mutations that abolish protein binding on this site decrease 
the activity of the GPIIB promoter but do not affect its tissue specificity. The 
second one, located at -40, contains an Ets consensus sequence, and we show that 
Ets-1 or Ets-2 protein can interact with this -40 GPIIB sequence. Point mutations
that impair Ets binding decrease the activity of the GPIIB promoter to the same
extent as do mutations that abolish GATA binding. A GPIIB 40-bp DNA fragment
containing the GATA and Ets binding sites can confer activity to a heterologous
promoter in megakaryocytic cells. This activity is independent of the GPIIB DNA
fragment orientation, and mutations on each binding site result in decreased
activity. Using cotransfection assays, we show that c-Ets-1 and human GATA1 can
transactive the GPIIB promoter in HeLa cells and can act additively. Northern
(RNA) blot analysis indicates that the ets-1 mRNA level is increased during
megakaryocyte-induced differentiation of erythrocytic/megakaryocytic cell lines. 
Gel retardation assays show that the same GATA-Ets association is found in the
human GPIIB enhancer and the rat platelet factor 4 promoter, the other two
characterized regulatory regions of megakaryocyte-specific genes. These results
indicate that GATA and Ets cis-acting sequences are an important determinant of
megakaryocytic specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC358945
PMID: 8417360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. FASEB J. 1993 Jan;7(1):155-60.

Mis-splicing yields circular RNA molecules.

Cocquerelle C(1), Mascrez B, Hétuin D, Bailleul B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer, Lille, France.

We previously identified novel human ets-1 transcripts in which the normal order 
of exons is inverted, and demonstrated that although the order of exons is
different than in the genomic DNA, splicing of these exons out of order occurs in
pairs using genuine splice sites (1). Here we determine the structure of these
novel transcripts, showing that they correspond to circular RNA molecules
containing only exons in genomic order. These transcripts are stable molecules,
localized in the cytoplasmic component of the cells. To our knowledge, this is
the first case of circular transcripts being processed from nuclear pre-mRNA in
eukaryotes. This new type of transcript might represent a novel aspect of gene
expression and hold some interesting clues about the splicing mechanism.

PMID: 7678559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Bull Cancer. 1993 Jan;80(1):38-49.

[Does oncogene c-ets 1 participate in the regulation of tumor angiogenesis?].

[Article in French]

Vandenbunder B(1), Wernert N, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'oncologie moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The formation of new blood vessels is an essential process in embryonic
development and wound healing, for tumor growth and metastasis. In situ
hybridization studies have revealed that the protooncogene c-est1 is expressed in
endothelial cells at the beginning of blood vessel formation, in normal and
pathological conditions. c-ets1 encodes a transcription factor, a protein which
binds specifically to DNA and which regulates the transcription of genes
containing these specific binding sequences in their promotors. Thus, in vitro
experiments suggest that c-ets1 may activate the transcription of genes encoding 
collagenase 1, stromelysine 1 and urokinase plasminogen activator, proteases
involved in extracellular matrix degradation. A working hypothesis is that c-ets1
takes part in regulating angiogenesis by controlling the transcription of these
genes whose activity is necessary for the migration of endothelial cells from
pre-existing capillaries. This hypothesis is discussed with respect to current
experimental evidence and to the complexity of the regulatory network controlling
gene transcription and extracellular matrix degradation.

PMID: 7515728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Genes Dev. 1992 Dec;6(12B):2502-12.

Specificities of protein-protein and protein-DNA interaction of GABP alpha and
two newly defined ets-related proteins.

Brown TA(1), McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Research Laboratories, Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Department of Embryology, Baltimore, Maryland 21210.

The ets-related protein GABP alpha interacts with the four ankyrin-type (ANK)
repeats of GABP beta to form a high-affinity DNA-binding complex that recognizes 
a site important for herpes simplex virus type I immediate early gene activation.
To investigate the selectivity and specificity of the GABP complex, we have
isolated two new ETS family members, termed ER81 and ER71. ER81 and GABP alpha
were present in most tissues of adult mice, whereas ER71 was restricted to
testis. We have compared the DNA-binding specificities of these proteins by
binding site selection. GABP alpha, ER71, and ER81 recognized the common
pentanucleotide DNA sequence 5'-CGGAA/T-3'. Although subtle differences were
observed for nucleotide preferences flanking this pentanucleotide core, the
overall similarity of the selected sequences was most striking. Given the
observation that GABP alpha interaction with GABP beta requires its intact ETS
domain, we further compared the ability of GABP beta to interact with other ETS
proteins. GABP beta did not augment the DNA-binding activity of the highly
similar ETS domains of ER81, ER71, or Ets-1. Moreover, probing of total tissue
extracts with radiolabeled GABP beta demonstrated its exceedingly stringent
specificity for GABP alpha. Given that the DNA-binding specificities of these ETS
proteins are similar and that the protein-protein interactions between GABP beta 
and GABP alpha are highly specific, we conclude that the protein interactions
determine the target site selection by GABP alpha.

PMID: 1340465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Int J Oncol. 1992 Nov;1(6):631-7.

Influence of nucleotides flanking the ggaa core sequence on ets1 and ets2
DNA-binding activity and the mechanism of ets1 autoregulation.

Ascione R(1), Thompson D, Thomas R, Panayiotakis A, Ramsay R, Tymms M, Kola I,
Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)NCI,MOLEC ONCOL LAB,FREDERICK,MD 21702. LUDWIG INST CANC RES,MELBOURNE TUMOR
BIOL BRANCH,MELBOURNE,VIC,AUSTRALIA. MONASH UNIV,CTR EARLY HUMAN DEV,MOLEC
EMBRYOL & BIRTH DEFECT LAB,CLAYTON,VIC 3168,AUSTRALIA.

The Ets family of genes encode nuclear proteins that activate transcription by
binding to a specific purine-rich (GGAA) ets binding sequence (EBS) present in
promoters/enhancers of various genes. We have previously shown that
over-expression of ets1 via transfection of ets1 expression vectors into NIH3T3
cells induced the expression of the endogenous Ets1 gene. Here we report that the
autoregulation occurs as a result of the ets1 protein binding to the EBS-core
located in its own promoter. In the present study, we have also identified Ets
binding sites in the IL-4, G-CSF (granulocyte colony stimulating factor), and the
2'5' OAS (oligoadenylate synthetase) promoters by binding with Ets1 and Ets2
proteins using electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Interestingly, we have
found that the EBS containing T nucleotides on either side of the GGAA core
sequence, does not bind Ets1 or Ets2 proteins. Our findings demonstrate that the 
sequences surrounding the purine core - GGAA- have a profound influence on the
binding of Ets proteins.

PMID: 21584592  [PubMed]


134. Cancer Lett. 1992 Oct 30;67(1):71-8.

C-ets-1 protooncogene expression alters the growth properties of immortalized rat
fibroblasts.

Topol LZ(1), Tatosyan AG, Ascione R, Thompson DM, Blair DG, Kola I, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201.

Ets family genes have been cloned and characterized from a variety of species
ranging from human to Drosophila. The ets proteins encode transcription factors
that activate transcription via specific binding to GGAA core sequence present in
various promoter/enhancers. To investigate the role of ets protooncogene
expression on the growth properties of rat embryo fibroblasts (REF), we
constructed and introduced ets expression vectors into primary, as well as
immortalized REF cells. The transfected cells contained multiple copies of the
vector DNA, and the Northern blot analysis demonstrated overexpression of the
c-ets-1-specific mRNA. Although the expression of the ets genes was unable to
immortalize primary rat embryo fibroblasts, the expression of ets-1 in REF-1
cells enabled their growth in serum-free medium and effected tumorigenic activity
in nude mice.

PMID: 1423247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Oct 15;89(20):9934-8.

A phorbol ester response element within the human T-cell receptor beta-chain
enhancer.

Prosser HM(1), Wotton D, Gegonne A, Ghysdael J, Wang S, Speck NA, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, United Kingdom.

The activity of the T-cell receptor beta-chain gene enhancer is increased by
activators of the protein kinase C pathway during T-cell activation. Analysis of 
mutant enhancer constructs identified two elements, beta E2 and beta E3,
conferring phorbol ester inducibility. Multimerized beta E2 acted in isolation as
a phorbol ester-responsive element. Both beta E2 and beta E3, which contain a
consensus Ets-binding site, were shown to bind directly to the product of the
c-ets-1 protooncogene. Both regions also bound a second factor, core-binding
factor. Mutation of the beta E2 Ets site abolished the inducibility of the beta
E2 multimer. beta E2 and beta E3 Ets site mutations also profoundly affected
activity and inducibility of the enhancer. In contrast, enhancer activity but not
its inducibility was affected by mutation of the beta E2 core-binding factor
site. Cotransfection studies showed that Ets-1 specifically repressed activity of
the multimerized beta E2 element and the complete T-cell receptor beta-chain
enhancer. These data show that the T-cell receptor beta-chain enhancer responds
to protein kinase C-mediated activation signals via a functional domain, composed
of two elements, which contains binding sites for Ets transcription factors and
which is negatively regulated by Ets-1.

PMCID: PMC50248
PMID: 1409722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell Growth Differ. 1992 Oct;3(10):705-13.

The ERGB/Fli-1 gene: isolation and characterization of a new member of the family
of human ETS transcription factors.

Watson DK(1), Smyth FE, Thompson DM, Cheng JQ, Testa JR, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

All cellular ets proteins contain a region of high amino acid identity to those
found in the last two exons of the ets-1 gene (C domain). We have identified and 
characterized a new member of the human ETS gene family, ERGB. The ERGB gene
shows extensive amino acid identity to the human ERG and the mouse Fli-1 genes.
The ERGB gene is found to be transcriptionally active in a variety of human cell 
lines and tissues, in contrast to the more restrictive expression pattern of the 
ERG gene. The ERGB gene encodes for a 3.2-kilobase mRNA containing an open
reading frame of 451 amino acids. The ERGB gene, like human ETS1, is located on
chromosome 11 and is transposed to chromosome 4 as a result of the translocation 
t(4;11) associated with leukemia. Pulse-field gel analysis suggests that ETS1 and
ERGB are more than 200 kilobases apart. Similar to the other members of the ets
family (ets 1, ets 2), this new member is also able to trans-activate
transcription of a reporter gene linked to the ETS-binding sequences derived from
either the GATA-1 promoter or an optimal Ets-binding site.

PMID: 1445800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Oct 1;89(19):8889-93.

An inhibitory carboxyl-terminal domain in Ets-1 and Ets-2 mediates differential
binding of ETS family factors to promoter sequences of the mb-1 gene.

Hagman J(1), Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of California, San Francisco 94143-0414.

The mb-1 gene is expressed only during the early stages of B-lymphocyte
differentiation. Here we show that the mb-1 proximal promoter region contains a
functionally important binding site for members of the ETS family of DNA-binding 
proteins. We found that both the E26 virus-encoded v-ets and the
myeloid/B-cell-specific factor PU.1 bind efficiently to this site in vitro. By
contrast, Ets-1, the lymphocyte-specific cellular homologue of v-ets, and the
related, more ubiquitously expressed Ets-2 protein interacted weakly with this
binding site. DNA binding by both Ets-1 and Ets-2, however, could be increased
20- to 50-fold by deleting as few as 16 carboxyl-terminal amino acids. The
inhibitory carboxyl-terminal amino acid sequence is highly conserved between
Ets-1 and Ets-2 but is not present in either v-ets or PU.1. Replacement of the
carboxyl-terminal amino acids of v-ets with those of Ets-1 decreased DNA binding 
by v-ets drastically. Cotranslation of Ets-1 transcripts encoding proteins of
different lengths suggested that Ets-1 binds DNA as a monomer. Therefore, the
carboxyl-terminal inhibitory domain appears to interfere directly with DNA
binding and not with homodimerization. Finally, the functional relevance of ETS
factor binding to the mb-1 promoter site was evidenced by the stimulation of
transcription through this site by a v-myb-v-ets fusion protein. Together, these 
data suggest that one or more ETS family factors are involved in the regulation
of mb-1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC50029
PMID: 1409581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biol Chem. 1992 Sep 5;267(25):17957-65.

Human ETS1 oncoprotein. Purification, isoforms, -SH modification, and DNA
sequence-specific binding.

Fisher RJ(1), Koizumi S, Kondoh A, Mariano JM, Mavrothalassitis G, Bhat NK, Papas
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Program Resources, Inc./DynCorp,
Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland.

The human ETS1 proto-oncogene proteins have been isolated from the T-cell
leukemia line, CEM, by immunoaffinity chromatography and their identity confirmed
by NH2-terminal amino acid sequencing. Incubation of CEM cells with N
alpha-p-tosyl-L-lysine chloromethyl ketone (TLCK) indicates that ETS proteins can
be modified in their cellular context and that pretreatment of the cells with
N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) protects ETS1 proteins from TLCK modification. These data 
show that ETS1 proteins can exist in at least two different states, -SH-available
and -SH-protected. Renatured human ETS1 has DNA sequence-specific binding to the 
PEA3 (CAGGAAGT) motif. The ETS1.PEA3 complex can be observed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA). Purified ETS1 retards a band which is exactly the
same size as a complex that is retarded from nuclear extracts prepared from CEM
cells. Reduced ETS1 is required to form the ETS1.PEA3 complex, however;
modification of the ETS1 -SH groups by either NEM or by TLCk does not inhibit
formation of the complex. The ETS1.PEA3 complex formed with TLCK-modified ETS1
has a slower mobility than the complex formed with unmodified ETS1. Zone
sedimentation analysis of purified ETS1 indicates that it is the monomer of ETS1 
which binds to the PEA3 oligonucleotide.

PMID: 1517230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Exp Cell Res. 1992 Sep;202(1):199-202.

Ets-1 and Ets-2 protooncogene expression in theca cells of the adult mouse ovary.

Rowe A(1), Propst F.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St. Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, United Kingdom.

We have investigated the mRNA expression of the Ets-1 and Ets-2 genes in murine
gonads and found expression in adult ovaries. In situ hybridization experiments
show that the Ets genes are predominantly expressed in theca cells and cells of
ovarian interstitium. By gel retardation experiments we detected DNA binding
proteins in ovaries that specifically bind to the ETS motif, suggesting the
expression of Ets or Ets-related proteins. Our results raise the possibility of
Ets-2 involvement in ovarian pathology seen in patients with Down's syndrome.

PMID: 1511734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Oncogene. 1992 Sep;7(9):1713-9.

Genomic dispersal of the ets gene family during metazoan evolution.

Lautenberger JA(1), Burdett LA, Gunnell MA, Qi S, Watson DK, O'Brien SJ, Papas
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

Evolutionary homologs of the ets proto-oncogene have been discovered in the
genomes of widely divergent eucaryote species from Drosophila to sea urchin to
vertebrates. The prototype mammalian ets-1 and ets-2 genes are divided into three
coding domains that differ in their rate of accumulation of sequence divergence. 
An analysis of sequence divergence of ets gene homologs in various species has
produced a phylogenetic history of the ets gene family in the context of metazoan
evolutionary radiation. A minimum of five duplication events of ets primordial
genes were evident, namely (1) a duplication that separates primitive ets genes
(Drosophila precursor of 74E, mouse PU.1 and human ELK1) from the ets-1, ets-2,
erg ancestor; (2) and (3) two duplications that established separate ets, erg and
elg/GABP-alpha lineages which occurred prior to invertebrate-vertebrate
divergence; (4) divergence of ets-1 and ets-2 gene family also associated with
vertebrate-invertebrate divergence; (5) duplication of ets-1 and ets-2 in Xenopus
laevis to produce two ets-1 genes and two ets-2 genes during genomic
tetraploidation in the recent ancestry of this species.

PMID: 1501883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cell Growth Differ. 1992 Sep;3(9):617-25.

Oncogenic conversion alters the transcriptional properties of ets.

Wasylyk C(1), Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Laboratoire de Génétique
Moléculaire des Eucaryotes/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The vEts oncoprotein and its progenitor cEts1(p68) belong to a growing family of 
transcription factors that are related by the conserved ets domain. We show here 
that the ets domain and adjacent COOH-terminal amino acids are required for DNA
binding by cEts1(p68). vEts differs from cEts1(p68) in both the COOH-terminal
sequence and an amino acid substitution in the ets domain. The change in the
COOH-terminal sequence markedly decreases its affinity for specific DNA, and the 
ets domain mutation further diminishes binding. vEts does not trans-activate
through the ets (PEA3) motif in vivo. Surprisingly, vEts still efficiently
trans-activates the promoters of two genes, stromelysin and collagenase, that are
found to be overexpressed in transformed cells. The AP1 motifs of both promoters 
are required for efficient activation. vEts does not bind to the AP1 motif, even 
in the presence of cJun and cFos. The DNA-binding domain of Ets1 is required for 
activation through the AP1 element. Activation is inhibited by the expression of 
the glucocorticoid and retinoic acid receptors, suggesting that activation by Ets
does not involve reversal of negative regulators of AP1. We suggest that
activation is by an indirect mechanism involving activation of endogenous genes. 
Our results show that vEts differs from its progenitor cEts1(p68) in its
trans-activating properties. The findings suggest that activation of the Jun and 
Fos oncoprotein pathway is important for transformation by Ets.

PMID: 1329927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Leukemia. 1992 Aug;6(8):843-4.

XbaI RFLP of ETS-1 oncogene in chronic B-cell leukaemia.

Crossen PE(1), Morrison MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetic and Molecular Oncology Unit, Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand.

The influence of a polymorphic variant of the ETS-1 oncogene on the
predisposition to develop chronic B-cell leukemia (CLL) was investigated. A total
of 59 patients with CLL and 59 controls were examined for the frequency of an
XbaI restriction fragment length polymorphism RFLP of the ETS-1 oncogene which
has been reported to occur more frequently in patients with hematological
malignancies than in normal controls. We found no significant difference in the
allele frequency between the CLL patients and the normal controls. These data
suggest that the presence of the XbaI RFLP is not associated with CLL.

PMID: 1353551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Jun 11;20(11):2699-703.

Serum, AP-1 and Ets-1 stimulate the human ets-1 promoter.

Majérus MA(1), Bibollet-Ruche F, Telliez JB, Wasylyk B, Bailleul B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille, France.

The ets-1 proto-oncogene codes for a transcription factor. In order to understand
how ets-1 is regulated, we have cloned its promoter. We show that the promoter is
inducible by serum and expression of c-Fos and c-Jun, and it is positively
auto-regulated by its gene product. A 50 base-pair sequence is sufficient to
confer c-Fos + c-Jun and c-Ets-1 responsiveness to a heterologous promoter. This 
element contains two AP1 and one Ets-1 like motifs. Striking, AP-1 and Ets-1
motifs are found in oncogene responsive units (ORU's) of other promoters,
suggesting that combining these motifs is a common mechanism for generating
mitogen responsive transcription elements.

PMCID: PMC336910
PMID: 1614856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Genes Dev. 1992 Jun;6(6):975-90.

Interaction of murine ets-1 with GGA-binding sites establishes the ETS domain as 
a new DNA-binding motif.

Nye JA(1), Petersen JM, Gunther CV, Jonsen MD, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular, Viral, and Molecular Biology, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84143.

The proto-oncogene ets-1 is the founding member of a new family of eukaryotic
transcriptional regulators. Using deletion mutants of murine ets-1 cDNA expressed
in Escherichia coli, we show that the DNA-binding domain corresponds closely to
the ETS domain, an 85-amino-acid region that is conserved among ets family
members. To investigate the specificity of DNA binding of the ETS domain, we
mapped the DNA contacts of a monomeric Ets-1 fragment by chemical protection and 
interference assays. DNA backbone interactions span a 20-nucleotide region and
are localized on one face of the helix. Close phosphate and base contacts are
restricted to 10 central nucleotides. Contacts map to the major groove in the
center of the site. Flanking minor groove interactions also are predicted. To
determine the sequence preference in the close contact zone, we selected a pool
of high-affinity binding sites using a purified Ets-1 carboxy-terminal fragment. 
Our Ets-1-selected consensus, 5'-A/GCCGGAA/TGT/C-3', differs from the binding
consensus for the Drosophila ETS domain protein E74A, suggesting that specificity
of action of ets family members is mediated by the ETS domain. Compared to other 
well-characterized classes of DNA-binding proteins, Ets-1 produces a unique
pattern of DNA contacts. These studies demonstrate that the ETS domain proteins
bind DNA in a novel manner.

PMID: 1592264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Genes Dev. 1992 Jun;6(6):965-74.

A novel modulator domain of Ets transcription factors.

Wasylyk C(1), Kerckaert JP, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Laboratoire de Génétique
Moléculaire des Eucaryotes/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM), Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The ets gene family is composed of several oncogenes and codes for transcription 
factors. The Ets proteins have a similar sequence called the ets domain and bind 
to the core motif A/CGGAA. We show here that several members of the ets family
have different trans-activating properties. The ets domain of Ets-1 is required
for DNA binding. Adjacent to this domain there is a novel element that inhibits
DNA binding. It appears to alter the structure of the DNA-binding domain before
it interacts with DNA. There is a similar sequence in Ets-2 that also inhibits
DNA binding. This sequence is absent in alternative splice products of h-Ets-1.
PU1, the most distantly related member of the ets gene family, lacks this novel
element. It has a distinct DNA-binding specificity that is determined by DNA
sequences outside the core motif. These results have important implications for
both the oncogenic and normal functions of ets family members.

PMID: 1592263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Hybridoma. 1992 Jun;11(3):277-94.

Characterization and uses of monoclonal antibody derived against DNA binding
domain of the ets family of genes.

Bhat NK(1), Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD.

A monoclonal antibody recognizing ets proteins from a variety of species has been
developed. This antibody recognizes ets1, ets2, erg, and other related proteins. 
It has a high affinity for the ets1 protein. The epitope for the pan ets mAb
consists of about 13 amino acids. This antibody can be used to isolate and
characterize new members of ets gene family derived from a c-DNA expression
library, as well as to identify other "ets motif" binding proteins.

PMID: 1500064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 May;12(5):2213-21.

Expression of a 91-kilodalton PEA3-binding protein is down-regulated during
differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Martin ME(1), Yang XY, Folk WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia 65212.

Proteins binding to the PEA3 enhancer motif (AGGAAG) activate the polyomavirus
early promoter and help comprise the viral late mRNA initiator element (W. Yoo,
M. E. Martin, and W. R. Folk, J. Virol. 65:5391-5400, 1991). Because many
developmentally regulated cellular genes have PEA3 motifs near their promoter
sequences, and because Ets family gene products activate the PEA3 motif, we have 
studied the expression of PEA3-binding proteins and Ets-related proteins during
differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells. An approximately 91-kDa protein 
(PEA3-91) was identified in F9 cell nuclear extracts by UV cross-linking to a
radiolabeled PEA3 oligonucleotide probe, and expression of PEA3-91 was
down-regulated after differentiation of F9 cells to parietal endoderm. The
c-ets-1 gene product binds to a sequence in the murine sarcoma virus long
terminal repeat that is similar to the PEA3 motif (cGGAAG), but PEA3-91 was not
cross-linked to this Ets-1-binding motif, nor did antiserum which recognizes
murine c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 proteins have any effect on PEA3-binding activity in
mobility shift assays. Furthermore, c-ets-1 mRNA was not detected in
undifferentiated or differentiated F9 cells, and c-ets-2 mRNA levels remained
high after differentiation. Antiserum against the Drosophila Ets-related E74A
protein, however, recognized an approximately 92-kDa protein in F9 cells whose
expression during differentiation varied in a manner identical to that of
PEA3-91. These data suggest that PEA3-91 is not the product of the ets-1 or ets-2
genes but is likely to be the product of a murine homolog of the Drosophila E74
gene.

PMCID: PMC364393
PMID: 1569949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Exp Med. 1992 May 1;175(5):1391-9.

Evolutionarily conserved Ets family members display distinct DNA binding
specificities.

Wang CY(1), Petryniak B, Ho IC, Thompson CB, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med 1993 Sep 1;178(3):1133.

Members of the Ets family of proto-oncogenes encode sequence-specific
transcription factors that bind to a purine-rich motif centered around a
conserved GGA trinucleotide. Ets binding sites have been identified in the
transcriptional regulatory regions of multiple T cell genes including the T cell 
receptor alpha and beta (TCR-alpha and -beta) enhancers and the IL-2 enhancer, as
well as in the enhancers of several T cell-trophic viruses including Maloney
sarcoma virus, human leukemia virus type 1, and human immunodeficiency virus-2. T
cells express multiple members of the Ets gene family including Ets-1, Ets-2,
GABP alpha, Elf-1, and Fli-1. The different patterns of expression and
protein-protein interactions of these different Ets family members undoubtedly
contribute to their ability to specifically regulate distinct sets of T cell
genes. However, previous studies have suggested that different Ets family members
might also display distinct DNA binding specificities. In this report, we have
examined the DNA binding characteristics of two Ets family members, Ets-1 and
Elf-1, that are highly expressed in T cells. The results demonstrate that the
minimal DNA binding domain of these proteins consists of adjacent basic and
putative alpha-helical regions that are conserved in all of the known Ets family 
members. Both regions are required for DNA binding activity. In vitro binding
studies demonstrated that Ets-1 and Elf-1 display distinct DNA binding
specificities, and, thereby interact preferentially with different naturally
occurring Ets binding sites. A comparison of known Ets binding sites identified
three nucleotides at the 3' end of these sequences that control the differential 
binding of the Ets-1 and Elf-1 proteins. These results are consistent with a
model in which different Ets family members regulate the expression of different 
T cell genes by binding preferentially to purine-rich sequences that share a GGA 
core motif, but contain distinct flanking sequences.

PMCID: PMC2119210
PMID: 1569404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. New Biol. 1992 May;4(5):512-9.

Analysis of the DNA binding and transcriptional activation properties of the Ets1
oncoprotein.

Gegonne A(1), Punyammalee B, Rabault B, Bosselut R, Seneca S, Crabeel M, Ghysdael
J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Virale et Cellulaire, CNRS URA 1443, Centre
Universitaire, Orsay, France.

The c-ets1 gene product (Ets1) is the prototype of a family of sequence-specific 
transcriptional activators which have been implicated in various developmental
processes and in the response of cells to a variety of extracellular stimuli. We 
report here a structure-function analysis of the DNA binding and transcriptional 
activation properties of Ets1. The minimal region required for specific DNA
binding is located at the carboxy-terminus of Ets1, a domain highly conserved in 
all known members of the Ets family. Transcriptional activation by Ets1 in
mammalian cells requires an additional domain of 110 amino acids characterized by
a high content of acidic residues and localized in the amino-terminal half of the
protein. This domain also functions as a transcriptional activation domain in
yeast cells when linked to the heterologous DNA binding domain of Gal4. In
contrast to its conservation in Ets1 proteins across vertebrate species, this
activation domain is not conserved in other members of the Ets family. These
results indicate that an important level of specificity between different members
of the Ets family may reside in the differential interactions of their respective
activation domains with distinct general transcription factors or different
associated coactivators.

PMID: 1515415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Arerugi. 1992 Apr;41(4):532-42.

[Regulation of T cell antigen receptor alpha chain gene expression].

[Article in Japanese]

Kantake M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, School of Medicine, Chiba University.

A T cell antigen receptor (TcR) gene is considered to be a model system for
studies of developmentally-regulated, lineage-specific gene expression. For the
TcR alpha gene expression, it has been shown that the enhancer region located at 
3.0 kb in mouse or 4.5 kb in human downstream of TcR C alpha gene is essential.
The enchancer is demonstrated to contain at least four nuclear protein binding
sites called T alpha 1-T alpha 4. In this report, we analysed the molecular
requirement for murine TcR alpha gene enhancer function by using in vitro
mutagenesis system and CAT assay, and obtained the following results: 1. The T
alpha 2 element, especially ACATCC sequence, is important for enhancer activity, 
because the mutation in the sequence completely abolished the activity. 2. The
sequence TCTGG near by the ACATCC sequence seems also important for the enhancer 
function, since the mutation lost the half of the activity. 3. The ets1, which is
known to bind the ACATCC site, upregulates the enhancer activity of the reporter 
gene containing the concatemers of T alpha 2 region. The results indicate that
ets1 has a trans-activating activity to the T alpha 2 region of TcR alpha chain
enhancer.

PMID: 1535773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Mar;12(3):1043-53.

cis-acting sequences required for inducible interleukin-2 enhancer function bind 
a novel Ets-related protein, Elf-1.

Thompson CB(1), Wang CY, Ho IC, Bohjanen PR, Petryniak B, June CH, Miesfeldt S,
Zhang L, Nabel GJ, Karpinski B, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109.

The recent definition of a consensus DNA binding sequence for the Ets family of
transcription factors has allowed the identification of potential Ets binding
sites in the promoters and enhancers of many inducible T-cell genes. In the
studies described in this report, we have identified two potential Ets binding
sites, EBS1 and EBS2, which are conserved in both the human and murine
interleukin-2 enhancers. Within the human enhancer, these two sites are located
within the previously defined DNase I footprints, NFAT-1 and NFIL-2B,
respectively. Electrophoretic mobility shift and methylation interference
analyses demonstrated that EBS1 and EBS2 are essential for the formation of the
NFAT-1 and NFIL-2B nuclear protein complexes. Furthermore, in vitro mutagenesis
experiments demonstrated that inducible interleukin-2 enhancer function requires 
the presence of either EBS1 or EBS2. Two well-characterized Ets family members,
Ets-1 and Ets-2, are reciprocally expressed during T-cell activation.
Surprisingly, however, neither of these proteins bound in vitro to EBS1 or EBS2. 
We therefore screened a T-cell cDNA library under low-stringency conditions with 
a probe from the DNA binding domain of Ets-1 and isolated a novel Ets family
member, Elf-1. Elf-1 contains a DNA binding domain that is nearly identical to
that of E74, the ecdysone-inducible Drosophila transcription factor required for 
metamorphosis (hence the name Elf-1, for E74-like factor 1). Elf-1 bound
specifically to both EBS1 and EBS2 in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. It
also bound to the purine-rich CD3R element from the human immunodeficiency virus 
type 2 long terminal repeat, which is required for inducible virus expression in 
response to signalling through the T-cell receptor. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that multiple Ets family members with apparently distinct DNA binding
specificities regulate differential gene expression in resting and activated T
cells.

PMCID: PMC369536
PMID: 1545787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Am J Pathol. 1992 Jan;140(1):119-27.

c-ets1 proto-oncogene is a transcription factor expressed in endothelial cells
during tumor vascularization and other forms of angiogenesis in humans.

Wernert N(1), Raes MB, Lassalle P, Dehouck MP, Gosselin B, Vandenbunder B,
Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.

The c-ets1 proteins are transcriptional activators expressed within endothelial
cells during blood vessel development in chick embryos. The authors show by in
situ hybridization that c-ets1 is transcribed in the endothelia during
angiogenesis in human embryos, in granulation tissue, and especially during tumor
vascularization. c-ets1 mRNAs were also detected in the fibrocytes of tumor
stroma and in the spindle cells of Kaposi's sarcomas, regarded as cells of
endothelial origin. It has been shown that the c-ets proteins activate
transcription through a PEA3 motif that plays a role in the stimulation of
transcription of urokinase-type plasminogen-activator (u-PA), stromelysin and
collagenase genes. The authors demonstrate in vitro that the angiogenic factor
TNF alpha increases transiently the amount of both c-ets1 and u-PA mRNA in
confluent human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Therefore, the authors suggest 
that the c-ets1 proteins might regulate the transcription of the genes coding for
matrix-degrading proteases, which are necessary for both angiogenesis and tumor
invasion.

PMCID: PMC1886238
PMID: 1370594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cancer Res. 1991 Dec 15;51(24):6708-11.

Rearrangements on chromosome 11q23 in hematopoietic tumor-associated t(11;14) and
t(11;19) translocations.

Akao Y(1), Seto M, Takahashi T, Saito M, Utsumi KR, Nakazawa S, Ueda R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemotherapy, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Nagoya,
Japan.

We previously demonstrated that the breakpoint of t(11;14)(q23;q32) in the RC-K8 
B cell lymphoma cell line lies between CD3 and THY1/ETS1 on chromosome 11q23, and
we cloned this region and named it the rck locus. Pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis showed that the rck probe B (distal to the breakpoint) and the
porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD) probe detect the same germ line band and also
the same rearranged band when DNA from RC-K8 cells was digested with NotI enzyme.
Furthermore, Southern blot analysis with somatic cell hybrids showed that the
PBGD gene moved to the 14q+chromosome, which confirmed PBGD to be more distal to 
the centromere than the rck locus. These data allowed us to construct the
following order of genes: 11 cen-q23-CD3-rck-PBGD-THY1/ETS1. In this study, three
infantile leukemia cell lines with t(11;19)(q23;p13) translocation were also
analyzed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. CD3D probe detected the rearranged 
bands in DNA from two of them after digestion with NotI and SacII enzymes,
demonstrating that the breakpoints of both cell lines were estimated to be within
360 kilobases of CD3D.

PMID: 1742746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Oncogene. 1991 Dec;6(12):2249-54.

High-affinity DNA-protein interactions of the cellular ETS1 protein: the
determination of the ETS binding motif.

Fisher RJ(1), Mavrothalassitis G, Kondoh A, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Program Resources, Inc./DynCorp,
Frederick, Maryland 21702-1012.

ETS1 protein purified from CEM cells was used to select its optimum DNA-binding
sequence (pu) G/CCaGGA-AGTc (py). The sequence CCGGAAGT (ETS1-3) was preferred
5:1 over CAGGAAGT (PEA3). Quantitative electrophoretic mobility-shift assays
(EMSA) indicated that the purified ETS1 protein binds to either ETS1-3 or PEA3
oligonucleotide probes with high affinity (Ka = 0.5-4.0 x 10(10) M-1) and that
the purified ETS1 has different binding capacities for ETS1-3 and PEA3
oligonucleotide probes. The ETS1 protein binds 2-5 times more ETS1-3 than PEA3.
Competitive binding experiments showed that the ETS1-3 and PEA3 probes
effectively compete for the binding of ETS1-3. However, changing the core
DNA-binding sequence from GGAA to AGAA eliminates competition. Since the human
ETS1 protein selected the same DNA sequence from a mixture of random
oligonucleotides as did the Drosophila E74A protein (one of the most divergent
members of the ETS family), this strongly suggests that all proteins containing
the ETS 85 amino acid domain (sequences which define the ETS family) will bind to
the same sequence.

PMID: 1766672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Oncogene. 1991 Nov;6(11):2077-83.

Structural and functional analysis of the regulatory sequences of the ets-1 gene.

Oka T(1), Rairkar A, Chen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pediatrics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston 77030.

The ets-1 gene is a human homolog of the oncogene v-ets of avian acute leukemia
virus E26. The ets-1 gene is preferentially expressed in lymphoid cells. To
understand the regulation of the ets-1 gene expression the regulatory sequences
of this gene were identified and isolated. The promoter is found to be
functioning in the lymphoid cell line Daudi and the erythromyeloid cell line K562
but not in the promyelocytic cell line HL60. Sequence analysis indicates that the
ets-1 promoter does not contain the TATA or CAT box. It contains multiple
transcription initiation sites in a tight cluster. The promoter contains one
binding site each for AP1 and AP2. It has one definitive and five presumptive
sp1-binding sites. In addition, the ets-1 promoter contains one ets-1
protein-binding site. Functional analysis has shown that c-jun enhances the
activity of the ets-1 promoter, whereas the combination of c-fos and c-jun
expressions has no synergistic effect. The expression of exogenous AP2 and ets-1 
also enhances the activity of the ets-1 promoter. These results suggest that the 
AP1, AP2 and ets-1 proteins have a positive regulatory effect. The presence of
the ets-1 protein-binding site indicates the existence of an autoregulatory
mechanism for the expression of the ets-1 gene. Our results suggested that the
presence of a negative regulatory element upstream of the region where most of
the positive regulators are located.

PMID: 1945412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 1991 Nov;66(6):780-93.

HLA and non-HLA genetic factors in Japanese IDDM.

Aparicio JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

The HLA of 56 unrelated Japanese with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) 
was investigated and reconfirmed their role in the pathogenesis by restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). DQw4 showed the highest correlation to IDDM 
not only within the DQ system but among all the antigens, suggesting that HLA-DQ 
might play the most important role in the development of IDDM similar as in
Caucasians. When the amino acid sequences of DQA1 and DQB1 alleles were analyzed 
to find susceptibility to IDDM, common features were observed. That is, in any
ethnic group, DQA1 alleles of non-Leu at 76th residue combined with DQB1 alleles 
of non-Asp at 57th residue show association with IDDM, whereas other combinations
give rise to negative association. However, two exceptions were observed in case 
of Japanese IDDM patients with DQw4 and DQw9. Since DQw4 and DQw9 are in strong
linkage disequilibrium with DRB1 containing non-Asp-57th, mixed isotype molecules
of DQA1 and DRB1 might be responsible to determine IDDM susceptibility.
Furthermore, several non-HLA genes, the polymorphism in the genes encoding the
alpha (A), beta (B) and gamma (G) chains of the T-cell receptor (TCRA, TCRB and
TCRG), insulin gene (INS) and three closely linked polymorphic genes on
chromosome 11q23; Thy-1 (THY1), T3-D (CD3D) and c-ets proto oncogene (ETS1) were 
analyzed. Only the EST1 gene showed a significant association with IDDM by
AvaII-polymorphic fragment (P less than 0.03). These results were discordant with
some of the strongly associated genes observed in Caucasians. The discrepancy of 
the HLA and non-HLA results between both ethnic groups is discussed.

PMID: 1686010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Nov;11(11):5631-8.

Transcriptional activation through ETS domain binding sites in the cytochrome c
oxidase subunit IV gene.

Virbasius JV(1), Scarpulla RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell, Molecular and Structural Biology, Northwestern University 
Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

A mutational analysis of the rat cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV (RCO4) promoter 
region revealed the presence of a major control element consisting of a tandemly 
repeated pair of binding sites for a nuclear factor from HeLa cells. This factor 
was designated NRF-2 (nuclear respiratory factor 2) because a functional
recognition site was also found in the human ATP synthase beta-subunit gene.
Deletion or site-directed point mutations of the NRF-2 binding sites in the RCO4 
promoter resulted in substantial loss of transcriptional activity, and synthetic 
oligomers of the NRF-2 binding sites from both genes stimulated a heterologous
promoter when cloned in cis. NRF-2 binding and transcriptional activation
required a purine-rich core sequence, GGAA. This motif is characteristic of the
recognition site for a family of activators referred to as ETS domain proteins
because of the similarity within their DNA-binding domains to the ets-1
proto-oncogene product. NRF-2 recognized an authentic Ets-1 site within the
Moloney murine sarcoma virus long terminal repeat, and this site was able to
compete for NRF-2 binding to the RCO4 promoter sequence. In addition, a single
polypeptide of 55 kDa was detected following cross-linking of a partially
purified NRF-2 fraction to RCO4, the human ATP synthase beta subunit, or Moloney 
murine sarcoma virus binding sites. However, in contrast to Ets-1, which appears 
to be exclusive to lymphoid tissues, NRF-2 has the broad tissue distribution
expected of a regulator of respiratory chain expression.

PMCID: PMC361934
PMID: 1656236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Virol. 1991 Oct;65(10):5513-23.

Sequence-specific interaction of the Ets1 protein with the long terminal repeat
of the human T-lymphotropic virus type I.

Gitlin SD(1), Bosselut R, Gégonne A, Ghysdael J, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

We recently demonstrated that members of the c-ets proto-oncogene family, Ets1
and Ets2, are sequence-specific transcriptional activators of the human
T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) long terminal repeat (LTR). We now report
that the HTLV-I LTR contains two distinct Ets1-responsive regions, ERR-1 and
ERR-2. Expression of Ets1 with reporter plasmids containing ERR-1 or ERR-2
upstream of a basal promoter resulted in an increase in transcriptional activity.
By gel mobility shift assay, the interaction of Ets1 with the downstream
ERR-1-binding region was found to be more stable than its interaction with the
upstream ERR-2 region. By DNase I footprint, gel mobility shift, and methylation 
interference analyses, ERR-1 was found to contain two Ets1 binding sites, ERE-A
and ERE-B. A recombinant Ets1 protein was found to bind with higher affinity to
ERE-A than to ERE-B. Binding of Ets1 to these sites appears to result in a
specific and sequential protection of a 37-nucleotide sequence of the HTLV-I LTR 
from -154 to -118. In view of the high-level expression of Ets1 in lymphoid
cells, the c-ets proto-oncogenes encode transcription factors which could play an
important role in both basal and Tax1-mediated HTLV-I transcription.

PMCID: PMC249048
PMID: 1895400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Science. 1991 Aug 16;253(5021):789-92.

Identification of Ets- and notch-related subunits in GA binding protein.

LaMarco K(1), Thompson CC, Byers BP, Walton EM, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Research Laboratories, Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Department of Embryology, Baltimore, MD 21210.

Comment in
    Science. 1991 Aug 16;253(5021):742.

Recombinant cDNA clones that encode two distinct subunits of the transcription
factor GA binding protein (GABP) have been isolated. The predicted amino acid
sequence of one subunit, GABP alpha, exhibits similarity to the sequence of the
product of the ets-1 protooncogene in a region known to encompass the Ets DNA
binding domain. The sequence of the second subunit, GABP beta, contains four
33-amino acid repeats located close to the NH2-terminus of the subunit. The
sequences of these repeats are similar to repeats in several transmembrane
proteins, including Notch from Drosophila melanogaster and Glp-1 and Lin-12 from 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Avid, sequence-specific binding to DNA required the
presence of both polypeptides, revealing a conceptual convergence of nuclear
transforming proteins and membrane-anchored proteins implicated in
developmentally regulated signal transduction processes.

PMID: 1876836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Genes Dev. 1991 Jun;5(6):908-18.

Erythroleukemia induction by Friend murine leukemia virus: insertional activation
of a new member of the ets gene family, Fli-1, closely linked to c-ets-1.

Ben-David Y(1), Giddens EB, Letwin K, Bernstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The retroviral integration site Fli-1 is rearranged in 75% of the erythroleukemia
cell clones induced by Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV), whereas Spi-1/PU.1,
a member of the ets family of DNA-binding proteins, is rearranged in 95% of the
erythroleukemias induced by Friend spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV). To
determine the transcriptional domain defined by Fli-1, we have isolated a cDNA
clone that is highly expressed only in erythroleukemia cell lines with Fli-1
rearrangements. The protein sequence of this cDNA is very similar to Erg2,
another member of the ets gene family. The hydrophilic carboxy-terminal end of
the Fli-1 cDNA shares significant sequence similarity to the DNA-binding ETS
domain found in all members of the ets family. PFGE analysis localized Fli-1
within 240 kb of the ets-1 proto-oncogene on mouse chromosome 9 and human
chromosome 11q23, suggesting that ets-1 and Fli-1 arose from a common ancestral
gene by gene duplication. The involvement of the murine Fli-1, Spi-1, and avian
v-ets genes in erythroleukemia induction suggests that activation of ets gene
family members plays an important role in the progression of these multistage
malignancies.

PMID: 2044959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Oncogene. 1991 Apr;6(4):523-32.

The human ETS1 gene: genomic structure, promoter characterization and alternative
splicing.

Jorcyk CL(1), Watson DK, Mavrothalassitis GJ, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

Genomic clones encompassing the human ETS1 gene were isolated and utilized to
define its molecular organization. This gene consists of eight exons spanning
over 60 kb. The 5' end of the human ETS1 gene was subcloned and characterized. S1
nuclease, primer extension and RNAase protection analyses of human mRNAs showed
multiple transcription initiation sites. DNA sequence analysis indicated a high G
+ C content in the promoter region and the absence of either a 'TATA' box or a
'CAAT' box. Six consensus recognition sequences for the transcription factor SP1,
two AP1 consensus sequences and one consensus AP2 recognition sequence were
identified, as well as two GC elements with dyad symmetry. A palindromic region
similar to the serum response element of the c-fos gene and two octamer consensus
recognition sequences were located upstream of the promoter region. A series of
promoter deletion constructs positioned upstream from the bacterial
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene were transfected into HeLa cells and
their functional promoter activity assayed. The deletion constructs identified
the 5' boundary for maximum promoter activity at 486 bp upstream of the first
initiation site and suggest possible positive and negative regulatory regions.
Polymerase chain reaction analysis of ETS1 cDNA identified several amplified
products, indicating alternative splicing. In addition to the presence of mRNA
products lacking exon VII, products lacking exon IV, as well as ones lacking both
exons IV and VII, were found.

PMID: 2030910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Immunol. 1991 Mar 15;146(6):1743-9.

Ligation of membrane Ig leads to calcium-mediated phosphorylation of the
proto-oncogene product, Ets-1.

Fisher CL(1), Ghysdael J, Cambier JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Center for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine, Denver, CO 80206.

Erratum in
    J Immunol 1991 Sep 15;147(6):2068.

Recent studies have demonstrated that the nuclear protein, Ets-1, which is
preferentially expressed in lymphocytes, binds to the long terminal repeat of
Moloney murine sarcoma virus and HTLV-1 and regulates gene expression. The
association of Ets-1 with DNA has been shown to be lost when the protein is
phosphorylated. Thus, Ets-1 may regulate gene expression in lymphocytes and this 
activity may be determined by its phosphorylation state. To address the
possibility that Ets-1 activity may be altered by membrane (m) Ig-mediated signal
transduction, we analyzed the effect of mIgM and mIgD ligation on the
phosphorylation state of Ets-1. Monoclonal anti-IgM or anti-IgD antibody
stimulation of normal mouse B cells led to increased phosphorylation of Ets-1
within 2 min. This response was absolutely dependent on calcium mobilization and 
could be induced by elevation of intracellular free calcium using the calcium
ionophore, ionomycin. Calcium release from intracellular stores was sufficient to
mediate the phosphorylation of Ets-1. Treatment of resting B cells with IL-4, TGF
beta-1, IFN-gamma, anti-class I, or anti-class II antibodies did not induce Ets-1
phosphorylation. In summary, calcium mobilization from intracellular stores after
mIgM or mIgD ligation provides a necessary and sufficient signal for activation
of Ets-1 phosphorylation. This phosphorylation event may act in the alteration of
gene expression during B cell activation.

PMID: 1900874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Oncogene. 1991 Mar;6(3):357-60.

Ets1, when fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain, efficiently enhances galactose
promotor dependent gene expression in yeast.

Seneca S(1), Punyammalee B, Bailly M, Ghysdael J, Crabeel M.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, c/o CERIA-COOVI, Belgium.

Ets1, the translation product of the c-ets1 proto-oncogene and the related Ets2
protein, act as sequence-specific transcriptional factors in transient
transfection experiments in animal cells. We report here that in S. cerevisiae,
expression of a lacZ test gene placed under the control of the GAL1 promoter is
stimulated efficiently by a fusion protein in which the chicken Ets1 sequence
starting from amino acid 37, is linked to the DNA binding domain of the yeast
GAL4 transcriptional activator. This suggests that Ets1 contains one or more
intrinsic transcription activation domain(s). However, the GAL4 integral of Ets1 
fusion protein was unable to restore growth of a gal4 deletion mutant on
galactose, implying that the fusion product cannot substitute for GAL4
enhancement on all GAL genes.

PMID: 1901401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1991;56(2):112-5.

Relationship of the human protooncogene CBL2 on 11q23 to the t(4;11), t(11;22),
and t(11;14) breakpoints.

Savage PD(1), Shapiro M, Langdon WY, Geurts van Kessel AD, Seuanez HN, Akao Y,
Croce C, Morse HC 3rd, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, School of Medicine,
Minneapolis.

A probe identifying CBL2, the human cellular homolog of the murine oncogene v-cbl
and murine cellular protooncogene Cbl-2, and panels of rodent X human somatic
cell hybrids were used to study the relationship of this protooncogene to
translocations associated with acute leukemia, lymphoma, and Ewing sarcoma. CBL2 
was mapped to 11q23 and found to translocate from chromosome 11 to 4 in an acute 
leukemia cell line possessing a t(4;11)(q21;q23) and from chromosome 11 to 14 in 
a B-cell lymphoma with a t(11;14)(q23;q32). In an Ewing sarcoma cell line with a 
t(11;22)(q23;q12), however, CBL2 remained on chromosome 11. Additional studies of
other genes in the region of 11q23 allowed the following ordering of these genes 
and breakpoints: 11cen--q23--NCAM--CD3(E-D-G)--[t(11;14), t(4;11)]--(THY1, CBL2, 
ETS1)--t(11;22)--11qter. The gross structure of the CBL2 sequences examined was
not altered by either of the flanking breakpoints. Given that the 5' and 3' ends 
of the CBL2 gene are not known and are probably not evaluated by the v-cbl probe,
these results do not rule out the possibility of CBL2 involvement in the
pathogenesis of a subset of acute leukemias possessing a t(4;11), B-cell
lymphomas possessing a t(11;14), or Ewing sarcomas possessing a t(11;22).

PMID: 2013228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1991 Jan;3(1):44-7.

CD3G is within 200 kb of the leukemic t(4;11) translocation breakpoint.

Das S(1), Cotter FE, Gibbons B, Dhut S, Young BD.

Author information: 
(1)ICRF Medical Oncology Unit, St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London, U.K.

The t(4;11)(q21;q23) has been associated with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)
especially in infants. The t(4;11) breakpoint on chromosome 11 is cytogenetically
indistinguishable from breakpoints for other leukemia-associated translocations
affecting 11q23. The molecular basis of the t(4;11) is unknown although a number 
of genes have been mapped to 11q23. The CD3D, G, and E genes have been positioned
proximal to the 11q23 breakpoint of the 4;11 translocation while the THY1 and
ETS1 genes have been mapped distal to this breakpoint. We report evidence that
CD3G is within 200 kb of the 4;11 breakpoint as observed by pulsed field gel
analysis. A rearrangement of the CD3G gene has been observed in a cell line
derived from a patient with the t(4;11) translocation and in a hybrid cell line
containing the derivative 11q chromosome derived from this cell line, using the
restriction enzymes SacII and ClaI. Similar rearrangements using SacII were
observed in 2 further patients with ALL and the t(4;11) translocation. No
rearrangements in the same DNA were observed using ETS1, THY1, and D11S29 and a
range of rare cutter restriction enzymes. CD3G thus provides a tool for the
cloning and analysis of the 4;11 translocation, and poses a question of its
possible involvement at long range with this translocation.

PMID: 1829960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 1991 Jan-Feb;19(1):42-6.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (group A): localization of ATA gene to chromosome 11q22-23 
and pathogenetic implications.

Gatti R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, UCLA School of Medicine 90024.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder resulting from a
single defective gene in each family. Complementation studies suggest that the
same syndrome is associated with defects of at least four AT genes (ATA, ATC, ATD
and ATE). The syndrome is multifaceted and involves the cerebellum, skin,
immunological system, chromosomes, cancer susceptibility, radiosensitivity,
premature ageing and serum alphafetoprotein levels. In order to further develop
understanding of how these seemingly unrelated physiological systems interact in 
this disease, we attempted to localize the gene by linkage analysis, using a
single large Group A AT family to screen 171 genetic markers and 30 additional AT
families to confirm any positive linkages. We found a linkage to AT (Group A)
with genetic markers on chromosome 11q22-23. This region of the human genome is
syntenic with a large region of the mouse genome on chromosome 9 and includes
such "candidate" genes as THY1, NCAM, CD3G-D-3, ets-1, and APOA1-C3-A4. In
addition, studies of human chromosomes identify fragile sites in this region as
well as breakpoints associated with translocation 4: 11 and 9; 11 in acute non-
lymphocytic leukemias. The pathogenetic implications of this localization to
11q22-23 are considered.

PMID: 1683142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Oncogene. 1990 Dec;5(12):1761-7.

The c-ets-1 proto-oncogene has oncogenic activity and is positively
autoregulated.

Seth A(1), Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

The proto-oncogene ets-1 is a member of the ets family of genes that share
homology with the viral oncogene, v-ets, of the avian leukemia virus E26. By
using expression vectors, we demonstrate that the ets-1 gene transforms NIH3T3
cells and the ets-1 transfected cells form colonies in soft agar and induce
tumors in nude mice. We have also determined that the ets-1 protein contains
homology with the helix-loop-helix motif of the HLH family proteins, but lacks
the basic domain upstream of helix I. Transfection of the NIH3T3 cells with ets-1
vectors results in the activation of the endogenous ets-1 gene. Using
hybridization probes that can distinguish between transcripts from endogenous and
exogenous templates, we show that the endogenous ets-1 gene is activated by the
expression of the transfected exogenous ets-1. In contrast, the expression of
transfected ets-2 has no effect on the endogenous ets-1 gene expression. The
results indicate that the ets-1 proto-oncogene is positively autoregulated by its
product.

PMID: 2284095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Dec;87(23):9358-62.

Mapping chromosome band 11q23 in human acute leukemia with biotinylated probes:
identification of 11q23 translocation breakpoints with a yeast artificial
chromosome.

Rowley JD(1), Diaz MO, Espinosa R 3rd, Patel YD, van Melle E, Ziemin S,
Taillon-Miller P, Lichter P, Evans GA, Kersey JH, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago, IL 60637.

Translocations involving chromosome 11, band q23, are frequent recurring
abnormalities in human acute lymphoblastic and acute myeloid leukemia. We used 19
biotin-labeled probes derived from genes and anonymous cosmids for hybridization 
to metaphase chromosomes from leukemia cells that contained four translocations
involving band 11q23: t(4;11)(q21;q23), t(6;11)(q27;q23), t(9;11)(p22;q23), and
t(11;19)(q23;p13). The location of the cosmid probes relative to the breakpoint
in 11q23 was the same in all translocations. Of the cosmid clones containing
known genes, CD3D was proximal and PBGD, THY1, SRPR, and ETS1 were distal to the 
breakpoint on 11q23. Hybridization of genomic DNA from a yeast clone containing
yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs), that carry 320 kilobases (kb) of human DNA
including CD3D and CD3G genes, showed that the YACs were split in all four
translocations. These results indicate that the breakpoint at 11q23 in each of
these translocations occurs within the 320 kb encompassed by these YACs; whether 
the breakpoint within the YACs is precisely the same in the different
translocations is presently unknown.

PMCID: PMC55164
PMID: 2251277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Immunol Today. 1990 Dec;11(12):432.

The ets-1 gene and ataxia telangiectasia.

Concannon P.

PMID: 1981470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Science. 1990 Nov 9;250(4982):814-8.

Sequence-specific binding of human Ets-1 to the T cell receptor alpha gene
enhancer.

Ho IC(1), Bhat NK, Gottschalk LR, Lindsten T, Thompson CB, Papas TS, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ann Arbor, MI.

Expression of the human T cell receptor (TCR) alpha gene is regulated by a T
cell-specific transcriptional enhancer that is located 4.5 kilobases (kb) 3' to
the C alpha gene segment. The core enhancer contains two nuclear protein binding 
sites, T alpha 1 and T alpha 2, which are essential for full enhancer activity. T
alpha 1 contains a consensus cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response
element (CRE) and binds a set of ubiquitously expressed CRE binding proteins. In 
contrast, the transcription factors that interact with the T alpha 2 site have
not been defined. In this report, a lambda gt11 expression protocol was used to
isolate a complementary DNA (cDNA) that programs the expression of a T alpha 2
binding protein. DNA sequence analysis demonstrated that this clone encodes the
human ets-1 proto-oncogene. Lysogen extracts produced with this cDNA clone
contained a beta-galactosidase-Ets-1 fusion protein that bound specifically to a 
synthetic T alpha 2 oligonucleotide. The Ets-1 binding site was localized to a
17-base pair (bp) region from the 3' end of T alpha 2. Mutation of five
nucleotides within this sequence abolished both Ets-1 binding and the activity of
the TCR alpha enhancer in T cells. These results demonstrate that Ets-1 binds in 
a sequence-specific fashion to the human TCR alpha enhancer and suggest that this
developmentally regulated proto-oncogene functions in regulating TCR alpha gene
expression.

PMID: 2237431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Oncogene. 1990 Oct;5(10):1521-7.

Molecular organization and differential polyadenylation sites of the human ETS2
gene.

Watson DK(1), Mavrothalassitis GJ, Jorcyk CL, Smyth FE, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21701-1013.

The human ETS2 gene is a member of the ets gene family (ETS1, ETS2, ERG, ELK1 and
ELK2) with amino acid similarity to the v-ets oncogene of the avian leukemia
virus, E26. The ETS2 gene is composed of 10 exons, nine of which contribute to
the open reading frame encoding 469 amino acids. The ETS2 gene directs the
synthesis of three RNA transcripts, which differ from each other by the length of
their 3' ends. This heterogeneity of 3' end is the major reason for the size
differences between the transcripts, presumably reflecting utilization of three
different polyadenylation signals/sites. The coding regions of all of the ETS2
RNA species are the same length and, thus, should contain the same open reading
frame.

PMID: 2250910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. EMBO J. 1990 Oct;9(10):3137-44.

The product of the c-ets-1 proto-oncogene and the related Ets2 protein act as
transcriptional activators of the long terminal repeat of human T cell leukemia
virus HTLV-1.

Bosselut R(1), Duvall JF, Gégonne A, Bailly M, Hémar A, Brady J, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U186/CNRS URA 1160 Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The c-ets-1 proto-oncogene and the related c-ets-2 gene encode related nuclear
chromatin-associated proteins which bind DNA in vitro. To investigate the
possibility that Ets1 and Ets2 are transcriptional activators, we analyzed the
ability of these proteins to trans-activate promoter/enhancer sequences in
transient co-transfection experiments. A CAT construct driven by the long
terminal repeat of the human T cell leukemia virus, HTLV-1 was found to be
trans-activated by both Ets1 and Ets2 in NIH3T3 and HeLa cells. The increased
levels of CAT activity were paralleled by increased levels of correctly initiated
CAT mRNA. Mutant Ets1 proteins unable to accumulate in the nucleus were found to 
be inactive. An ets-responsive sequence between positions -117 and -160 of the
LTR was identified by analyses of a series of 5' deletion mutants of the HTLV-1
LTR and of dimerized versions of specific motifs of the LTR enhancer region.
Using a gel shift binding assay, Ets1 was found to bind specifically to an
oligonucleotide corresponding to region -117 to -160. This sequence, which also
contributes to Tax1 responsiveness of the HTLV-1 LTR, is characterized by the
presence of four repeats of a pentanucleotide sequence of the type CC(T/A)CC.
Competition experiments show that integrity of repeats 1 and 4 is important for
Ets1 binding. These results show that Ets1 and Ets2 are sequence-specific
transcriptional activators. In view of the high level expression of Ets1 in
lymphoid cells, Ets1 could be part of the transcription complex which mediates
the response to Tax1 and the control of HTLV-1 replication. More generally, Ets1 
and Ets2 could regulate transcription of cellular genes.

PMCID: PMC552042
PMID: 2209540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Dis Markers. 1990 Sep-Oct;8(5):283-94.

Non-HLA genetic factors and insulin dependent diabetes mellitus in the Japanese: 
TCRA, TCRB and TCRG, INS, THY1, CD3D and ETS1.

Aparicio JM(1), Wakisaka A, Takada A, Matsuura N, Yoshiki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

Polymorphism of the genes encoding the alpha, beta, and gamma chains of the human
T-cell receptor (TCRA, TCRB, and TCRG), insulin gene (INS), and three closely
linked polymorphic genes on chromosome 11q23, Thy-1 (THY1), T3-D (CD3D), and
c-ets proto oncogene (ETS1) were investigated among 56 unrelated patients with
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and 48 healthy controls. Only eight of
the 17 enzymes examined revealed restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP),
with the use of TCRA, TCRB, and TCRG. No significant association was observed.
Polymorphism after BglI, SstI, and TaqI digestion was observed for the INS gene. 
In consideration of the three classes within the insulin-gene-linked DNA
polymorphism alleles, A1 and more rarely A2 alleles were found, but with no
significant frequencies. THY1 and CD3D genes were polymorphic after MspI
digestion but no significant association was observed. Conversely, the ETS1 gene 
showed polymorphism after TaqI, SstI, and AvaII were used. Only a significant
AvaII-polymorphic fragment (p less than 0.03) was found. However, this
significant association disappeared when the correct p value was applied. These
results were compared to findings in Caucasians and some differences were noted. 
The polymorphism observed in this study may be useful in genetic studies on
immunologically affected populations.

PMID: 1982251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1990 Jun-Jul;81(6-7):632-8.

Loss of heterozygosity on chromosomes 1 and 11 in sporadic pheochromocytomas.

Yokogoshi Y(1), Yoshimoto K, Saito S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Tokushima.

Molecular genetic analysis was performed with 20 oncogene probes and 32
polymorphic DNA probes on tumor DNA samples from seven pheochromocytomas; namely,
one multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B, and two familial and four sporadic
pheochromocytomas. No amplification or rearrangement of the oncogenes was
detected in any of the tumors. However, loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 1p, 
11p or 11q was detected in these cases. In addition, a locus related to ETS1 was 
deleted in two of the sporadic tumors. These results suggest that
pheochromocytomas may be genetically heterogeneous, and that inactivation of
unknown genes on chromosome 1p, 11p or 11q may contribute to their development.

PMID: 1976119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Oncogene. 1990 May;5(5):675-81.

Isoforms of the human ets-1 protein: generation by alternative splicing and
differential phosphorylation.

Koizumi S(1), Fisher RJ, Fujiwara S, Jorcyk C, Bhat NK, Seth A, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland.

The ets-1 gene belongs to the ets gene family (ets-1, ets-2, erg, and elk) and is
homologous to the v-ets oncogene found in the avian leukemia virus E26. The ets-1
gene products were characterized using a specific monoclonal antibody developed
against a bacterially expressed v-ets protein. The ets-1 gene product in the
human T-cell line CEM was found to consist of at least six species: four major
species with apparent molecular weights of 51 kDa (p51), 48 kDa (p48), 42 kDa
(p42), and 39 kDa (p39); and two minor species of 52 kDa (pp52) and 49 kDa
(pp49), which are demonstrated to be the phosphorylated forms of p51 and p48,
respectively. All of the ets-1 proteins are related to each other and are
considered products of the ets-1 gene. Subcellular localization showed that the
pp52 and p51 are found mainly in the cytoplasm, while p48 and p39 are found
mainly in the nucleus. Specific antibodies against various exons of ets-1 showed 
that both p42 and p39 lack a region corresponding to exon VII. Polymerase chain
reaction analyses revealed the presence of an additional RNA product that
corresponds to mRNA lacking exon VII. These results suggest that the human ets-1 
gene encodes multiple proteins that are generated by at least two distinct
mechanisms: alternative splicing of mRNA and protein phosphorylation.

PMID: 2189104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 May;87(10):3723-7.

Reciprocal expression of human ETS1 and ETS2 genes during T-cell activation:
regulatory role for the protooncogene ETS1.

Bhat NK(1), Thompson CB, Lindsten T, June CH, Fujiwara S, Koizumi S, Fisher RJ,
Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21701-1013.

The expression of the protooncogenes ETS1 and ETS2 has been studied in purified
human T cells activated either by cross-linking of the T-cell receptor-CD3
complex on their cell surface or by direct stimulation with phorbol esters and
ionomycin. Our results show that resting T cells express high levels of ETS1 mRNA
and protein, while expression of ETS2 is undetectable. Upon T-cell activation,
ETS2 mRNA and proteins are induced, while ETS1 gene expression decreases to very 
low levels. Late after stimulation, ETS1 mRNA is reinduced and maintained at a
high level, while ETS2 gene expression decreases to undetectable levels.
Therefore, it appears that in human T cells, ETS2 gene products are associated
with cellular activation and proliferation, while ETS1 gene products are
preferentially expressed in a quiescent state.

PMCID: PMC53975
PMID: 2187191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Oncogene. 1990 Apr;5(4):603-10.

Identification of a Ets1 variant protein unaffected in its chromatin and in vitro
DNA binding capacities by T cell antigen receptor triggering and intracellular
calcium rises.

Pognonec P(1), Boulukos KE, Bosselut R, Boyer C, Schmitt-Verhulst AM, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 186, CNRS UA 041160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

We previously showed that thymocytes express high levels of c-ets-1 protein
(Ets1) that can be rapidly phosphorylated following mitogenic stimulation using
lectins. We demonstrate here that T cell receptor (TCR) specific stimulation with
monoclonal antibodies of mature CD8+ or CD4+ T cells also results in the rapid
phosphorylation of Ets1, reinforcing the hypothesis of a possible role for Ets1
in T cell activation. In addition to the major Ets1 product (mu-p63c-ets-1), we
identify in mouse thymocytes and mature T cells a distinct 52 Kd Ets1 related
protein (mu-p52c-ets-1). In contrast to the major Ets1 protein, mu-p52c-ets-1 is 
poorly phosphorylated in unstimulated cells. Furthermore, mitogenic stimulation
of thymocytes and T cells failed to induce in mu-p52c-ets-1 the Ca2(+)-dependent 
phosphorylation events which are known to drastically affect the migration of the
major Ets1 protein in SDS polyacrylamide gels. Mu-p52c-ets-1, like mu-p63c-ets-1,
is a nuclear-chromatin associated protein which exhibits DNA binding activity in 
vitro. However, in contrast to the major Ets1 protein, the association of
mu-p53c-ets-1 with chromatin and its ability to bind to DNA in vitro are
unaffected by activation stimuli resulting in an increase in [Ca2+]i. Finally, we
present indications suggesting that mu-p52c-ets-1 might be the murine equivalent 
of the translation product of an alternatively c-ets-1 spliced mRNA described in 
human cells by others.

PMID: 2183162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Genes Dev. 1990 Apr;4(4):667-79.

Sequence-specific DNA binding of the proto-oncoprotein ets-1 defines a
transcriptional activator sequence within the long terminal repeat of the Moloney
murine sarcoma virus.

Gunther CV(1), Nye JA, Bryner RS, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular, Viral, and Molecular Biology, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84132.

The ets proto-oncogene family is a group of sequence-related genes whose normal
cellular function is unknown. In a study of cellular proteins involved in the
transcriptional regulation of murine retroviruses in T lymphocytes, we have
discovered that a member of the ets gene family encodes a sequence-specific
DNA-binding protein. A mouse ets-1 cDNA clone was obtained by screening a mouse
thymus cDNA expression library with a double-stranded oligonucleotide probe
representing 20 bp of the Moloney murine sarcoma virus (MSV) long terminal repeat
(LTR). The cDNA sequence has an 813-bp open reading frame (ORF) whose predicted
amino acid sequence is 97.6% identical to the 272 carboxy-terminal amino acids of
the human ets-1 protein. The ORF was expressed in bacteria, and the 30-kD protein
product was shown to bind DNA in a sequence-specific manner by mobility-shift
assays, Southwestern blot analysis, and methylation interference. A mutant LTR
containing four base pair substitutions in the ets-1 binding site was constructed
and was shown to have reduced binding in vitro. Transcriptional efficiency of the
MSV LTR promoter containing this disrupted ets-1 binding site was compared to the
activity of a wild-type promoter in mouse T lymphocytes in culture, and 15- to
20-fold reduction in expression of a reporter gene was observed. We propose that 
ets-1 functions as a transcriptional activator of mammalian type-C retroviruses
and speculate that ets-related genes constitute a new group of eukaryotic
DNA-binding proteins.

PMID: 2163347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1990 Mar;45(1):73-80.

ETS1 gene in myelodysplastic syndrome with chromosome change at 11q23.

Ohyashiki K(1), Ohyashiki JH, Tauchi T, Iwabuchi H, Iwabuchi A, Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

We examined the c-ets1 gene (located at 11q23) in two myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS) patients displaying a chromosome change at band 11q23 to ascertain any
association between this oncogene and the chromosome change. Besides the
chromosome change at 11q23, the two MDS patients also showed other numerical and 
structural changes. Bone marrow cells from the first case showed a translocation 
between chromosomes 11 and 22, t(?;11;22)(?;p11 or q11----q23;q11), resulting in 
a Ph-like chromosome. Neither a transposition nor a rearrangement of the c-ets1
gene was detected. Bone marrow cells of the second case showed unidentified
chromosomal material attached to bands 11q23 and 6q27. Southern blot study,
however, revealed that these cells carried an amplified c-ets1 gene associated
with the chromosomal rearrangement. In both MDS cases studied, the amount of
c-ets1 related message was the same whether amplification of the c-ets1 gene was 
present or not, and the level of the c-ets1 gene in MDS cells was very low.

PMID: 2302688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1990;54(3-4):142-7.

Fine mapping of the long arm of human chromosome 11 by in situ hybridization
using different translocations, including the t(11;22) of Ewing sarcoma.

Bérubé D(1), Passage E, Mattei MG, Mattei JF, Gagné R.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique humaine, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval,
Québec, Canada.

The progesterone receptor gene (PGR), the gene coding for porphobilinogen
deaminase (PBGD), the gene coding for a neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), the
oncogene ETS1, and the anonymous genomic sequence D11S29 have been previously
located on the long arm of chromosome 11. However, gene localizations obtained
with different gene-mapping procedures have led to occasional discrepancies. To
localize these genes more precisely, we hybridized five human DNA sequences with 
different chromosomal rearrangements, including four balanced and one unbalanced 
translocations. We show here that the order of these five sequences is
cen-PGR-PBGD-DIIS29/NCAM/ETS1-tel.

PMID: 2265556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Am J Med Genet Suppl. 1990;7:251-61.

ETS family of genes in leukemia and Down syndrome.

Papas TS(1), Watson DK, Sacchi N, Fujiwara S, Seth AK, Fisher RJ, Bhat NK,
Mavrothalassitis G, Koizumi S, Jorcyk CL, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21701-1013.

The human ETS2 and ERG genes are members of the ETS gene family, with sequence
homology to the viral ets gene of the avian erythroblastosis retrovirus, E26.
These genes are located on chromosome 21 and molecular genetic analysis of Down
syndrome (DS) patients with partial trisomy 21 suggested that ETS2 may be a gene 
within the minimal DS genetic region. We have, in fact, been able to confirm the 
presence of the ETS2 gene dosage in triplicate occurring in occult human 21
chromosome abnormalities. It is known that ERG and ETS2 gene translocations occur
in certain specific leukemias associated with defined chromosome rearrangements
[e.g., t(8;21)]. Moreover, it is known that DS individuals are at greater risk
for leukemic disease than their normal familial cohorts, implying that trisomy of
that region of human chromosome 21 may play a role in the development of this
type of neoplasia. The human ETS genes, first identified in our laboratory, are
highly conserved, being found from lower organisms, like Drosophila and sea
urchin, to humans. In mammals, the ETS genes are structurally distinct, located
on separate chromosomes; they are transcriptionally active and differentially
regulated. The ETS2 protein is phosphorylated and turns over with a half-life of 
approximately 20 min. After activation with the tumor promoter, TPA, the level of
ETS2 elevates 5- to 20-fold. The properties of the ETS2 protein, such as nuclear 
localization, phosphorylation, rapid turnover, and response to protein kinase C, 
indicate that this protein belongs to a group of oncogene proteins thought to
have regulatory functions in the nucleus. In the mouse thymus ets-1 and ets-2 are
8-10-fold higher, respectively, in the CD4+ subset than in other subsets
examined, suggesting a role in T-cell development for these genes. Cells
transfected with the cellular ets-2 gene, expressing higher levels of ets-2
products, showed a stimulated proliferation response, abolished their serum
requirement and formed colonies in soft agar that could induce tumors in nude
mice. Collectively, these data suggest that this family of genes might play a
role in controlling specific steps of the signaling transduction pathway. Thus,
the ETS genes, as other genes with homology to viral oncogenes, might be
instrumental in regulating cellular growth and differentiation, as well as
organismal development.

PMID: 2149958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Leukemia. 1990 Jan;4(1):16-9.

Polymorphism of the proto-oncogene ETS-1 in hematological malignancies.

Kerckaert JP(1), Duterque-Coquillaud M, Collyn-d'Hooghe M, Morel P, Majérus MA,
Laï JL, Fenaux P, Bauters F, Debuire B, Loucheux-Lefebvre MH.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer, Lille, France.

We studied a novel restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) of the
proto-oncogenes ETS-1 that we detected in a patient with an acute monocytic
leukemia by the presence of two, 3.7 and 10 kb, Xbal fragments on Southern blots 
of DNA from blast cells and remission blood samples. RFLP analysis of a series of
114 normal donors revealed that only four (3.6%) shared the 10 kb fragment. By
contrast, this unusual allele was found in 20 (all lymphocytic or monocytic) of
108 (18.5%) hematological malignancies (p less than 0.001). DNA sequence analysis
indicated the disappearance in the rare allele of a Xbal site due to a single
point mutation at the 3' end of ETS-1 locus. Molecular consequences of this
mutation point to a possible pathogenic involvement of ETS-1 in these disorders
and to the question of genetic susceptibility to hematological malignancies.

PMID: 1967322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Crit Rev Oncog. 1990;1(4):409-36.

Molecular analysis of the ets genes and their products.

Watson DK(1), Ascione R, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland.

Organisms from human to Drosophila have been found to contain cellular sequences 
and transcripts that are homologous to the ets region of the avian retrovirus,
E26. Ets-related sequences are present on at least two distinct functional loci
in chickens and mammals, and have been designated ets-1 and ets-2. The E26 virus 
transduced sequences from the chicken ets-1 locus, which encompasses over 60 kb
of DNA. The ets genes characterized so far from sea urchin and Drosophila are
most closely related to the 3' end of the known ets genes. The predicted viral
and avian ets proteins are very similar, except at the termini. The similarity
between the predicted ets proteins so far described is discussed. The ets
proteins have been identified and localized by immunoprecipitation and
immunofluorescence. While the ets-1 proteins are found in the nuclear and
cytoplasmic fractions, the viral gag-myb-ets protein (p135) and the ets-2
proteins are nuclear. The ets-1 and ets-2 genes are differentially regulated in
different cell types, probably reflecting unique controlling elements. Because
chromosomal translocations have been associated with different human leukemias,
studies addressing the possible association with the ETS1 (11q23) or ETS2
(21q22.3) loci are reviewed.

PMID: 1964597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Mol Biol. 1989 Dec 5;210(3):497-512.

The 5' end of U3 snRNA can be crosslinked in vivo to the external transcribed
spacer of rat ribosomal RNA precursors.

Stroke IL(1), Weiner AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, CT 06510.

From previous work it was known that U3 RNA is hydrogen bonded to nucleolar 28 S 
to 35 S RNA and can be covalently crosslinked to RNA of greater than 28 S by
irradiation in vivo with long-wave ultraviolet light in the presence of
4'-aminomethyl-4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen (AMT psoralen). Here we use a novel
sandwich blot technique to identify these large nucleolar RNA species as rRNA
precursors and to map the site(s) of crosslinking in vivo. The crosslink occurs
between one or more residues near the 5' end of U3 RNA and a 380 nucleotide
region of the rat rRNA external transcribed spacer (ETS1). We have sequenced this
region of the rat ETS and we show that it includes an RNA-processing site
analogous to those previously mapped to approximately 3.5 kb upstream from the 5'
end of mouse and human 18 S rRNAs.

PMID: 2614831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Dec;9(12):5718-21.

Definition of an Ets1 protein domain required for nuclear localization in cells
and DNA-binding activity in vitro.

Boulukos KE(1), Pognonec P, Rabault B, Begue A, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé de la Recherche Medicale U186/Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique UA 041160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

Ets1 and Ets2 are nuclear phosphoproteins which bind to DNA in vitro and share
two domains of strong identity. Deletion analyses of each of these conserved
regions in Ets1 demonstrated that integrity of the carboxy-terminal domain, also 
conserved in the more distantly related elk and erg gene products, is essential
for both nuclear targeting and DNA-binding activity in vitro.

PMCID: PMC363744
PMID: 2555704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1989 Sep;69(3):496-9.

Clonal loss of one chromosome 11 in a parathyroid adenoma.

Arnold A(1), Kim HG.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114.

Traditional cytogenetic approaches have been unsuccessful in the study of
parathyroid adenomas. We now describe one parathyroid adenoma in which a
molecular cytogenetic approach revealed clonal loss of one chromosome 11.
Restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis of the patient's normal
leukocyte DNA demonstrated heterozygosity at four loci (PTH, INT2, APOA1, and
ETS1) that span the length of chromosome 11. However, the adenoma DNA showed
clonal deletion of one allele, i.e. loss of heterozygosity, at each locus. Use of
five nonpolymorphic probes from chromosome 11 was consistent with 50% loss of
total chromosome 11 DNA in the adenoma. No tumor-specific loss of heterozygosity 
was observed when restriction fragment length polymorphisms from five other
autosomes (no. 1, 5, 6, 7, and 12) were analyzed, and an X-chromosome probe also 
showed no tumor DNA loss. We have demonstrated tumor-specific chromosome loss in 
a parathyroid adenoma; such a lesion has been described only rarely in benign
tumors. Our finding adds to the evidence for monoclonality in parathyroid
adenomatosis, indicates that only one PTH gene copy is sufficient for
hyperparathyroid tumor function, and raises the possibility that a
tumor-suppressor gene important in the development of nonfamilial parathyroid
neoplasia is located on chromosome 11.

PMID: 2569472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Am J Hum Genet. 1989 Jul;45(1):128-39.

Comparative mapping of the constitutional and tumor-associated 11;22
translocations.

Budarf M(1), Sellinger B, Griffin C, Emanuel BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia.

The reciprocal t(11;22)(q23;q11) is the most common non-Robertsonian
constitutional translocation in humans. The tumor-associated 11;22 rearrangement 
of Ewing sarcoma (ES) and peripheral neuroepithelioma (NE) is cytologically very 
similar to the 11;22 constitutional rearrangement. Using immunoglobulin
light-chain constant region, ETS1 probes, and the technique of in situ
hybridization, we previously were able to show that the constitutional and ES/NE 
breakpoints are different. As a first step toward isolating these translocation
junctions and to further distinguish between them, we have made somatic cell
hybrids. Cells from a constitutional 46,XX,inv(9),t(11;22) carrier and from an ES
cell line with a t(11;22) were separately fused to a hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase-deficient Chinese hamster cell line (RJK88). Resulting 
clones were screened with G-banding and Southern hybridization. Hybrid clones
derived from the constitutional t(11;22) were established which contained the
der(22) and both the der(22) and the der(11). Hybrid clones derived from the ES
cell line containing the der(11) were isolated. Using the technique of Southern
hybridization we have sublocalized the loci; ApoA1/C3, CD3D, ETS1, PBGD, THY1,
D11S29, D11S34, and D11S147 to the region between the two breakpoints on
chromosome 11 and V lambda I, V lambda VI, V lambda VII, and D22S10 to the region
between the breakpoints on chromosome 22. Using anonymous DNA probes, we found
that D22S9 and D22S24 map proximal to the constitutional breakpoint and that
D22S15 and D22S32 map distal to the ES breakpoint on chromosome 22.

PMCID: PMC1683383
PMID: 2741943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Oncogene. 1989 Jul;4(7):915-22.

Amplification of FGF-related genes in human tumors: possible involvement of HST
in breast carcinomas.

Theillet C(1), Le Roy X, De Lapeyrière O, Grosgeorges J, Adnane J, Raynaud SD,
Simony-Lafontaine J, Goldfarb M, Escot C, Birnbaum D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA199, Centre Paul Lamarque, Montpellier, France.

Erratum in
    Oncogene 1989 Dec;4(12):1537.

In order to document a possible involvement of structural alterations of FGF
(Fibroblast Growth Factor)-like genes in human oncogenesis, we have screened a
large series of human tumors for amplification of five FGF-related genes
(Basic-FGF, INT2, HST, FGF5 and FGF6). None of 37 hematopoietic neoplasms, one
out of 13 melanomas (8%), three out of 43 bladder tumors (7%) and 41 out of 238
breast carcinomas (17%) contained amplified FGF-related sequences, namely HST and
INT2. Only these two genes, both located on band q13 of chromosome 11 have been
found amplified. In all cases they were co-amplified and in only one instance did
amplification extend to the ETS1 locus at position 11q23. INT2 and HST RNA could 
be evidenced by RNA/RNA in situ hybridization in breast carcinomas. Our results
indicate a correlation between RNA expression and gene amplification in the case 
of HST but not of INT2. Although evaluation of the clinical significance of HST
amplification and expression must await long-term follow-up of the patients, we
suggest that HST gene product could play a role in development and/or progression
of human breast cancer.

PMID: 2474139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Immunol. 1989 Jan 15;142(2):672-8.

Expression of ets genes in mouse thymocyte subsets and T cells.

Bhat NK(1), Komschlies KL, Fujiwara S, Fisher RJ, Mathieson BJ, Gregorio TA,
Young HA, Kasik JW, Ozato K, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21701-1013.

The cellular ets genes (ets-1, ets-2, and erg) have been identified by their
sequence similarity with the v-ets oncogene of the avian erythroblastosis virus, 
E26. Products of the ets-2 gene have been detected in a wide range of normal
mouse tissues and their expression appears to be associated with cell
proliferation in regenerating liver. In contrast, the ets-1 gene was previously
shown to be more highly expressed in the mouse thymus than in other tissues.
Because the thymic tissue contains various subsets of cells in different stages
of proliferation and maturation, we have examined ets gene expression in fetal
thymocytes from different stages of development, in isolated subsets of adult
thymocytes, and in peripheral T lymphocytes. Expression of the ets-1 gene was
first detected at day 18 in fetal thymocytes, corresponding to the first
appearance of CD4+ (CD4+, CD8-) thymocytes, and reaches maximal/plateau levels of
expression in the thymus at 1 to 2 days after birth. The ets-2 gene expression is
detected at least 1 day earlier, coinciding with the presence of both
double-positive (CD4+, CD8+) and double-negative (CD4-, CD8-) blast thymocytes
and reaches maximal/plateau levels 1 day before birth. In the adult thymus, ets-1
and ets-2 mRNA expression is 10- to 8-fold higher respectively in the CD4+ subset
than in the other subsets examined. Higher levels of p55 ets-1 protein were also 
shown to exist in the CD4+ subset. Because the CD4+ thymic subset is the pool
from which the CD4+ peripheral, helper/inducer T cells are derived, the ets gene 
expression was examined in lymph node T cells. Both the CD4+ and the CD8+ T cells
subsets had lower ets RNA levels than the CD4+ thymocytes. These results suggest 
that ets-2 and more particularly ets-1 gene products play an important role in T 
cell development and differentiation and are not simply associated with
proliferating cells, which are observed at a higher frequency in fetal
thymocytes, or dull Ly-1 (low CD5+), and double-negative (CD4-, CD8-) adult
thymocytes. Selectively enhanced expression of ets-1 gene may be observed in
thymic CD4+ thymocytes because these cells have uniquely encountered MHC class II
or other Ag in the thymic environment. These cells may have been subsequently
stimulated to activate the ets genes in conjunction with their differentiation of
helper/inducer function(s) and expression of mature TCR.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
400 WORDS)

PMID: 2536061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol. 1989;31(3):217-21.

ets-1 and ets-2 proto-oncogene expression in human leukemia cells and cell lines.

Dreyfus F(1), Picard F, Gisselbrecht S, Varet B, Tambourin PE, Fichelson S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie et Virologie des Tumeurs, INSERM U152, Hôpital
Cochin, Paris, France.

c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 are 2 proto-oncogenes known to be possibly involved in some
human myelomonocytic leukemias. However, very few studies concern c-ets-1 and
c-ets-2 RNA expression in human hematologic malignancies. We have studied 18
leukemic patients, and 10 cell lines for their ets RNA contents. c-ets-1 was
strongly expressed in 5 and c-ets-2 in 8 of the 18 patients. All the cell lines
expressed both c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 RNAs. This expression was highly variable from
one patient to another, and from one cell line to another, regardless of the
cellular leukemia subtype. The variability of this expression in patients may
reflect differences in the proliferative potential of leukemic cells.

PMID: 2694094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Leuk Res. 1989;13(6):459-63.

The oncogene ETS1 is distant from the chromosome 11 breakpoint in leukaemic cells
with the t(11;19)(q23;p13).

Kennedy MA(1), Morris CM, Fitzgerald PH.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetic and Molecular Oncology Unit, Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand.

Field inversion gel electrophoresis of DNA from a leukemic clone characterized by
the t(11;19)(q23;p13) allowed us to exclude any genomic rearrangement within more
than 900 kb of DNA encompassing ETS1 on chromosome 11. Although ETS1 was moved to
the derivative chromosome 19 as a result of the t(11;19), we conclude that this
oncogene is not close to the chromosome 11 breakpoint and is unlikely to be
involved in this leukaemia.

PMID: 2671514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1989;52(1-2):7-10.

Precise in situ localization of NCAM, ETS1, and D11S29 on human meiotic
chromosomes.

Bello MJ(1), Salagnon N, Rey JA, Guichaoua MR, Bergé-Lefranc JL, Jordan BR,
Luciani JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie et de Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine, Secteur
Nord, France.

In order to sublocalize NCAM, ETS1, and the anonymous DNA fragment D11S29 within 
11q23, in situ hybridization was performed on pachytene bivalents. Analysis of
the grain distribution within the band 11q23 indicated that the chromosomal
sublocalization of both NCAM and D11S29 was in 11q23.1, whereas ETS1 was found to
be localized in 11q23.3. These results clearly demonstrate the usefulness of in
situ hybridization applied to pachytene bivalents to obtain accurate gene
sublocalization.

PMID: 2612216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Leuk Res. 1989;13(6):445-50.

Deletion of c-ets1 and T3 gamma loci from the 11q- chromosome in the human
monoblastic cell line U937.

Shipley J(1), Sheer D.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, U.K.

The 11q- chromosome in the human monoblastic cell line U937 appears to be derived
from an interstitial deletion in bands 11q21-23/24 or a translocation with an
unknown chromosome. We show here by in situ hybridisation that this chromosome
has lost the c-ets1 and T3 gamma loci. C-ets1 and T3 gamma sequences were not
detected on any chromosomes besides the normal 11, indicating either that they
were lost from the genome or that the chromosome to which they were translocated 
was not present in a high enough proportion of the cells to be detected by in
situ hybridisation. No DNA rearrangements were found with three different
restriction enzymes in the c-ets1, N-CAM, Thy-1 and c-sea genes detected by our
probes. There was also no detectable rearrangement in the c-fms gene which was
shown to be translocated from chromosome 5 to chromosome 1 in a subline of U937. 
The size of the c-fms and c-ets1 messages were normal. The possible significance 
of these findings is discussed.

PMID: 2528035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Experientia. 1988 Dec 1;44(11-12):1019-20.

Restriction fragment length polymorphisms in the ETS-1 proto-oncogene. Comparison
of Saudi and Western populations.

Parkar MH(1), Seid JM, Rowson JM, Stringer BM, Vencer LJ, Aur RJ, Goyns MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Medical Research, King Faisal Specialist Hospital
and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

We have cloned part of the ETS 1 proto-oncogene and demonstrated the presence of 
two polymorphic Sst I restriction sites. A probe derived from one of our clones
revealed the presence of 8.3 kb, 9.5 kb and/or 11.5 kb fragments on Southern
blots of human DNA samples. The relative frequencies of these alleles appear to
be significantly different between Saudi and Western populations, but there are
no apparent differences in these frequencies between Saudi non-leukemic and
leukemic individuals.

PMID: 2461869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Nov;85(21):7862-6.

Mammalian ets-1 and ets-2 genes encode highly conserved proteins.

Watson DK(1), McWilliams MJ, Lapis P, Lautenberger JA, Schweinfest CW, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21701-1013.

Cellular ets sequences homologous to v-ets of the avian leukemia virus E26 are
highly conserved. In mammals the ets sequences are dispersed on two separate
chromosomal loci, called ets-1 and ets-2. To determine the structure of these two
genes and identify the open reading frames that code for the putative proteins,
we have sequenced human ets-1 cDNAs and ets-2 cDNA clones obtained from both
human and mouse. The human ETS1 gene is capable of encoding a protein of 441
amino acids. This protein is greater than 95% identical to the chicken c-ets-1
gene product. Thus, the human ETS1 gene is homologous to the chicken c-ets-1
gene, the protooncogene that the E26 virus transduced. Human and mouse ets-2 cDNA
clones are closely related and contain open reading frames capable of encoding
proteins of 469 and 468 residues, respectively. Direct comparison of these data
with previously published findings indicates that ets is a family of genes whose 
members share distinct domains.

PMCID: PMC282297
PMID: 2847145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Brain Res. 1988 Apr 26;447(1):149-53.

Expression of ETS proto-oncogenes in astrocytes in human cortex.

Amouyel P(1), Gégonne A, Delacourte A, Défossez A, Stéhelin D.

Author information: 
(1)I.N.S.E.R.M. U.186/C.N.R.S., Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.

In order to investigate a possible function of ETS proto-oncogenes in human
brain, we incubated a polyclonal antibody raised against the viral region of E26 
homologous to ETS1 and ETS2 with human brain frontal cortex sections. Our results
show that this antibody decorates astrocytes but not neurons. By using
astrocytomas of different grades as a source of astrocytes, we demonstrate the
presence of ETS1 and ETS2 messenger RNAs and proteins. This leads to the idea
that ETS genes are expressed in cells with dividing potentialities in human
cortex and that they could provide a new marker for glial cells. Recently, a
microduplication on chromosome 21 including ETS2 locus was described in
karyotypically 'normal' Down's syndrome and suspected in Alzheimer's disease;
when testing Alzheimer's disease-affected brain cortex sections, no obvious
difference was observed with the technique used.

PMID: 3289683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Hum Genet. 1988 Feb;78(2):144-7.

Further localization of ETS1 indicates that the chromosomal rearrangement in
Ewing sarcoma does not occur at fra(11)(q23).

Simmers RN(1), Sutherland GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Adelaide Children's Hospital, Australia.

A genomic probe homologous to 5.4 kb of the c-ets-1 gene was hybridized in situ
to chromosomes expressing fra(11)(q23). This probe hybridized distal to the
fragile site, which is just distal to the midpoint of band 11q23.3. This result
localizes ETS1 from the FRA11B locus to 11q24. The result also distinguishes the 
FRA11B locus from the site of translocation at 11q23-q24 in the Ewing sarcoma-
and peripheral neuroepithelioma-specific t(11;22), indicating that the
chromosomes of a previously reported patient heterozygous for fra(11)(q23) did
not rearrange at this fragile site to give rise to Ewing sarcoma. This adds to
the mounting evidence against individuals with fragile sites being predisposed to
developing cancer.

PMID: 3422214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1988;49(4):289-92.

Mapping studies and expression of genes located on human chromosome 11, band q23.

Savage PD(1), Jones C, Silver J, Geurts van Kessel AH, Gonzalez-Sarmiento R, Palm
L, Hanson CA, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Hospital and Clinic,
Minneapolis 55455.

Chromosome translocations and deletions may alter cellular proto-oncogenes and
result in cellular changes that are important in the pathogenesis of malignancy. 
The region 11q23 is frequently involved in human malignancy. Utilizing a leukemic
cell line with a reciprocal translocation involving 11q23 and somatic cell
hybrids derived from this cell line, we analyzed five genes assigned to 11q23:
NCAM, CD3D, CD3E, THY1, and ETS1. Our data showed no evidence of direct
involvement of these genes in this leukemia but enabled a partial genetic map of 
this important region of the human genome to be constructed: 11cen--NCAM--CD3([G,
D], E)--parallel--(ETS1, THY1)--11qter.

PMID: 3248386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1988;48(3):170-3.

Chromosome assignment of the gene loci ETS1 and THY1 in the owl monkey.

Ma NS(1), Gerhard DS.

Author information: 
(1)New England Regional Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical School,
Southborough, MA 01772.

Erratum in
    Cytogenet Cell Genet 1989;50(1):following 66. Gerard DS [corrected to Gerhard
DS].

Our previous assignment of the gene loci HBB, HRAS1, INS, PTH, LDHA, and CAT to
owl monkey chromosome 19 of karyotype VI (K-VI) indicated a putative homology of 
this owl monkey chromosome with the short arm of human chromosome 11 (HSA 11p).
To investigate further the extent of shared homology, we localized in the owl
monkey complement two genes known to be on HSA 11q. Segregation analysis of ETS1 
and THY1 homologous DNA in three karyotypically different panels of rodent x owl 
monkey somatic cell hybrids provided evidence for the syntenic assignment of
these loci to homologous chromosomes of three owl monkey karyotypes, namely,
chromosomes 4 (K-VI), 3 (K-II), and 5 (K-V). The results indicate a disruption of
syntenic gene loci on the distal portion of HSA 11q from 11p during primate
evolution.

PMID: 3069340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Jul 24;15(14):5905.

Sst I RFLP linked to the human ets-1 gene.

Kerckaert JP, Dozier C, Loucheux-Lefebvre MH, Stehelin D.

PMCID: PMC306049
PMID: 2886980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Blood. 1987 Jul;70(1):327-9.

Identification of a restriction fragment length polymorphism involving the
oncogene ETS-1 on chromosome 11q23.

Savage PD, Hanson CA, Kersey JH.

Twenty four samples of DNA from 23 unrelated individuals were analyzed for the
presence of a novel restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) involving the
proto-oncogene ETS-1 at an Xba I site. Four samples from unrelated individuals
lacked an Xba I site, giving rise to a longer restriction fragment detectable by 
Southern analysis; two samples were from normal tissue, and two were from acute
myelogenous leukemic blasts. Thus, no association could be found between the RFLP
and disease among the individuals studied. Pedigree analysis of another cohort
demonstrated Mendelian inheritance consistent with a somatic polymorphism. The
practical applications of RFLP analysis in clinical and research settings, and
the usefulness of this Xba I RFLP in the study of hematologic malignancies
because of its location in 11q23, are discussed.

PMID: 2885050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Virology. 1987 Jun;158(2):339-47.

Nucleotide sequence analysis of six satellite RNAs of cucumber mosaic virus:
primary sequence and secondary structure alterations do not correlate with
differences in pathogenicity.

García-Arenal F(1), Zaitlin M, Palukaitis P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patología Vegetal, ETS1 Agrónomos, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

The nucleotide sequences of six satellite RNAs of cucumber mosaic virus (CMV)
differing in their pathological properties have been determined. Although these
RNAs varied in length from 333 to 342 nucleotides, the extent of nucleotide
sequence homology to each other and to four other satellite RNAs ranged from 84
to 97%, allowing satellite RNA subgrouping on the basis of nucleotide sequence.
This subgrouping was further extended by an analysis of the nature of the
differences in nucleotide sequence, with most of the variation occurring within
nucleotides 129 to 190 and 318 to the 3'-end. Enzymatic and chemical secondary
structure probing of four satellite RNAs yielded a common structure in which
48-52% of the nucleotides were base paired. Although there were discrepancies
between the experimental data and the model in two out of seven hairpins, the
model contained structural elements and consensus sequences in common with the
3'-end sequences of two satellite RNA helper viruses: CMV and tomato aspermy
virus. Specific sequence changes, secondary structure characteristics, or
proteins potentially encoded by any of 10 satellite RNAs did not correlate with
the known pathogenic responses attributable to individual satellite RNAs.

PMID: 18644565  [PubMed]


203. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 May;84(9):2868-71.

Interferon-inducible gene maps to a chromosomal band associated with a (4;11)
translocation in acute leukemia cells.

Luster AD, Jhanwar SC, Chaganti RS, Kersey JH, Ravetch JV.

An interferon-inducible cytokine, IP-10, containing homology to a family of
proteins having chemotactic (platelet factor 4, beta-thromboglobulin) and
mitogenic (connective tissue-activating peptide III) activities has been mapped
to chromosome 4 at band q21, a locus associated with an acute
monocytic/B-lymphocyte lineage leukemia that exhibits the nonrandom translocation
t(4;11)(q21;q23). In situ hybridization of t(4;11)(q21;q23)-carrying leukemic
cells revealed that the IP-10 gene is proximal to the breakpoint of this
translocation. No DNA rearrangement was evident when the IP-10 gene was
hybridized to genomic DNA isolated from two patients' leukemic cells that contain
t(4;11)(q21;q23). However, restriction fragment length polymorphism in the 5'
region of the IP-10 gene was detected. The ETS1 protooncogene is located at 11q23
and is known to translocate to chromosome 4 in t(4;11) (q21;q23) and into the
interferon gene cluster in (9;11) (p22;q23). Both translocations are associated
with acute monocytic leukemia. These results suggest a model in which
juxtaposition of genetic loci regulated by antiproliferative signals, such as
interferon, next to an oncogene, like ETS1, could effectively short circuit
homeostatic control circuits and contribute to the neoplastic state.

PMCID: PMC304761
PMID: 2437586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Aug;83(16):6122-6.

Comparison of constitutional and tumor-associated 11;22 translocations:
nonidentical breakpoints on chromosomes 11 and 22.

Griffin CA, McKeon C, Israel MA, Gegonne A, Ghysdael J, Stehelin D, Douglass EC, 
Green AE, Emanuel BS.

Recurring, site-specific chromosomal rearrangements are associated with several
human syndromes and malignant disorders. Such nonrandom translocations involving 
chromosome 22 in band q11 are numerous and found to be associated with a
diversity of neoplasms as well as constitutional disorders. Chromosome 11 in
bands q23-q24 is similarly involved in several types of tumors as well as in a
recurring constitutional reciprocal translocation with chromosome 22. Here we
report the use of chromosomal in situ hybridization to compare the translocation 
breakpoints in the cytologically indistinguishable constitutional t(11;22) and
the tumor-related t(11;22) associated with Ewing sarcoma and peripheral
neuroepithelioma. We have shown that the breakpoints can be distinguished from
each other with respect to the locus encoding the constant region of the Ig
lambda light chain (C lambda) at 22q11 and the ETS1 locus at 11q23----q24; ETS1
has been called hu-ets-1 or human c-ets-1. The tumor-associated chromosome 11
breakpoint is also different from those of leukemias with t(9;11) and t(4;11)
translocations. Southern-blot analysis showed no rearrangement of ETS1 in these
disorders in the region detected by our probe. ETS1 has also been mapped more
precisely to 11q23.3----q24 by in situ hybridization to cells from an individual 
with an 11q23.3----qter deletion.

PMCID: PMC386451
PMID: 3461479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Mar;83(6):1792-6.

Conserved chromosomal positions of dual domains of the ets protooncogene in cats,
mice, and humans.

Watson DK, McWilliams-Smith MJ, Kozak C, Reeves R, Gearhart J, Nunn MF, Nash W,
Fowle JR 3rd, Duesberg P, Papas TS, et al.

The mammalian protooncogene homologue of the avian v-ets sequence from the E26
retrovirus consists of two sequentially distinct domains located on different
chromosomes. Using somatic cell hybrid panels, we have mapped the mammalian
homologue of the 5' v-ets-domain to chromosome 11 (ETS1) in man, to chromosome 9 
(Ets-1) in mouse, and to chromosome D1 (ETS1) in the domestic cat. The mammalian 
homologue of the 3' v-ets domain was similarly mapped to human chromosome 21
(ETS2), to mouse chromosome 16 (Ets-2), and to feline chromosome C2 (ETS2). Both 
protooncogenes fell in syntenic groups of homologous linked loci that were
conserved among the three species. The occurrence of two distinct functional
protooncogenes and their conservation of linkage positions in the three mammalian
orders indicate that these two genes have been separate since before the
evolutionary divergence of mammals.

PMCID: PMC323170
PMID: 3513188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


