
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 28. pii: gkw126. [Epub ahead of print]

Synergistic action of master transcription factors controls
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Chang H(1), Liu Y(2), Xue M(2), Liu H(3), Du S(4), Zhang L(5), Wang P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Biology, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 100 Haike Road, Zhangjiang High-Tech Park, Shanghai 201210, 
PR China University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, Beijing 
100049, PR China. (2)Laboratory of Systems Biology, Shanghai Advanced Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100 Haike Road, Zhangjiang High-Tech
Park, Shanghai 201210, PR China. (3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
No. 19A Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049, PR China Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry 
and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, PR China. (4)Laboratory of Systems
Biology, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100
Haike Road, Zhangjiang High-Tech Park, Shanghai 201210, PR China School of Life
Sciences, Shanghai University,333 Nanchen Road, Shanghai200444, PR China.
(5)Laboratory of Systems Biology, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 100 Haike Road, Zhangjiang High-Tech Park, Shanghai 201210, 
PR China University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, Beijing 
100049, PR China Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 555 Zu Chong Zhi Road, Zhangjiang High-Tech Park, Shanghai 201203, PR
China School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 100 Haike
Road, Zhangjiang High-Tech Park, Shanghai 201210, PR China. (6)Laboratory of
Systems Biology, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 100 Haike Road, Zhangjiang High-Tech Park, Shanghai 201210, PR China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049,
PR China School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 100
Haike Road, Zhangjiang High-Tech Park, Shanghai 201210, PR China
wangpeng@sari.ac.cn.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a complex multistep process in
which phenotype switches are mediated by a network of transcription factors
(TFs). Systematic characterization of all dynamic TFs controlling EMT state
transitions, especially for the intermediate partial-EMT state, represents a
highly relevant yet largely unexplored task. Here, we performed a computational
analysis that integrated time-course EMT transcriptomic data with public
cistromic data and identified three synergistic master TFs (ETS2, HNF4A and JUNB)
that regulate the transition through the partial-EMT state. Overexpression of
these regulators predicted a poor clinical outcome, and their elimination readily
abolished TGF-ß-induced EMT. Importantly, these factors utilized a clique motif, 
physically interact and their cumulative binding generally characterized
EMT-associated genes. Furthermore, analyses of H3K27ac ChIP-seq data revealed
that ETS2, HNF4A and JUNB are associated with super-enhancers and the
administration of BRD4 inhibitor readily abolished TGF-ß-induced EMT. These
findings have implications for systematic discovery of master EMT regulators and 
super-enhancers as novel targets for controlling metastasis.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26926107  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Front Oncol. 2016 Feb 18;6:35. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2016.00035. eCollection 2016.

Mutant p53 and ETS2, a Tale of Reciprocity.

Martinez LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook Cancer Center, Stony Brook University ,
Stony Brook, NY , USA.

TP53 is one of the most frequently inactivated tumor suppressor genes in human
cancer. However, unlike other tumor suppressor genes whose expression is lost,
TP53 is usually inactivated as a result of a single nucleotide change within the 
coding region. Typically, these single nucleotide mutations result in a codon
change that creates an amino acid substitution. Thus, unlike other tumor
suppressor genes whose expression is lost due to genetic or epigenetic changes,
the p53 gene primarily suffers missense mutations, and therefore, the cells
retain and express a mutant form of the p53 protein (mtp53). It is now well
established that mtp53 contributes to tumor development through its
gain-of-function (GOF) activities. These GOF activities can arise from novel
protein-protein interactions that can either disable other tumor suppressors
(e.g., p63 and p73) or enable oncogenes such as ETS2, an ETS family member. In
this review, I will focus on the identification of the mtp53/ETS2 complex and
outline the diverse activities that this transcriptional regulatory complex
controls to promote cancer.

PMCID: PMC4757666
PMID: 26925389  [PubMed]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 17. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7433. [Epub ahead of print]

A genetic variation in microRNA target site of ETS2 is associated with clinical
outcomes of paclitaxel-cisplatin chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer.

Hong MJ(1,)(2), Lee SY(3,)(4), Choi JE(1,)(2), Jin CC(1), Kang HJ(1), Baek SA(1),
Lee SY(4), Shin KM(5), Jeong JY(6), Lee WK(7), Yoo SS(3,)(4), Lee J(3), Cha
SI(3), Kim CH(3), Son JW(8), Park JY(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Kyungpook National University
Medical Center, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (2)Cell and Matrix Research Institute, 
Kyungpook National University Medical Center, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(3)Departments of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (4)Lung Cancer Center, Kyungpook National
University Medical Center, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Radiology, 
Kyungpook National University Medical Center, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Pathology, Kyungpook National University Medical Center, Daegu, 
Republic of Korea. (7)Biostatistics Center, School of Medicine, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (8)Department of Internal
Medicine, Konyang University Hospital, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

The present study was performed to investigate the association of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in the miRNA target sites with the
clinical outcomes of first line paclitaxel-cisplatin chemotherapy in advanced
NSCLC. Eighty SNPs in miRNA binding sites of cancer related genes selected from
18,500 miRNA:target bindings in crosslinking, ligation, and sequencing of hybrids
(CLASH) data were investigated in 379 advanced NSCLC patients using a sequenom
mass spectrometry-based genotype assay. qRT-PCR and luciferase assay were
conducted to examine functional relevance of potentially functional SNPs in miRNA
binding sites. Of the 80 SNPs analyzed, 16 SNPs were significantly associated
with the clinical outcomes after chemotherapy. Among these, ANAPC1 rs3814026C>T, 
ETS2 rs461155A>G, SORBS1 rs7081076C>A and POLR2A rs2071504C>T could predict both 
chemotherapy response and survival. Notably, ETS2 rs461155A>G was significantly
associated with decreased ETS2 mRNA expression in both tumor and paired normal
lung tissues (Ptrend = 4 × 10-7, and 3 × 10-4, respectively). Consistently, a
decreased expression of the reporter gene for the G allele of rs461155 compared
with the A allele was observed by luciferase assay. These findings suggest that
the four SNPs, especially ETS2 rs461155A>G, could be used as biomarkers
predicting the clinical outcomes of NSCLC patients treated with first-line
paclitaxel-cisplatin chemotherapy.

PMID: 26893365  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7275. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutant p53 protects ETS2 from non-canonical COP1/DET1 dependent degradation.

Carrero ZI(1), Kollareddy M(1,)(2), Chauhan KM(1,)(2), Ramakrishnan G(1,)(2),
Martinez LA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson, MS 39216, USA. (2)Cancer Institute, University of Mississippi, Jackson, 
MS 39216, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Cancer Center, Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Mutations in the tumor suppressor gene TP53 contribute to the development of
approximately half of all human cancers. One mechanism by which mutant p53
(mtp53) acts is through interaction with other transcription factors, which can
either enhance or repress the transcription of their target genes. Mtp53
preferentially interacts with the erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homologue 2
(ETS2), an ETS transcription factor, and increases its protein stability. To
study the mechanism underlying ETS2 degradation, we knocked down ubiquitin
ligases known to interact with ETS2. We observed that knockdown of the
constitutive photomorphogenesis protein 1 (COP1) and its binding partner
De-etiolated 1 (DET1) significantly increased ETS2 stability, and conversely,
their ectopic expression led to increased ETS2 ubiquitination and degradation.
Surprisingly, we observed that DET1 binds to ETS2 independently of COP1, and we
demonstrated that mutation of multiple sites required for ETS2 degradation
abrogated the interaction between DET1 and ETS2. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
mtp53 prevents the COP1/DET1 complex from ubiquitinating ETS2 and thereby marking
it for destruction. Mechanistically, we show that mtp53 destabilizes DET1 and
also disrupts the DET1/ETS2 complex thereby preventing ETS2 degradation. Our
study reveals a hitherto unknown function in which DET1 mediates the interaction 
with the substrates of its cognate ubiquitin ligase complex and provides an
explanation for the ability of mtp53 to protect ETS2.

PMID: 26871468  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Oncol Lett. 2015 Nov;10(5):3171-3176. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Involvement of UTR-dependent gene expression in the maintenance of cancer stem
cell like phenotypes.

Yasuda M(1), Hatanaka T(1), Shirato H(2), Nishioka T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathobiology, Graduate School of Dental Medicine, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8586, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology and
Nuclear Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo,
Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School
of Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.

The present study demonstrated the acquisition of additional malignant
characteristics in irradiated mouse fibrosarcoma cells compared with the parent
cells. Several reporter assays indicated that hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a, 
activator protein-1 and Ets-dependent transcription were activated in irradiated 
cells. The cis-elements in the 5'-untranslated region (UTR) of these
transcription factors plays a major role in their expression in surviving
irradiated cancer cells. By contrast, there were no evident differences between
the 3'-UTR-dependent repression demonstrated by parent cells and irradiated
cells. A small population of parental fibrosarcoma cells was also found to
exhibit the same enhanced 5'-UTR-dependent HIF-1a expression as that demonstrated
by irradiated cells. These observations may indicate that high-dose X-ray
irradiation affects the majority of proliferating cancer cells, but not the
cancer stem cells (CSCs), and an increased CSC population may explain the
progressive phenotypes of the irradiated cells. It appears likely that the
transcription factors that maintain stemness are regulated by the same
5'-UTR-dependent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4665853
PMID: 26722307  [PubMed]


6. Molecules. 2015 Dec 4;20(12):21715-31. doi: 10.3390/molecules201219796.

Seapolynol Extracted from Ecklonia cava Inhibits Adipocyte Differentiation in
Vitro and Decreases Fat Accumulation in Vivo.

Jeon HJ(1), Choi HS(2), Lee YJ(3), Hwang JH(4), Lee OH(5), Seo MJ(6), Kim KJ(7), 
Lee BY(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, CHA University, Seongnam,
Gyeonggi 463-400, Korea. jhj_0324@naver.com. (2)Department of Food Science and
Technology, Seoul Women's University, Hwarang, Nowon, Seoul 139-774, Korea.
hschoi@swu.ac.kr. (3)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, CHA
University, Seongnam, Gyeonggi 463-400, Korea. eyeonjoo@gmail.com. (4)Department 
of Food Science and Biotechnology, CHA University, Seongnam, Gyeonggi 463-400,
Korea. hwangjh0947@gmail.com. (5)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology,
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 200-701, Korea. loh99@kangwon.ac.kr.
(6)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, CHA University, Seongnam,
Gyeonggi 463-400, Korea. mjseo@kirams.re.kr. (7)Department of Food Science and
Biotechnology, CHA University, Seongnam, Gyeonggi 463-400, Korea.
Kuijin.Kim@gmail.com. (8)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, CHA
University, Seongnam, Gyeonggi 463-400, Korea. bylee@cha.ac.kr.

Seapolynol (SN) is a polyphenol mixture derived from Ecklonia cava. We evaluated 
the effects of SN on lipid accumulation in adipocytes, zebrafish, and mice. SN
effectively inhibited lipid accumulation in three experimental models by
suppressing adipogenic factors. Triglyceride synthetic enzymes such as
diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1) and GPAT3 were also downregulated by SN.
This SN-induced inhibition of adipogenic factors was shown to be due to the
regulatory effect of SN on early adipogenic factors; SN downregulated the
expression of Krueppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), KLF5, CCAAT-enhancer-binding
protein ß (C/EBPß), C/EBPd, and Protein C-ets-2 (ETS2), while KLF2, an anti-early
adipogenic factor, was upregulated by SN. SN-mediated inhibition in early
adipogenesis was closely correlated with the inhibition of mitotic clonal
expansion via cell cycle arrest. SN inhibited cell cycle progression by
suppressing cell cycle regulators, such as cyclin A, cyclinD, and pRb but
increased p27, a cell cycle inhibitor. In a mouse study, SN effectively reduced
body weight and plasma lipid increases induced by a high-fat diet; triglycerides,
total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) levels were markedly reduced
by SN. Moreover, SN remarkably improved high-fat-diet-induced hepatic lipid
accumulation. Furthermore, SN activated AMP-activated protein kinase-a (AMPKa),
an energy sensor, to suppress acetyl-coA carboxylase (ACC), inhibiting lipid
synthesis. Our study suggests that SN may be an edible agent that can play a
positive role in prevention of metabolic disorders.

PMID: 26690099  [PubMed - in process]


7. Int J Biometeorol. 2015 Dec 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Seventeen-year trends in spring and autumn phenophases of Betula pubescens in a
boreal environment.

Poikolainen J(1), Tolvanen A(2,)(3), Karhu J(1), Kubin E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Natural Resources Institute Finland, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 413,
FI-90014, Oulu, Finland. (2)Natural Resources Institute Finland, University of
Oulu, P.O. Box 413, FI-90014, Oulu, Finland. anne.tolvanen@luke.fi. (3)Department
of Ecology, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 413, FI-90014, Oulu, Finland.
anne.tolvanen@luke.fi.

Trends in the timing of spring and autumn phenophases of Betula pubescens were
investigated in the southern, middle, and northern boreal zones in Finland. The
field observations were carried out at 21 sites in the Finnish National
Phenological Network in 1997-2013. The effective temperature sum of the thermal
growth period, i.e. the sum of the positive differences between diurnal mean
temperatures and 5 °C (ETS1), increased annually on average by 6-7 degree day
units. Timing of bud burst remained constant in the southern and middle boreal
zones but advanced annually by 0.5 day in the northern boreal zone. The effective
temperature sum at bud burst (ETS2) showed no trend in the southern and middle
boreal zones, whereas ETS2 increased on average from 20-30 to 50 degree day units
in the northern boreal zone, almost to the same level as in the other zones.
Increase in ETS2 indicates that the trees did not start their growth in very
early spring despite warmer spring temperatures. The timing of leaf colouring and
leaf fall remained almost constant in the southern boreal zones, whereas these
advanced annually by 0.3 and 0.6 day in the middle boreal zone and by 0.6 and
0.4 day in the northern boreal zone, respectively. The duration of the growth
period remained constant in all boreal zones. The results indicate high buffering
capacity of B. pubescens against temperature changes. The study also shows the
importance of the duration of phenological studies: some trends in spring
phenophases had levelled out, while new trends in autumn phases had emerged after
earlier studies in the same network for a shorter observation period.

PMID: 26686678  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 7;10(12):e0144345. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144345.
eCollection 2015.

Comparison of Gene Expression by Sheep and Human Blood Stimulated with the TLR4
Agonists Lipopolysaccharide and Monophosphoryl Lipid A.

Enkhbaatar P(1), Nelson C(1), Salsbury JR(1), Carmical JR(2), Torres KE(3),
Herndon D(4), Prough DS(1), Luan L(5), Sherwood ER(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, the University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States of America. (2)Molecular Virology and Microbiology
Core, Alkek Center for Metagenomics & Microbiome Research, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States of America. (3)GenUs BioSystems, Northbrook,
IL, United States of America. (4)Shriners Hospital for Children, Galveston, TX,
United States of America. (5)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Animal models that mimic human biology are important for successful
translation of basic science discoveries into the clinical practice. Recent
studies in rodents have demonstrated the efficacy of TLR4 agonists as
immunomodulators in models of infection. However, rodent models have been
criticized for not mimicking important characteristics of the human immune
response to microbial products. The goal of this study was to compare genomic
responses of human and sheep blood to the TLR4 agonists lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
and monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA).
METHODS: Venous blood, withdrawn from six healthy human adult volunteers (~ 28
years old) and six healthy adult female sheep (~3 years old), was mixed with 30
µL of PBS, LPS (1µg/mL) or MPLA (10µg/mL) and incubated at room temperature for
90 minutes on a rolling rocker. After incubation, 2.5 mL of blood was transferred
to Paxgene Blood RNA tubes. Gene expression analysis was performed using an
Agilent Bioanalyzer with the RNA6000 Nano Lab Chip. Agilent gene expression
microarrays were scanned with a G2565 Microarray Scanner. Differentially
expressed genes were identified.
RESULTS: 11,431 human and 4,992 sheep probes were detected above background.
Among them 1,029 human and 175 sheep genes were differentially expressed at a
stringency of 1.5-fold change (p<0.05). Of the 175 sheep genes, 54 had a known
human orthologue. Among those genes, 22 had > 1.5-fold changes in human samples. 
Genes of major inflammatory mediators, such as IL-1, IL-6 and IL-8, TNF alpha,
NF-kappaB, ETS2, PTGS2, PTX3, CXCL16, KYNU, and CLEC4E were similarly (>2-fold)
upregulated by LPS and MPLA in both species.
CONCLUSION: The genomic responses of peripheral blood to LPS and MPLA in sheep
are quite similar to those observed in humans, supporting the use of the ovine
model for translational studies that mimic human inflammatory diseases and the
study of TLR-based immunomodulators.

PMCID: PMC4671644
PMID: 26640957  [PubMed - in process]


9. Elife. 2015 Nov 21;4. pii: e10870. doi: 10.7554/eLife.10870.

ETS family transcriptional regulators drive chromatin dynamics and malignancy in 
squamous cell carcinomas.

Yang H(1), Schramek D(1), Adam RC(1), Keyes BE(1), Wang P(2), Zheng D(2,)(3),
Fuchs E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Robin Chemers Neustein Laboratory of
Mammalian Cell Biology and Development, The Rockefeller University, New York,
United States. (2)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
New York, United States. (3)Departments of Genetics and Neuroscience, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, New York, United States.

Tumor-initiating stem cells (SCs) exhibit distinct patterns of transcription
factors and gene expression compared to healthy counterparts. Here, we show that 
dramatic shifts in large open-chromatin domain (super-enhancer) landscapes
underlie these differences and reflect tumor microenvironment. By in vivo
super-enhancer and transcriptional profiling, we uncover a dynamic
cancer-specific epigenetic network selectively enriched for binding motifs of a
transcription factor cohort expressed in squamous cell carcinoma SCs (SCC-SCs).
Many of their genes, including Ets2 and Elk3, are themselves regulated by SCC-SC 
super-enhancers suggesting a cooperative feed-forward loop. Malignant progression
requires these genes, whose knockdown severely impairs tumor growth and prohibits
progression from benign papillomas to SCCs. ETS2-deficiency disrupts the SCC-SC
super-enhancer landscape and downstream cancer genes while ETS2-overactivation in
epidermal-SCs induces hyperproliferation and SCC super-enhancer-associated genes 
Fos, Junb and Klf5. Together, our findings unearth an essential regulatory
network required for the SCC-SC chromatin landscape and unveil its importance in 
malignant progression.

PMCID: PMC4739765
PMID: 26590320  [PubMed - in process]


10. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):557-68. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.08.005. Epub
2015 Sep 24.

Direct Induction of Trophoblast Stem Cells from Murine Fibroblasts.

Kubaczka C(1), Senner CE(2), Cierlitza M(1), Araúzo-Bravo MJ(3), Kuckenberg P(1),
Peitz M(4), Hemberger M(2), Schorle H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany. (2)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK; Centre for Trophoblast
Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (3)Group of
Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health Research
Institute, 20014 San Sebastian, Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
48013 Bilbao, Spain. (4)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, Life and Brain 
Center, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany; German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 53127 Bonn, Germany. (5)Department of
Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, 
Germany. Electronic address: hubert.schorle@ukb.uni-bonn.de.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):499-500.

Trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) arise from the first cell fate decision in the
developing embryo and generate extra-embryonic lineages, giving rise to the fetal
portion of the placenta. Mouse embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages are
strictly separated by a distinct epigenetic barrier, which is not fully overcome 
following expression of TSC-determining factors in embryonic stem cells. Here, we
show that transient expression of Tfap2c, Gata3, Eomes, and Ets2 is sufficient to
reprogram mouse embryonic fibroblasts and post-natal tail-tip-derived fibroblasts
into induced TSCs (iTSCs) and surmount the epigenetic barrier separating somatic 
from extra-embryonic lineages. iTSCs share nearly identical morphological
characteristics, gene expression profiles, and DNA methylation patterns with
blastocyst-derived TSCs. Furthermore, iTSCs display transgene-independent
self-renewal, differentiate along extra-embryonic lineages, and chimerize host
placentas following blastocyst injection. These findings provide insights into
the transcription factor networks governing TSC identity and opportunities for
studying the epigenetic barriers underlying embryonic and extra-embryonic lineage
segregation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26412560  [PubMed - in process]


11. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 25;10(9):e0138210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138210.
eCollection 2015.

Systems Analysis of Adaptive Responses to MAP Kinase Pathway Blockade in BRAF
Mutant Melanoma.

Capaldo BJ(1), Roller D(2), Axelrod MJ(2), Koeppel AF(3), Petricoin EF(4),
Slingluff CL Jr(5), Weber MJ(2), Mackey AJ(6), Gioeli D(2), Bekiranov S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America. (2)Department of
Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia, United States of America. (3)Bioinfomatics Core Facility, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America. (4)Center for
Applied Proteomics and Molecular Medicine, School of Systems Biology, College of 
Science, George Mason University, Manassas, Virginia, United States of America.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia,
United States of America. (6)Center for Public Health Genomics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.

Fifty percent of cutaneous melanomas are driven by activated BRAFV600E, but
tumors treated with RAF inhibitors, even when they respond dramatically, rapidly 
adapt and develop resistance. Thus, there is a pressing need to identify the
major mechanisms of intrinsic and adaptive resistance and develop drug
combinations that target these resistance mechanisms. In a combinatorial drug
screen on a panel of 12 treatment-naïve BRAFV600E mutant melanoma cell lines of
varying levels of resistance to mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway
inhibition, we identified the combination of PLX4720, a targeted inhibitor of
mutated BRaf, and lapatinib, an inhibitor of the ErbB family of receptor tyrosine
kinases, as synergistically cytotoxic in the subset of cell lines that displayed 
the most resistance to PLX4720. To identify potential mechanisms of resistance to
PLX4720 treatment and synergy with lapatinib treatment, we performed a
multi-platform functional genomics analysis to profile the genome as well as the 
transcriptional and proteomic responses of these cell lines to treatment with
PLX4720. We found modest levels of resistance correlated with the zygosity of the
BRAF V600E allele and receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) mutational status. Layered
over base-line resistance was substantial upregulation of many ErbB pathway genes
in response to BRaf inhibition, thus generating the vulnerability to combination 
with lapatinib. The transcriptional responses of ErbB pathway genes are
associated with a number of transcription factors, including ETS2 and its
associated cofactors that represent a convergent regulatory mechanism conferring 
synergistic drug susceptibility in the context of diverse mutational landscapes.

PMCID: PMC4583389
PMID: 26405815  [PubMed - in process]


12. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;17(10):1327-38. doi: 10.1038/ncb3240. Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Non-canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling and ETS1/2 cooperatively drive C250T mutant TERT
promoter activation.

Li Y(1), Zhou QL(1,)(2), Sun W(3), Chandrasekharan P(4), Cheng HS(1), Ying
Z(5,)(6), Lakshmanan M(1), Raju A(1), Tenen DG(2,)(7), Cheng SY(8), Chuang KH(4),
Li J(5,)(6), Prabhakar S(3), Li M(5,)(6), Tergaonkar V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), A*STAR (Agency for Science,
Technology and Research), Singapore 138673, Singapore. (2)Cancer Science
Institute of Singapore, 14 Medical Dr #12-01, Singapore 117599, Singapore.
(3)Computational and Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis 
St, Singapore 138672, Singapore. (4)Laboratory of Molecular Imaging, Singapore
Bioimaging Consortium, Agency for Science, Technology and Research Singapore, 11 
Biopolis Way, #02-02 Helios, Singapore 138667, Singapore. (5)Department of
Microbiology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, China. (6)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control (Sun
Yat-sen University), Chinese Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, 
China. (7)Harvard Medical School, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. (8)Department of Neurology, Northwestern Brain Tumor
Institute, Center for Genetic Medicine &The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Transcriptional reactivation of TERT, the catalytic subunit of telomerase, is
necessary for cancer progression in about 90% of human cancers. The recent
discovery of two prevalent somatic mutations-C250T and C228T-in the TERT promoter
in various cancers has provided insight into a plausible mechanism of TERT
reactivation. Although the two hotspot mutations create a similar binding motif
for E-twenty-six (ETS) transcription factors, we show that they are functionally 
distinct, in that the C250T unlike the C228T TERT promoter is driven by
non-canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling. We demonstrate that binding of ETS to the mutant 
TERT promoter is insufficient in driving its transcription but this process
requires non-canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling for stimulus responsiveness, sustained
telomerase activity and hence cancer progression. Our findings highlight a
previously unrecognized role of non-canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling in tumorigenesis
and elucidate a fundamental mechanism for TERT reactivation in cancers, which if 
targeted could have immense therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC4772727 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26389665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Nov;1849(11):1319-28. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.09.005. Epub 2015 Sep 11.

c-ETS transcription factors play an essential role in the licensing of human MCM4
origin of replication.

Sidhu K(1), Kumar V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. (2)Virology Group,
International Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali
Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. Electronic address: vijay@icgeb.res.in.

In metazoans, DNA replication is a highly regulated and ordered process that
occurs during the S phase of cell cycle. It begins with the licensing of origins 
of replication usually found in close proximity of actively transcribing genes
owing perhaps to a profound influence of transcription factors on the epigenetic 
signatures and architecture of chromatin. Here we show that ETS transcription
factors are novel regulators of MCM4 origin, whose binding sites are localized
between two divergently transcribing MCM4 and PRKDC genes. c-ETS1 and c-ETS2 were
recruited to the MCM4 origin respectively during the S and G1 phases of cell
cycle. c-ETS2 binding was facilitated by an active chromatin distinguished by
acetylated histone H3 orchestrated by histone acetyl transferase GCN5 and
followed by HBO1 mediated histone H4 acetylation. Interestingly, c-ETS2
overexpression led to increased BrdU incorporation in the S phase cells while its
down-regulation by RNA interference compromised the loading of pre-replicative
complex at the origin. Conversely, the recruitment of c-ETS1 at the origin
coincided with histone H3 methylation signature characteristic of closed
chromatin conformation. As expected, enforced expression of c-ETS1 severely
compromised DNA replication whereas its down-regulation enhanced DNA replication 
as evident from increased BrdU incorporation. Thus, c-ETS transcription factors
appear to be key regulators of MCM4 origin where c-ETS2 seems to promote DNA
replication whereas c-ETS1 functions as a negative regulator.

© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26365772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cancer. 2015 Jul 16;14:133. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0400-7.

Exosome-mediated microRNA signaling from breast cancer cells is altered by the
anti-angiogenesis agent docosahexaenoic acid (DHA).

Hannafon BN(1), Carpenter KJ(2), Berry WL(3), Janknecht R(4,)(5), Dooley
WC(6,)(7), Ding WQ(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. bethany-hannafon@ouhsc.edu. (2)Department of
Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,
73104, USA. 5karlajo5@gmail.com. (3)Department of Cell Biology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
william-berry@ouhsc.edu. (4)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. ralf-janknecht@ouhsc.edu. 
(5)Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
ralf-janknecht@ouhsc.edu. (6)Department of Surgery, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. william-dooley@ouhsc.edu.
(7)Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
william-dooley@ouhsc.edu. (8)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. weiqun-ding@ouhsc.edu.
(9)Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
weiqun-ding@ouhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is a natural compound with anticancer and 
anti-angiogenesis activity that is currently under investigation as both a
preventative agent and an adjuvant to breast cancer therapy. However, the precise
mechanisms of DHA's anticancer activities are unclear. It is understood that the 
intercommunication between cancer cells and their microenvironment is essential
to tumor angiogenesis. Exosomes are extracellular vesicles that are important
mediators of intercellular communication and play a role in promoting
angiogenesis. However, very little is known about the contribution of breast
cancer exosomes to tumor angiogenesis or whether exosomes can mediate DHA's
anticancer action.
RESULTS: Exosomes were collected from MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
after treatment with DHA. We observed an increase in exosome secretion and
exosome microRNA contents from the DHA-treated cells. The expression of 83
microRNAs in the MCF7 exosomes was altered by DHA (>2-fold). The most abundant
exosome microRNAs (let-7a, miR-23b, miR-27a/b, miR-21, let-7, and miR-320b) are
known to have anti-cancer and/or anti-angiogenic activity. These microRNAs were
also increased by DHA treatment in the exosomes from other breast cancer lines
(MDA-MB-231, ZR751 and BT20), but not in exosomes from normal breast cells
(MCF10A). When DHA-treated MCF7 cells were co-cultured with or their exosomes
were directly applied to endothelial cell cultures, we observed an increase in
the expression of these microRNAs in the endothelial cells. Furthermore,
overexpression of miR-23b and miR-320b in endothelial cells decreased the
expression of their pro-angiogenic target genes (PLAU, AMOTL1, NRP1 and ETS2) and
significantly inhibited tube formation by endothelial cells, suggesting that the 
microRNAs transferred by exosomes mediate DHA's anti-angiogenic action. These
effects could be reversed by knockdown of the Rab GTPase, Rab27A, which controls 
exosome release.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that DHA alters breast cancer exosome secretion and
microRNA contents, which leads to the inhibition of angiogenesis. Our data
demonstrate that breast cancer exosome signaling can be targeted to inhibit tumor
angiogenesis and provide new insight into DHA's anticancer action, further
supporting its use in cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4504101
PMID: 26178901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Anticancer Res. 2015 Aug;35(8):4397-401.

Transcriptional Regulation of the p16 Tumor Suppressor Gene.

Kotake Y(1), Naemura M(2), Murasaki C(2), Inoue Y(2), Okamoto H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Chemistry, Faculty of
Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, Kinki University, Fukuoka, Japan
ykotake@fuk.kindai.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biological and Environmental
Chemistry, Faculty of Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, Kinki
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

The p16 tumor suppressor gene encodes a specific inhibitor of cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK) 4 and 6 and is found altered in a wide range of human cancers. p16
plays a pivotal role in tumor suppressor networks through inducing cellular
senescence that acts as a barrier to cellular transformation by oncogenic
signals. p16 protein is relatively stable and its expression is primary regulated
by transcriptional control. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins associate with the p16 
locus in a long non-coding RNA, ANRIL-dependent manner, leading to repression of 
p16 transcription. YB1, a transcription factor, also represses the p16
transcription through direct association with its promoter region. Conversely,
the transcription factors Ets1/2 and histone H3K4 methyltransferase MLL1 directly
bind to the p16 locus and mediate p16 induction during replicative and premature 
senescence. In the present review, we discuss the molecular mechanisms by which
these factors regulate p16 transcription.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26168478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):16663-73.

TERT promoter mutations and polymorphisms as prognostic factors in primary
glioblastoma.

Mosrati MA(1), Malmström A(2), Lysiak M(1), Krysztofiak A(1), Hallbeck M(3),
Milos P(4), Hallbeck AL(5), Bratthäll C(6), Strandéus M(7), Stenmark-Askmalm
M(8), Söderkvist P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden. (2)Department of Advanced Home Care and Department of Clinical
and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. (3)Department
of Clinical Pathology and Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. (4)Department of Neurosurgery and
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden. (5)Department of Oncology and Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. (6)Department of 
Oncology, District Hospital, Kalmar, Sweden. (7)Department of Oncology, Ryhov
Hospital, Jönköping, Sweden. (8)Department of Clinical Pathology and Clinical
Genetics and Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping
University, Linköping, Sweden.

Telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) activity is up-regulated in several types
of tumors including glioblastoma (GBM). In the present study, 128 primary
glioblastoma patients were examined for single nucleotide polymorphisms of TERT
in blood and in 92 cases for TERT promoter mutations in tumors. TERT promoter
mutations were observed in 86% of the tumors and of these, C228T (-124 bp
upstream start codon) was detected in 75% and C250T (-146 bp) in 25% of cases.
TERT promoter mutations were associated with shorter overall survival (11 vs. 20 
months p = 0.002 and 12 vs. 20, p = 0.04 for C228T and C250T, respectively). The 
minor alleles of rs2736100 and rs10069690 SNP's, located in intron 2 and the
promotor regions, respectively, were associated with an increased risk of
developing GBM (p = 0.004 and 0.001). GBM patients having both TERT promoter
mutations and being homozygous carriers of the rs2853669 C-allele displayed
significantly shorter overall survival than those with the wild type allele. The 
rs2853669 SNP is located in a putative Ets2 binding site in the promoter (-246 bp
upstream start codon) close to the C228T and C250T mutation hot spots.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression regulated by TERT promoter status and
polymorphism, what leads us to think that TERT and IL-6 plays a significant role 
in GBM, where specific SNPs increase the risk of developing GBM while the
rs2853669 SNP and specific mutations in the TERT promoter of the tumor lead to
shorter survival.

PMCID: PMC4599297
PMID: 26143636  [PubMed - in process]


17. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Sep;12(3):4508-13. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3960. Epub 2015 Jun
18.

Triptolide suppresses proliferation, hypoxia-inducible factor-1a and c-Myc
expression in pancreatic cancer cells.

Ding X(1), Zhou X(2), Jiang B(1), Zhao Q(1), Zhou G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China. (2)Department of Immunology, Medical School 
of Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China.

Triptolide (TL) is known to suppress the proliferation of a number of pancreatic 
cancer cell lines in vitro. Marked antitumor effects were also observed in a
xenograft model of pancreatic cancer. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) is
highly expressed in pancreatic cancer cells lines. The present study therefore
tested the hypothesis that suppression of HIF-1a is associated with the antitumor
activity of TL. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot analysis 
were used to determine the level of gene expression. A xenograft tumor model of
pancreatic cancer was established in athymic nude mice and the tumor size was
measured to evaluate the outcome of TL treatment. Immunohistochemistry was used
to detect the expression of HIF-1a and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
and to assess microvessel density. Microarray was used to investigate gene
expression in pancreatic cancer cells following TL treatment. The expression of
HIF-1a was shown to be reduced in pancreatic cell lines following treatment with 
TL, and this effect occurred in a dose-dependent manner. In a xenograft model of 
pancreatic cancer, reduced levels of HIF-1a were also observed in mice that were 
treated with TL. Furthermore, the expression of VEGF, which is a direct target of
HIF-1a, was also suppressed, and the microvessel density of tumor tissues was
consequently reduced. A microarray analysis of gene expression was performed in
order to investigate the potential mechanisms underlying the antitumor activity
of TL. The results showed that 11 genes, including c-Myc, SOX9 and Ets2, were
downregulated at an early stage following treatment with TL. A recent study
indicated that overexpression of c-Myc in colon cancer cells promotes increased
expression of HIF-1a and VEGF. Therefore, TL may suppress HIF-1a through a
c-Myc-dependent mechanism, which is involved in antitumor effects in mouse models
of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 26094625  [PubMed - in process]


18. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 8;6(26):22060-71.

Downregulation of c-SRC kinase CSK promotes castration resistant prostate cancer 
and pinpoints a novel disease subclass.

Yang CC(1,)(2), Fazli L(3), Loguercio S(4,)(5), Zharkikh I(6), Aza-Blanc P(2),
Gleave ME(3), Wolf DA(1,)(4,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Initiation & Maintenance Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Functional Genomics Core, Sanford-Burnham 
Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Vancouver Prostate
Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6H 3Z6. (4)San Diego Center for Systems Biology,
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (5)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (6)Tumor Analysis Core, 
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (7)School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences & Center for Stress Signaling Networks, Xiamen
University, Xiamen 361102, China.

SRC kinase is activated in castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC),
phosphorylates the androgen receptor (AR), and causes its ligand-independent
activation as a transcription factor. However, activating SRC mutations are
exceedingly rare in human tumors, and mechanisms of ectopic SRC activation
therefore remain largely unknown. Performing a functional genomics screen, we
found that downregulation of SRC inhibitory kinase CSK is sufficient to overcome 
growth arrest induced by depriving human prostate cancer cells of androgen. CSK
knockdown led to ectopic SRC activation, increased AR signaling, and resistance
to anti-androgens. Consistent with the in vitro observations, stable knockdown of
CSK conferred castration resistance in mouse xenograft models, while sensitivity 
to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib was retained. Finally, CSK was found
downregulated in a distinct subset of CRPCs marked by AR amplification and ETS2
deletion but lacking PTEN and RB1 mutations. These results identify CSK
downregulation as a principal driver of SRC activation and castration resistance 
and validate SRC as a drug target in a molecularly defined subclass of CRPCs.

PMCID: PMC4673146
PMID: 26091350  [PubMed - in process]


19. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 May 18;16(5):11229-58. doi: 10.3390/ijms160511229.

Transcriptional (ChIP-Chip) Analysis of ELF1, ETS2, RUNX1 and STAT5 in Human
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm.

Pahl MC(1), Erdman R(2), Kuivaniemi H(3,)(4), Lillvis JH(5), Elmore JR(6), Tromp 
G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Sigfried and Janet Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, PA 17822, USA. mcp3bp@virginia.edu. (2)Sigfried and Janet Weis Center
for Research, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA 17822, USA.
rerdman@geisinger.edu. (3)Sigfried and Janet Weis Center for Research, Geisinger 
Health System, Danville, PA 17822, USA. shkuivaniemi@geisinger.edu. (4)Department
of Surgery, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.
shkuivaniemi@geisinger.edu. (5)Department of Ophthalmology, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48202, USA. johnlillvis@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, PA 17822, USA. jelmore@geisinger.edu. (7)Sigfried and Janet Weis Center
for Research, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA 17822, USA.
gctromp@geisinger.edu.

We investigated transcriptional control of gene expression in human abdominal
aortic aneurysm (AAA). We previously identified 3274 differentially expressed
genes in human AAA tissue compared to non-aneurysmal controls. Four expressed
transcription factors (ELF1, ETS2, STAT5 and RUNX1) were selected for genome-wide
chromatin immunoprecipitation. Transcription factor binding was enriched in 4760 
distinct genes (FDR < 0.05), of which 713 were differentially expressed in AAA.
Functional classification using Gene Ontology (GO), KEGG, and Network Analysis
revealed enrichment in several biological processes including "leukocyte
migration" (FDR = 3.09 × 10-05) and "intracellular protein kinase cascade" (FDR =
6.48 × 10-05). In the control aorta, the most significant GO categories differed 
from those in the AAA samples and included "cytoskeleton organization" (FDR =
1.24 × 10-06) and "small GTPase mediated signal transduction" (FDR = 1.24 ×
10-06). Genes up-regulated in AAA tissue showed a highly significant enrichment
for GO categories "leukocyte migration" (FDR = 1.62 × 10-11), "activation of
immune response" (FDR = 8.44 × 10-11), "T cell activation" (FDR = 4.14 × 10-10)
and "regulation of lymphocyte activation" (FDR = 2.45 × 10-09), whereas the
down-regulated genes were enriched in GO categories "cytoskeleton organization"
(FDR = 7.84 × 10-05), "muscle cell development" (FDR = 1.00 × 10-04), and "organ 
morphogenesis" (FDR = 3.00 × 10-04). Quantitative PCR assays confirmed a sub-set 
of the transcription factor binding sites including those in MTMR11, DUSP10,
ITGAM, MARCH1, HDAC8, MMP14, MAGI1, THBD and SPOCK1.

PMCID: PMC4463698
PMID: 25993293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochimie. 2015 May;112:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2015.02.013. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Transcriptional regulation of the apolipoprotein F (ApoF) gene by ETS and C/EBPa 
in hepatoma cells.

Shen XB(1), Huang L(1), Zhang SH(2), Wang DP(3), Wu YL(4), Chen WN(4), Xu SH(5), 
Lin X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China; Department of
Cardiology, Affiliated Nanping First Hospital, Fujian Medical University,
Nanping, China. (2)Department of Medical Laboratory, Affiliated Nanping First
Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Nanping, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China; Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Hongqi Hospital of MuDanJiang Medical College, Mudanjiang, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China. (5)Department
of Cardiology, Affiliated Nanping First Hospital, Fujian Medical University,
Nanping, China. Electronic address: 18905990816@163.com. (6)Key Laboratory of
Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China. Electronic address:
linxu@mail.fjmu.edu.cn.

Apolipoprotein F (ApoF) inhibits cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP)
activity and plays an important role in lipid metabolism. In the present study,
the full-length human ApoF promoter was cloned, and the molecular mechanism of
the regulation of ApoF was investigated. The ApoF promoter displayed higher
activities in hepatoma cell lines, and the -198 nt to +79 nt promoter region
contained the maximum promoter activity. In the promoter region of -198 nt
to -2 nt there were four putative binding sites for transcription factors
ETS-1/ETS-2 (named EBS-1 to EBS-4) and one for C/EBP. Mutation of EBS-2, EBS4 and
the C/EBP binding site abolished the promoter activity, and ETS-1/ETS-2 and
C/EBPa could interact with corresponding binding sites. In addition,
overexpression of ETS-1/2 or C/EBPa enhanced, while dominant-negative mutants of 
ETS-1/2 and knockdown of C/EBPa decreased, ApoF promoter activities. ETS-1 and
C/EBPa associated physically, and acted synergistically to activate ApoF
transcription. These results demonstrated combined activation of the ApoF
promoter by liver-enriched and ubiquitous transcription factors. Direct
interactions between C/EBPa and ETS-1 were important for high liver-specific
expression of ApoF.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMID: 25726912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Neuro Oncol. 2015 Sep;17(9):1231-40. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nov010. Epub 2015 Feb
13.

Prognostic quality of activating TERT promoter mutations in glioblastoma:
interaction with the rs2853669 polymorphism and patient age at diagnosis.

Spiegl-Kreinecker S(1), Lötsch D(1), Ghanim B(1), Pirker C(1), Mohr T(1), Laaber 
M(1), Weis S(1), Olschowski A(1), Webersinke G(1), Pichler J(1), Berger W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Wagner-Jauregg Hospital, Linz, Austria (S.S.-K.,
M.L., A.O.); Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology, Wagner-Jauregg Hospital, 
Linz, Austria (S.W.); Department of Internal Medicine, Wagner-Jauregg Hospital,
Linz, Austria (J.P.); Institute of Cancer Research and Comprehensive Cancer
Center-Central Nervous System Tumors Unit, Department of Medicine I, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria (D.L., C.P., T.M., W.B.); Division of
Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria (B.G.); Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Tumorcytogenetics, Hospital
Barmherzige Schwestern, Linz, Austria (G.W.).

BACKGROUND: Expression of the telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) might be
altered by activating mutations of the rs2853669 polymorphism within the promoter
region. Here we investigate the impact of these genomic alterations on telomerase
activation and dissect their prognostic potential in glioblastoma (GBM).
METHODS: The respective TERT promoter region was sequenced in 126 GBM tissues and
compared with clinical parameters and glioma biomarkers MGMT promoter methylation
and IDH1 mutation. TERT mRNA expression, telomerase activity, and telomere
lengths were determined by reverse transcriptase PCR, TRAP assay, and real-time
PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: Seventy-three percent of GBM patients harbored TERT promoter mutations
associated with enhanced telomerase activity and TERT mRNA expression but reduced
telomere lengths (P < .001 for all). Patients with mutated tumors exhibited
significantly shorter overall survival in the entire cohort (11.5 vs 23.1 months;
P < .0001) and in the primary GBM patient subgroup lacking IDH1 mutations (n =
120; P = .0084). This prognostic impact was confined to younger patients (aged
<65 years), while the negative prognostic power of enhanced age at diagnosis was 
limited to those patients lacking TERT promoter mutations. Presence of the common
single nucleotide polymorphism rs2853669, disrupting an endogenous Ets2
transcription factor-binding site, was associated with improved survival
exclusively in patients with a wild-type TERT promoter. On the contrary, the
shortest mean overall survival was detected in those patients harboring both an
activating TERT promoter mutation and homozygous rs2853669 alleles.
CONCLUSION: In summary, TERT promoter mutations are powerful prognosticators for 
worse course of disease in human GBM patients but their prognostic value is
influenced by the rs2853669 polymorphism and age at diagnosis.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4588753 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25681309  [PubMed - in process]


22. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 27;290(13):8539-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.619270. Epub 2015
Feb 10.

Structural insights into the autoregulation and cooperativity of the human
transcription factor Ets-2.

Newman JA(1), Cooper CD(1), Aitkenhead H(1), Gileadi O(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ,
United Kingdom. (2)From the Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom opher.gileadi@sgc.ox.ac.uk.

Ets-2, like its closely related homologue Ets-1, is a member of the Ets family of
DNA binding transcription factors. Both proteins are subject to multiple levels
of regulation of their DNA binding and transactivation properties. One such
regulatory mechanism is the presence of an autoinhibitory module, which in Ets-1 
allosterically inhibits the DNA binding activity. This inhibition can be relieved
by interaction with protein partners or cooperative binding to closely separated 
Ets binding sites in a palindromic arrangement. In this study we describe the 2.5
Å resolution crystal structure of a DNA complex of the Ets-2 Ets domain. The Ets 
domain crystallized with two distinct species in the asymmetric unit, which
closely resemble the autoinhibited and DNA bound forms of Ets-1. This discovery
prompted us to re-evaluate the current model for the autoinhibitory mechanism and
the structural basis for cooperative DNA binding. In contrast to Ets-1, in which 
the autoinhibition is caused by a combination of allosteric and steric
mechanisms, we were unable to find clear evidence for the allosteric mechanism in
Ets-2. We also demonstrated two possibly distinct types of cooperative binding to
substrates with Ets binding motifs separated by four and six base pairs and
suggest possible molecular mechanisms for this behavior.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4375503
PMID: 25670864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Stem Cells. 2015 May;33(5):1434-46. doi: 10.1002/stem.1961.

Perturbations of heart development and function in cardiomyocytes from human
embryonic stem cells with trisomy 21.

Bosman A(1), Letourneau A, Sartiani L, Del Lungo M, Ronzoni F, Kuziakiv R,
Tohonen V, Zucchelli M, Santoni F, Guipponi M, Dumevska B, Hovatta O, Antonarakis
SE, Jaconi ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute,
Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia.

Congenital heart defects (CHD) occur in approximately 50% of patients with Down
syndrome (DS); the mechanisms for this occurrence however remain unknown. In
order to understand how these defects evolve in early development in DS, we
focused on the earliest stages of cardiogenesis to ascertain perturbations in
development leading to CHD. Using a trisomy 21 (T21) sibling human embryonic stem
cell (hESC) model of DS, we show that T21-hESC display many significant
differences in expression of genes and cell populations associated with
mesodermal, and more notably, secondary heart field (SHF) development, in
particular a reduced number of ISL1(+) progenitor cells. Furthermore, we provide 
evidence for two candidate genes located on chromosome 21, ETS2 and ERG, whose
overexpression during cardiac commitment likely account for the disruption of SHF
development, as revealed by downregulation or overexpression experiments.
Additionally, we uncover an abnormal electrophysiological phenotype in functional
T21 cardiomyocytes, a result further supported by mRNA expression data acquired
using RNA-Seq. These data, in combination, revealed a cardiomyocyte-specific
phenotype in T21 cardiomyocytes, likely due to the overexpression of genes such
as RYR2, NCX, and L-type Ca(2+) channel. These results contribute to the
understanding of the mechanisms involved in the development of CHD. Stem Cells
2015;33:1434-1446.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25645121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Biol. 2015 Jan 1;397(1):77-88. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.011. Epub 2014
Oct 23.

Elf5 and Ets2 maintain the mouse extraembryonic ectoderm in a dosage dependent
synergistic manner.

Donnison M(1), Broadhurst R(1), Pfeffer PL(2).

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand. (2)AgResearch 
Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand; School of Biological
Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington 6140, New
Zealand. Electronic address: peter.pfeffer@vuw.ac.nz.

The ETS superfamily transcription factors Elf5 and Ets2 have both been implicated
in the maintenance of the extraembryonic ectoderm (ExE) of the mouse embryo.
While homozygous mutants of either gene result in various degrees of ExE tissue
loss, heterozygotes are without phenotype. We show here that compound
heterozygous mutants exhibit a phenotype intermediate to that of the more severe 
Elf5-/- and the milder Ets2-/- mutants. Functional redundancy is shown via
commonalities in expression patterns, in target gene expression, and by partial
rescue of Elf5-/- mutants through overexpressing Ets2 in an Elf5-like fashion. A 
model is presented suggesting the functional division of the ExE region into a
proximal and distal domain based on gene expression patterns and the proximal to 
distal increasing sensitivity to threshold levels of combined Elf5 and Ets2
activity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Evodevo. 2014 Nov 3;5(1):40. doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-5-40. eCollection 2014.

Transcriptional dynamics of a conserved gene expression network associated with
craniofacial divergence in Arctic charr.

Ahi EP(1), Kapralova KH(1), Pálsson A(2), Maier VH(1), Gudbrandsson J(1),
Snorrason SS(1), Jónsson ZO(2), Franzdóttir SR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Iceland,
Sturlugata 7, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. (2)Institute of Life and Environmental
Sciences, University of Iceland, Sturlugata 7, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland ;
Biomedical Center, University of Iceland, Vatnsmýrarvegur 16, 101 Reykjavik,
Iceland.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the molecular basis of craniofacial variation can
provide insights into key developmental mechanisms of adaptive changes and their 
role in trophic divergence and speciation. Arctic charr (Salvelinus alpinus) is a
polymorphic fish species, and, in Lake Thingvallavatn in Iceland, four sympatric 
morphs have evolved distinct craniofacial structures. We conducted a gene
expression study on candidates from a conserved gene coexpression network,
focusing on the development of craniofacial elements in embryos of two
contrasting Arctic charr morphotypes (benthic and limnetic).
RESULTS: Four Arctic charr morphs were studied: one limnetic and two benthic
morphs from Lake Thingvallavatn and a limnetic reference aquaculture morph. The
presence of morphological differences at developmental stages before the onset of
feeding was verified by morphometric analysis. Following up on our previous
findings that Mmp2 and Sparc were differentially expressed between morphotypes,
we identified a network of genes with conserved coexpression across diverse
vertebrate species. A comparative expression study of candidates from this
network in developing heads of the four Arctic charr morphs verified the
coexpression relationship of these genes and revealed distinct transcriptional
dynamics strongly correlated with contrasting craniofacial morphologies (benthic 
versus limnetic). A literature review and Gene Ontology analysis indicated that a
significant proportion of the network genes play a role in extracellular matrix
organization and skeletogenesis, and motif enrichment analysis of conserved
noncoding regions of network candidates predicted a handful of transcription
factors, including Ap1 and Ets2, as potential regulators of the gene network. The
expression of Ets2 itself was also found to associate with network gene
expression. Genes linked to glucocorticoid signalling were also studied, as both 
Mmp2 and Sparc are responsive to this pathway. Among those, several
transcriptional targets and upstream regulators showed differential expression
between the contrasting morphotypes. Interestingly, although selected network
genes showed overlapping expression patterns in situ and no morph differences,
Timp2 expression patterns differed between morphs.
CONCLUSION: Our comparative study of transcriptional dynamics in divergent
craniofacial morphologies of Arctic charr revealed a conserved network of
coexpressed genes sharing functional roles in structural morphogenesis. We also
implicate transcriptional regulators of the network as targets for future
functional studies.

PMCID: PMC4240837
PMID: 25419450  [PubMed]


26. Blood. 2014 Nov 6;124(19):2948-52. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-556332. Epub 2014
Sep 29.

OVOL2 is a critical regulator of ER71/ETV2 in generating FLK1+, hematopoietic,
and endothelial cells from embryonic stem cells.

Kim JY(1), Lee RH(2), Kim TM(3), Kim DW(2), Jeon YJ(2), Huh SH(4), Oh SY(5), Kyba
M(6), Kataoka H(7), Choi K(8), Ornitz DM(4), Chae JI(2), Park C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Cardiovascular Biology, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA; Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois, Chicago, IL; (2)Department of Oral Pharmacology, School
of Dentistry, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Republic of Korea;
(3)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois,
Chicago, IL; (4)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO; (5)Department of Pediatrics, Center for
Cardiovascular Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA;
(6)Department of Medicine, Medical School, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
MN; (7)Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, 
Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan; and. (8)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO.

In this study, we report that OVOL2, a C2H2 zinc finger protein, is a novel
binding protein of ER71, which is a critical transcription factor for blood and
vessel development. OVOL2 directly interacted with ER71, but not with ETS1 or
ETS2, in the nucleus. ER71-mediated activation of the Flk1 promoter was further
enhanced by OVOL2, although OVOL2 alone failed to activate it. Consistently,
coexpression of ER71 and OVOL2 in differentiating embryonic stem cells led to a
significant augmentation of FLK1(+), endothelial, and hematopoietic cells. Such
cooperative effects were impaired by the short hairpin RNA-mediated inhibition of
Ovol2. Collectively, we show that ER71 directly interacts with OVOL2 and that
such interaction is critical for FLK1(+) cell generation and their
differentiation into downstream cell lineages.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4224193
PMID: 25267199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncogene. 2015 Jul;34(28):3651-61. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.294. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

CSF1-ETS2-induced microRNA in myeloid cells promote metastatic tumor growth.

Mathsyaraja H(1), Thies K(1), Taffany DA(1), Deighan C(2), Liu T(3), Yu L(4),
Fernandez SA(4), Shapiro C(5), Otero J(6), Timmers C(3), Lustberg MB(5), Chalmers
J(7), Leone G(8), Ostrowski MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State
University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA [2] The Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (2)Department of Chemical
Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (3)The Comprehensive
Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (4)Center for
Biostatistics, Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA. (5)1] The Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State
University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA. (6)1] The Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Department of Pathology,
Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA. (7)1] The
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [2]
Department of Chemical Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(8)1] The Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
USA [2] Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology & Medical Genetics, The Ohio
State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA [3] Department of
Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Metastasis of solid tumors is associated with poor prognosis and bleak survival
rates. Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are known to promote metastasis,
but the mechanisms underlying their collaboration with tumor cells remain
unknown. Here, we report an oncogenic role for microRNA (miR) in driving M2
reprogramming in TIMs, characterized by the acquisition of pro-tumor and
pro-angiogenic properties. The expression of miR-21, miR-29a, miR-142-3p and
miR-223 increased in myeloid cells during tumor progression in mouse models of
breast cancer and melanoma metastasis. Further, we show that these miRs are
regulated by the CSF1-ETS2 pathway in macrophages. A loss-of-function approach
utilizing selective depletion of the miR-processing enzyme Dicer in mature
myeloid cells blocks angiogenesis and metastatic tumor growth. Ectopic expression
of miR-21 and miR-29a promotes angiogenesis and tumor cell proliferation through 
the downregulation of anti-angiogenic genes such as Col4a2, Spry1 and Timp3,
whereas knockdown of the miRs impedes these processes. miR-21 and miR-29a are
expressed in Csf1r+ myeloid cells associated with human metastatic breast cancer,
and levels of these miRs in CD115+ non-classical monocytes correlates with
metastatic tumor burden in patients. Taken together, our results suggest that
miR-21 and miR-29a are essential for the pro-tumor functions of myeloid cells and
the CSF1-ETS2 pathway upstream of the miRs serves as an attractive therapeutic
target for the inhibition of M2 remodeling of macrophages during malignancy. In
addition, miR-21 and miR-29a in circulating myeloid cells may potentially serve
as biomarkers to measure therapeutic efficacy of targeted therapies for CSF1
signaling.

PMCID: PMC4369473
PMID: 25241894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Physiol Genomics. 2014 Oct 15;46(20):779-87. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00054.2014. Epub 2014 Aug 26.

Dynamic gene expression patterns in animal models of early and late heart failure
reveal biphasic-bidirectional transcriptional activation of signaling pathways.

Rowell J(1), Koitabashi N(1), Kass DA(1), Barth AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland
abarth3@jhmi.edu.

Altered cardiac gene expression in heart failure (HF) has mostly been identified 
by single-point analysis of end-stage disease. This may miss earlier changes in
gene expression that are transient and/or directionally opposite to those
observed later. Myocardial datasets from the largest microarray data repository
(Gene Expression Omnibus) yielded six HF studies with time-course data.
Differentially expressed transcripts between nonfailing controls, early HF (<3
days after cardiac insult) and late HF (usually >2 wk) were determined, and
analysis of KEGG pathways and predicted regulatory control elements performed. We
found that gene expression followed varying patterns: Downregulation of metabolic
pathways occurred early and was sustained into late-stage HF. In contrast, most
signaling pathways undergo a complex biphasic pattern: Calcium signaling, p53,
apoptosis, and MAPK pathways displayed a bidirectional response, declining early 
but rising late. These profiles were compatible with specific microRNA (miRNA)
and transcription regulators: Estrogen-related receptor-a and myocyte-enhancer
factor-2 binding sites were overrepresented in the promoter regions of
downregulated transcripts. Concurrently, there were overrepresented binding sites
for E2f and ETS family members (E-Twenty Six, including Gabp, Elf1, and Ets2),
serum response and interferon regulated factor in biphasic-bidirectional and
late-upregulated transcripts. Binding sites for miRNAs downregulated by HF were
more common in upregulated transcripts (e.g., miRNA-22,-133a/b, and -150 in early
HF and miRNA-1,-9,-499 in late HF). During the development of HF, gene expression
is characterized by dynamic overlapping sets of transcripts controlled by
specific interrelated regulatory mechanisms. While metabolic gene classes show
early and sustained downregulation in HF, signaling pathways undergo a complex
biphasic pattern with early down- and more pronounced late upregulation.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4200378
PMID: 25159852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Nov;10(5):2421-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2491. Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Differential co-expression analysis of rheumatoid arthritis with microarray data.

Wang K(1), Zhao L(2), Liu X(1), Hao Z(2), Zhou Y(1), Yang C(1), Li H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Orthopedics, The Harbin Fifth Hospital, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the underlying molecular
mechanisms of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) using microarray expression profiles from
osteoarthritis and RA patients, to improve diagnosis and treatment strategies for
the condition. The gene expression profile of GSE27390 was downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus, including 19 samples from patients with RA (n=9) or
osteoarthritis (n=10). Firstly, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
obtained with the thresholds of |logFC|>1.0 and P<0.05, using the t-test method
in LIMMA package. Then, differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) and
differentially co-expressed links (DCLs) were screened with q<0.25 by the
differential coexpression analysis and differential regulation analysis of gene
expression microarray data package. Secondly, pathway enrichment analysis for
DCGs was performed by the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery and the DCLs associated with RA were selected by comparing the obtained
DCLs with known transcription factor (TF)-targets in the TRANSFAC database.
Finally, the obtained TFs were mapped to the known TF-targets to construct the
network using cytoscape software. A total of 1755 DEGs, 457 DCGs and 101988 DCLs 
were achieved and there were 20 TFs in the obtained six TF-target relations
(STAT3-TNF, PBX1-PLAU, SOCS3-STAT3, GATA1-ETS2, ETS1-ICAM4 and CEBPE-GATA1) and
457 DCGs. A number of TF-target relations in the constructed network were not
within DCLs when the TF and target gene were DCGs. The identified TFs may have an
important role in the pathogenesis of RA and have the potential to be used as
biomarkers for the development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for
RA.

PMID: 25118911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Cell. 2014 Aug 11;26(2):222-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.06.026.

Phosphorylation of ETS1 by Src family kinases prevents its recognition by the
COP1 tumor suppressor.

Lu G(1), Zhang Q(1), Huang Y(2), Song J(3), Tomaino R(4), Ehrenberger T(5), Lim
E(6), Liu W(7), Bronson RT(8), Bowden M(2), Brock J(3), Krop IE(1), Dillon DA(3),
Gygi SP(4), Mills GB(7), Richardson AL(9), Signoretti S(10), Yaffe MB(5), Kaelin 
WG Jr(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02215, USA. (2)Center for Molecular Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)Department of Cell
Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Department of Biology,
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (6)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(7)Department of Systems Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)Rodent Histopathology Core, Dana Farber/Harvard Cancer
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (9)Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA; Department of Cancer Cell Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. (10)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (11)Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Electronic address:
william_kaelin@dfci.harvard.edu.

Oncoproteins and tumor suppressors antagonistically converge on critical nodes
governing neoplastic growth, invasion, and metastasis. We discovered that
phosphorylation of the ETS1 and ETS2 transcriptional oncoproteins at specific
serine or threonine residues creates binding sites for the COP1 tumor suppressor 
protein, which is an ubiquitin ligase component, leading to their destruction. In
the case of ETS1, however, phosphorylation of a neighboring tyrosine residue by
Src family kinases disrupts COP1 binding, thereby stabilizing ETS1. Src-dependent
accumulation of ETS1 in breast cancer cells promotes anchorage-independent growth
in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. These findings expand the list of potential
COP1 substrates to include proteins whose COP1-binding sites are subject to
regulatory phosphorylation and provide insights into transformation by Src family
kinases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4169234
PMID: 25117710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 29;111(30):11145-50. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1404139111. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

Pla2g16 phospholipase mediates gain-of-function activities of mutant p53.

Xiong S(1), Tu H(1), Kollareddy M(2), Pant V(1), Li Q(1), Zhang Y(1), Jackson
JG(1), Suh YA(1), Elizondo-Fraire AC(1), Yang P(1), Chau G(1), Tashakori M(1),
Wasylishen AR(1), Ju Z(3), Solomon H(4), Rotter V(4), Liu B(1), El-Naggar AK(5), 
Donehower LA(6), Martinez LA(2), Lozano G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Cancer Institute,
University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216; (3)Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, and. (4)Department of Molecular
Biology, The Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100, Israel; and. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030;
(6)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030. (7)Department of Genetics, gglozano@mdanderson.org.

p53(R172H/+) mice inherit a p53 mutation found in Li-Fraumeni syndrome and
develop metastatic tumors at much higher frequency than p53(+/-) mice. To explore
the mutant p53 metastatic phenotype, we used expression arrays to compare primary
osteosarcomas from p53(R172H/+) mice with metastasis to osteosarcomas from
p53(+/-) mice lacking metastasis. For this study, 213 genes were differentially
expressed with a P value <0.05. Of particular interest, Pla2g16, which encodes a 
phospholipase that catalyzes phosphatidic acid into lysophosphatidic acid and
free fatty acid (both implicated in metastasis), was increased in p53(R172H/+)
osteosarcomas. Functional analyses showed that Pla2g16 knockdown decreased
migration and invasion in mutant p53-expressing cells, and vice versa:
overexpression of Pla2g16 increased the invasion of p53-null cells. Furthermore, 
Pla2g16 levels were increased upon expression of mutant p53 in both mouse and
human osteosarcoma cell lines, indicating that Pla2g16 is a downstream target of 
the mutant p53 protein. ChIP analysis revealed that several mutant p53 proteins
bind the Pla2g16 promoter at E26 transformation-specific (ETS) binding motifs and
knockdown of ETS2 suppressed mutant p53 induction of Pla2g16. Thus, our study
identifies a phospholipase as a transcriptional target of mutant p53 that is
required for metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4121829
PMID: 25024203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 26;9(6):e100693. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100693.
eCollection 2014.

MicroRNA 17-92 cluster mediates ETS1 and ETS2-dependent RAS-oncogenic
transformation.

Kabbout M(1), Dakhlallah D(2), Sharma S(3), Bronisz A(3), Srinivasan R(1), Piper 
M(4), Marsh CB(4), Ostrowski MC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America; Graduate Program
in Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America; Solid Tumor Program, Comprehensive
Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of
America. (2)Graduate Program in Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America; Dorothy M. Davis
Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio,
United States of America. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry,
College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of 
America; Solid Tumor Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America. (4)Dorothy M. Davis Heart
and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United
States of America; Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

The ETS-family transcription factors Ets1 and Ets2 are evolutionarily conserved
effectors of the RAS/ERK signaling pathway, but their function in Ras cellular
transformation and biology remains unclear. Taking advantage of Ets1 and Ets2
mouse models to generate Ets1/Ets2 double knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts,
we demonstrate that deletion of both Ets1 and Ets2 was necessary to inhibit
HrasG12V induced transformation both in vitro and in vivo. HrasG12V expression in
mouse embryonic fibroblasts increased ETS1 and ETS2 expression and binding to
cis-regulatory elements on the c-Myc proximal promoter, and consequently induced 
a robust increase in MYC expression. The expression of the oncogenic microRNA
17-92 cluster was increased in HrasG12V transformed cells, but was significantly 
reduced when ETS1 and ETS2 were absent. MYC and ETS1 or ETS2 collaborated to
increase expression of the oncogenic microRNA 17-92 cluster in HrasG12V
transformed cells. Enforced expression of exogenous MYC or microRNA 17-92 rescued
HrasG12V transformation in Ets1/Ets2-null cells, revealing a direct function for 
MYC and microRNA 17-92 in ETS1/ETS2-dependent HrasG12V transformation.

PMCID: PMC4072627
PMID: 24968297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Sep;74:139-50. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.05.001. Epub
2014 May 10.

Cardiomyocytes mediate anti-angiogenesis in type 2 diabetic rats through the
exosomal transfer of miR-320 into endothelial cells.

Wang X(1), Huang W(2), Liu G(3), Cai W(2), Millard RW(3), Wang Y(2), Chang J(4), 
Peng T(5), Fan GC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. Electronic address:
wang2xn@ucmail.uc.edu. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. (4)Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, TX, USA. (5)Critical Illness
Research, Lawson Health Research Institute, Ontario N6A 4G5, Canada.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. Electronic address:
fangg@ucmail.uc.edu.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Sep;74:196-8.

Exosomes, nano-vesicles naturally released from living cells, have been well
recognized to play critical roles in mediating cell-to-cell communication. Given 
that diabetic hearts exhibit insufficient angiogenesis, it is significant to test
whether diabetic cardiomyocyte-derived exosomes possess any capacity in
regulating angiogenesis. In this study, we first observed that both proliferation
and migration of mouse cardiac endothelial cells (MCECs) were inhibited when
co-cultured with cardiomyocytes isolated from adult Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats, a
commonly used animal model of type 2 diabetes. However, GK-myocyte-mediated
anti-angiogenic effects were negated upon addition of GW4869, an inhibitor of
exosome formation/release, into the co-cultures. Next, exosomes were purified
from the myocyte culture supernatants by differential centrifugation. While
exosomes derived from GK myocytes (GK-exosomes) displayed similar size and
molecular markers (CD63 and CD81) to those originated from the control Wistar rat
myocytes (WT-exosomes), their regulatory role in angiogenesis is opposite. We
observed that the MCEC proliferation, migration and tube-like formation were
inhibited by GK-exosomes, but were promoted by WT-exosomes. Mechanistically, we
found that GK-exosomes encapsulated higher levels of miR-320 and lower levels of 
miR-126 compared to WT-exosomes. Furthermore, GK-exosomes were effectively taken 
up by MCECs and delivered miR-320. In addition, transportation of miR-320 from
myocytes to MCECs could be blocked by GW4869. Importantly, the exosomal miR-320
functionally down-regulated its target genes (IGF-1, Hsp20 and Ets2) in recipient
MCECs, and overexpression of miR-320 inhibited MCEC migration and tube formation.
GK exosome-mediated inhibitory effects on angiogenesis were removed by knockdown 
of miR-320. Together, these data indicate that cardiomyocytes exert an
anti-angiogenic function in type 2 diabetic rats through exosomal transfer of
miR-320 into endothelial cells. Thus, our study provides a novel mechanism
underlying diabetes mellitus-induced myocardial vascular deficiency which may be 
caused by secretion of anti-angiogenic exosomes from cardiomyocyes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4120246
PMID: 24825548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Apr;17(4):506-12. doi: 10.1038/nn.3676. Epub 2014 Mar 9.

Parallel states of pathological Wnt signaling in neonatal brain injury and colon 
cancer.

Fancy SP(1), Harrington EP(2), Baranzini SE(3), Silbereis JC(4), Shiow LR(4),
Yuen TJ(4), Huang EJ(5), Lomvardas S(6), Rowitch DH(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF),
San Francisco, California, USA. [2] Department of Neurology, UCSF, San Francisco,
California, USA. [3] Eli and Edythe Broad Institute for Stem Cell Research and
Regeneration Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UCSF, San Francisco,
California, USA. [4]. (2)1] Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA. [2] Eli and Edythe Broad
Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regeneration Medicine and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA. [3] Medical Scientist
Training Program, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA. [4]. (3)Department of
Neurology, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA. (4)1] Department of Pediatrics, 
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA.
[2] Eli and Edythe Broad Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regeneration
Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UCSF, San Francisco, California,
USA. (5)Department of Pathology, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Anatomy, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Neurosci. 2014 Dec;17(12):1841.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2014 Apr;17(4):483-5.

In colon cancer, mutation of the Wnt repressor APC (encoding adenomatous
polyposis coli) leads to a state of aberrant and unrestricted high-activity
signaling. However, the relevance of high Wnt tone in non-genetic human disease
is unknown. Here we demonstrate that distinct functional states of Wnt activity
determine oligodendrocyte precursor cell (OPC) differentiation and myelination.
Mouse OPCs with genetic Wnt dysregulation (high tone) express multiple genes in
common with colon cancer, including Lef1, Sp5, Ets2, Rnf43 and Dusp4.
Surprisingly, we found that OPCs in lesions of hypoxic human neonatal white
matter injury upregulated markers of high Wnt activity and lacked expression of
APC. We also found that lack of Wnt repressor tone promoted permanent white
matter injury after mild hypoxic insult. These findings suggest a state of
pathological high-activity Wnt signaling in human disease tissues that lack
predisposing genetic mutation.

PMCID: PMC3975168
PMID: 24609463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1501-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0329. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Establishment of bovine trophoblast stem-like cells from in vitro-produced
blastocyst-stage embryos using two inhibitors.

Huang X(1), Han X, Uyunbilig B, Zhang M, Duo S, Zuo Y, Zhao Y, Yun T, Tai D, Wang
C, Li J, Li X, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University , Hohhot, China .

The trophoblast (TR) is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis
and play a pivotal role in the development of the placenta. We used a dual
inhibitor system (PD0325901 and CHIR99021) with mixed feeders to successfully
obtain bovine trophoblast stem-like (bTS) cells, which were similar in phenotype 
to mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). The bTS cells that were generated using
this system continually proliferated, displayed a normal diploid karyotype, and
had no signs of altered morphology or differentiation even after 150 passages.
These cells exhibited alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and expressed
pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, SSEA-1, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and
TRA-1-81, and TR lineage markers such as CDX2, as determined by both
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Additionally, these cells generated dome-like structures, formed teratomas when
injected into NOD-SCID mice, and differentiated into placenta TR cells in vitro. 
The microarray analysis of bTS cells showed high expression levels of many TR
markers, such as TEAD4, EOMES, GATA3, ETS2, TFAP2A, ELF5, SMARCA4 (BRG1), CDH3,
MASH2, HSD17B1, CYP11A1, PPARG, ID2, GCM1, HAND1, TDK, PAG, IFN-t, and THAP11.
The expression of many pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and GDF3,
was lower in bTS cells compared with in vitro-produced blastocysts; however,
compared with bovine fetal fibroblasts, the expression of these pluripotency
markers was elevated in bTS cells. The DNA methylation status of the promoter
regions of OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 was investigated, which were significantly
higher in bTS cells (OCT4 23.90%, NANOG 74.40%, and SOX2 8.50%) compared with
blastocysts (OCT4 8.90%, NANOG 34.4%, and SOX2 3.80%). In contrast, two promoter 
regions of CDX2 were hypomethylated in bTS cells (13.80% and 3.90%) compared with
blastocysts (18.80% and 9.10%). The TSC lines that were established in this study
may be used either for basic research that is focused on peri-implantation and
placenta development or as donor cells for transgenic animal production.

PMID: 24605918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Feb 13;10(2):e1003448. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003448. 
eCollection 2014.

Mathematical model of a telomerase transcriptional regulatory network developed
by cell-based screening: analysis of inhibitor effects and telomerase expression 
mechanisms.

Bilsland AE(1), Stevenson K(1), Liu Y(1), Hoare S(1), Cairney CJ(1), Roffey J(2),
Keith WN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Cancer Research UK
Beatson Laboratories, Bearsden, Glasgow, United Kingdom. (2)Cancer Research
Technology Ltd., Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research, London, United
Kingdom.

Cancer cells depend on transcription of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT). 
Many transcription factors affect TERT, though regulation occurs in context of a 
broader network. Network effects on telomerase regulation have not been
investigated, though deeper understanding of TERT transcription requires a
systems view. However, control over individual interactions in complex networks
is not easily achievable. Mathematical modelling provides an attractive approach 
for analysis of complex systems and some models may prove useful in systems
pharmacology approaches to drug discovery. In this report, we used transfection
screening to test interactions among 14 TERT regulatory transcription factors and
their respective promoters in ovarian cancer cells. The results were used to
generate a network model of TERT transcription and to implement a dynamic Boolean
model whose steady states were analysed. Modelled effects of signal transduction 
inhibitors successfully predicted TERT repression by Src-family inhibitor SU6656 
and lack of repression by ERK inhibitor FR180204, results confirmed by RT-QPCR
analysis of endogenous TERT expression in treated cells. Modelled effects of GSK3
inhibitor 6-bromoindirubin-3'-oxime (BIO) predicted unstable TERT repression
dependent on noise and expression of JUN, corresponding with observations from a 
previous study. MYC expression is critical in TERT activation in the model,
consistent with its well known function in endogenous TERT regulation. Loss of
MYC caused complete TERT suppression in our model, substantially rescued only by 
co-suppression of AR. Interestingly expression was easily rescued under modelled 
Ets-factor gain of function, as occurs in TERT promoter mutation. RNAi targeting 
AR, JUN, MXD1, SP3, or TP53, showed that AR suppression does rescue endogenous
TERT expression following MYC knockdown in these cells and SP3 or TP53 siRNA also
cause partial recovery. The model therefore successfully predicted several
aspects of TERT regulation including previously unknown mechanisms. An
extrapolation suggests that a dominant stimulatory system may programme TERT for 
transcriptional stability.

PMCID: PMC3923661
PMID: 24550717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 14;289(7):4316-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.522730. Epub 2013 
Dec 20.

The role of Ets2 transcription factor in the induction of microRNA-155 (miR-155) 
by lipopolysaccharide and its targeting by interleukin-10.

Quinn SR(1), Mangan NE, Caffrey BE, Gantier MP, Williams BR, Hertzog PJ, McCoy
CE, O'Neill LA.

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences
Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.

MicroRNA-155 (miR-155) is highly expressed in many cancers such as B cell
lymphomas and myeloid leukemia and inflammatory disorders such as rheumatoid
arthritis, atopic dermatitis, and multiple sclerosis. The role of miR-155 as both
a promoter of inflammation and an oncogenic agent provides a clear need for
miR-155 itself to be stringently regulated. We therefore investigated the
transcriptional regulation of miR-155 in response to the respective pro- and
anti-inflammatory mediators LPS and IL-10. Bioinformatic analysis revealed Ets
binding sites on the miR-155 promoter, and we found that Ets2 is critical for
miR-155 induction by LPS. Truncation and mutational analysis of the miR-155
promoter confirmed the role of the Ets2 binding site proximal to the
transcription start site for LPS responsiveness. We observed increased binding of
Ets2 to the miR-155 promoter and Ets2 deficient mice displayed decreased
induction of miR-155 in response to LPS. IL-10 inhibited the induction of Ets2
mRNA and protein by LPS, thereby decreasing Ets2 function on the pri-155
promoter. We have thus identified Ets2 as a key novel regulator in both the
positive and negative control of miR-155 in the inflammatory response.

PMCID: PMC3924294
PMID: 24362029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 27;8(11):e80427. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080427.
eCollection 2013.

Transcriptional regulation of two conceptus interferon tau genes expressed in
Japanese black cattle during peri-implantation period.

Sakurai T(1), Nakagawa S(2), Kim MS(1), Bai H(1), Bai R(1), Li J(3), Min KS(4),
Ideta A(5), Aoyagi Y(5), Imakawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular Life 
Science, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Animal Resource
Center, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Animal Biotechnology, Hankyong National University,
Kyonggi-do, Korea. (5)Zen-Noh ET Center, Hokkaido, Japan.

Interferon tau (IFNT), produced by the mononuclear trophectoderm, signals the
process of maternal recognition of pregnancy in ruminants. However, its
expression in vivo and its transcriptional regulation are not yet well
characterized. Objectives of this study were to determine conceptus IFNT gene
isoforms expressed in the bovine uterus and to identify differences in promoter
sequences of IFNT genes that differ in their expression. RNA-seq data analysis of
bovine conceptuses on days 17, 20, and 22 (day 0 <U+200A>=<U+200A> day of estrus) detected the 
expression of two IFNT transcripts, IFNT1 and IFNTc1, which were indeed
classified into the IFNT gene clade. RNA-seq and quantitative RT-PCR analyses
also revealed that the expression levels of both IFNT mRNAs were highest on day
17, and then decreased on days 20 and 22. Bovine ear-derived fibroblast (EF)
cells, a model system commonly used for bovine IFNT gene transcription study in
this laboratory, were cotransfected with luciferase reporter constructs carrying 
upstream (positions -637 to +51) regions of IFNT1 or IFNTc1 gene and various
transcription factor expression plasmids including CDX2, AP-1 (Jun) and ETS2.
CDX2, either alone or with the other transcription factors, markedly increased
luciferase activity. The upstream regions of IFNT1 and IFNTc1 loci were then
serially deleted or point-mutated at potential CDX-, AP-1-, and ETS-binding
sites. Compared to the wild-type constructs, deletion or mutation at CDX2 or ETS2
binding sites similarly reduced the luciferase activities of IFNT1- or
IFNTc1-promoter constructs. However, with the AP-1 site mutated construct, IFNT1-
and IFNTc1-reporters behaved differently. These results suggest that two forms of
bovine conceptus IFNT genes are expressed in utero and their transcriptional
regulations differ.

PMCID: PMC3857836
PMID: 24348910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;34(3):522-32. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00612-13. Epub 2013 Nov
25.

Transcription factor Ets1, but not the closely related factor Ets2, inhibits
antibody-secreting cell differentiation.

John S(1), Russell L, Chin SS, Luo W, Oshima R, Garrett-Sinha LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Developmental Genetics Focus Group, Center of
Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, State University of New York at
Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.

B cell differentiation into antibody-secreting cells (ASCs) is a tightly
regulated process under the control of multiple transcription factors. One such
transcription factor, Ets1, blocks the transition of B cells to ASCs via two
separate activities: (i) stimulating the expression of target genes that promote 
B cell identity and (ii) interfering with the functional activity of the
transcription factor Blimp1. Ets1 is a member of a multigene family, several
members of which are expressed within the B cell lineage, including the closely
related protein Ets2. In this report, we demonstrate that Ets1, but not Ets2, can
block ASC formation despite the fact that Ets1 and Ets2 bind to apparently
identical DNA sequence motifs and are thought to regulate overlapping sets of
target genes. The DNA binding domain of Ets1 is required, but not sufficient by
itself, to block ASC formation. In addition, less conserved regions within the N 
terminus of Ets1 play an important role in inhibiting B cell differentiation.
Differences between the N termini of Ets1 and Ets2, rather than differences in
the DNA binding domains, determine whether the proteins are capable of blocking
ASC formation or not.

PMCID: PMC3911503
PMID: 24277931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):19525-30. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1306814110. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

CDK10/cyclin M is a protein kinase that controls ETS2 degradation and is
deficient in STAR syndrome.

Guen VJ(1), Gamble C, Flajolet M, Unger S, Thollet A, Ferandin Y, Superti-Furga
A, Cohen PA, Meijer L, Colas P.

Author information: 
(1)P2I2 Group, Protein Phosphorylation and Human Disease Unit, Station
Biologique, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Unité de Service
et de Recherche USR3151, 29680 Roscoff, France.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) regulate a variety of fundamental cellular
processes. CDK10 stands out as one of the last orphan CDKs for which no
activating cyclin has been identified and no kinase activity revealed. Previous
work has shown that CDK10 silencing increases ETS2 (v-ets erythroblastosis virus 
E26 oncogene homolog 2)-driven activation of the MAPK pathway, which confers
tamoxifen resistance to breast cancer cells. The precise mechanisms by which
CDK10 modulates ETS2 activity, and more generally the functions of CDK10, remain 
elusive. Here we demonstrate that CDK10 is a cyclin-dependent kinase by
identifying cyclin M as an activating cyclin. Cyclin M, an orphan cyclin, is the 
product of FAM58A, whose mutations cause STAR syndrome, a human developmental
anomaly whose features include toe syndactyly, telecanthus, and anogenital and
renal malformations. We show that STAR syndrome-associated cyclin M mutants are
unable to interact with CDK10. Cyclin M silencing phenocopies CDK10 silencing in 
increasing c-Raf and in conferring tamoxifen resistance to breast cancer cells.
CDK10/cyclin M phosphorylates ETS2 in vitro, and in cells it positively controls 
ETS2 degradation by the proteasome. ETS2 protein levels are increased in cells
derived from a STAR patient, and this increase is attributable to decreased
cyclin M levels. Altogether, our results reveal an additional regulatory
mechanism for ETS2, which plays key roles in cancer and development. They also
shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying STAR syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3845122
PMID: 24218572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 22;110(43):17426-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1310522110. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

TERT promoter mutations in bladder cancer affect patient survival and disease
recurrence through modification by a common polymorphism.

Rachakonda PS(1), Hosen I, de Verdier PJ, Fallah M, Heidenreich B, Ryk C, Wiklund
NP, Steineck G, Schadendorf D, Hemminki K, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter, an important element of
telomerase expression, has emerged as a target of cancer-specific mutations.
Originally described in melanoma, the mutations in TERT promoter have been shown 
to be common in certain other tumor types that include glioblastoma,
hepatocellular carcinoma, and bladder cancer. To fully define the occurrence and 
effect of the TERT promoter mutations, we investigated tumors from a
well-characterized series of 327 patients with urothelial cell carcinoma of
bladder. The somatic mutations, mainly at positions -124 and -146 bp from ATG
start site that create binding motifs for E-twenty six/ternary complex factors
(Ets/TCF), affected 65.4% of the tumors, with even distribution across different 
stages and grades. Our data showed that a common polymorphism rs2853669, within a
preexisting Ets2 binding site in the TERT promoter, acts as a modifier of the
effect of the mutations on survival and tumor recurrence. The patients with the
mutations showed poor survival in the absence [hazard ratio (HR) 2.19, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.02-4.70] but not in the presence (HR 0.42, 95% CI
0.18-1.01) of the variant allele of the polymorphism. The mutations in the
absence of the variant allele were highly associated with the disease recurrence 
in patients with Tis, Ta, and T1 tumors (HR 1.85, 95% CI 1.11-3.08). The TERT
promoter mutations are the most common somatic lesions in bladder cancer with
clinical implications. The association of the mutations with patient survival and
disease recurrence, subject to modification by a common polymorphism, can be a
unique putative marker with individualized prognostic potential.

PMCID: PMC3808633
PMID: 24101484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013 Sep;17(18):2504-11.

Regulation different network analysis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
osteoarthritis (OA).

Yin F(1), Luo SL, Yuan F, Peng Z, Zhou W, Fang L, Cai JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University, Pudong
New district, Shanghai, China. dr_jfc@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease
characterized by chronic synovitis that progresses to destruction of cartilage
and bone.
AIM: The purpose of this study was to employ microarray analysis combined with
bioinformatics techniques to evaluate differential gene expression in BM-derived 
mononuclear cells obtained from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or
osteoarthritis (OA) to study the pathogenesis of this disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gene expression profiles in BM-derived mononuclear cells
from 9 RA and 10 OA patients were obtained from GEO.
RESULTS: The bone marrow (BM) mononuclear cells showed 2581 up-regulated and 649 
down-regulated genes in RA patients relative to the OA group: Our analysis
indicated that several differentially expressed genes might play crucial roles in
RA development, including SP1, RARA, ETS1, ETS2, FOS and ESR1.
CONCLUSIONS: Further analysis predicted these genes might be involved in RA
through cancer related pathways and immunity related pathways. Furthermore, these
genes may serve as novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of RA.

PMID: 24089231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 16;8(8):e71533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071533. eCollection
2013.

Ets2 in tumor fibroblasts promotes angiogenesis in breast cancer.

Wallace JA(1), Li F, Balakrishnan S, Cantemir-Stone CZ, Pecot T, Martin C,
Kladney RD, Sharma SM, Trimboli AJ, Fernandez SA, Yu L, Rosol TJ, Stromberg PC,
Lesurf R, Hallett M, Park M, Leone G, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Tumor fibroblasts are active partners in tumor progression, but the genes and
pathways that mediate this collaboration are ill-defined. Previous work
demonstrates that Ets2 function in stromal cells significantly contributes to
breast tumor progression. Conditional mouse models were used to study the
function of Ets2 in both mammary stromal fibroblasts and epithelial cells.
Conditional inactivation of Ets2 in stromal fibroblasts in PyMT and ErbB2 driven 
tumors significantly reduced tumor growth, however deletion of Ets2 in epithelial
cells in the PyMT model had no significant effect. Analysis of gene expression in
fibroblasts revealed a tumor- and Ets2-dependent gene signature that was enriched
in genes important for ECM remodeling, cell migration, and angiogenesis in both
PyMT and ErbB2 driven-tumors. Consistent with these results, PyMT and ErbB2
tumors lacking Ets2 in fibroblasts had fewer functional blood vessels, and Ets2
in fibroblasts elicited changes in gene expression in tumor endothelial cells
consistent with this phenotype. An in vivo angiogenesis assay revealed the
ability of Ets2 in fibroblasts to promote blood vessel formation in the absence
of tumor cells. Importantly, the Ets2-dependent gene expression signatures from
both mouse models were able to distinguish human breast tumor stroma from normal 
stroma, and correlated with patient outcomes in two whole tumor breast cancer
data sets. The data reveals a key function for Ets2 in tumor fibroblasts in
signaling to endothelial cells to promote tumor angiogenesis. The results
highlight the collaborative networks that orchestrate communication between
stromal cells and tumor cells, and suggest that targeting tumor fibroblasts may
be an effective strategy for developing novel anti-angiogenic therapies.

PMCID: PMC3745457
PMID: 23977064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jul;123(7):3154-65. doi: 10.1172/JCI65566. Epub 2013 Jun 24.

HGF-MET signals via the MLL-ETS2 complex in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Takeda S(1), Liu H, Sasagawa S, Dong Y, Trainor PA, Cheng EH, Hsieh JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Jul;123(7):2780-3.

HGF signals through its cognate receptor, MET, to orchestrate diverse biological 
processes, including cell proliferation, cell fate specification, organogenesis, 
and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL), an
epigenetic regulator, plays critical roles in cell fate, stem cell, and cell
cycle decisions. Here, we describe a role for MLL in the HGF-MET signaling
pathway. We found a shared phenotype among Mll(-/-), Hgf(-/-), and Met(-/-) mice 
with common cranial nerve XII (CNXII) outgrowth and myoblast migration defects.
Phenotypic analysis demonstrated that MLL was required for HGF-induced invasion
and metastatic growth of hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines. HGF-MET signaling
resulted in the accumulation of ETS2, which interacted with MLL to transactivate 
MMP1 and MMP3. ChIP assays demonstrated that activation of the HGF-MET pathway
resulted in increased occupancy of the MLL-ETS2 complex on MMP1 and MMP3
promoters, where MLL trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4), activating
transcription. Our results present an epigenetic link between MLL and the HGF-MET
signaling pathway, which may suggest new strategies for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3696564
PMID: 23934123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jul;123(7):2780-3. doi: 10.1172/JCI70235. Epub 2013 Jun 24.

Linking MLL and the HGF-MET signaling pathway in liver cancer.

Marquardt JU(1), Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Jul;123(7):3154-65.

Mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL; also known as myeloid/lymphoid), the human homolog
of trithorax in Drosophila, is a transcriptional coactivator that plays an
essential role during early development and hematopoiesis. Furthermore, MLL is
critically involved in the epigenetic regulation of cell cycle, senescence, DNA
damage, and stem cell self-renewal. Chromosomal aberrations of MLL in acute
leukemias are well documented, but the role of this gene in solid malignancies
remains unclear. In this issue of the JCI, Takeda et al. describe a novel
epigenetic link between MLL and the HGF-MET signaling pathway conferring invasive
and metastatic properties to hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

PMCID: PMC3696572
PMID: 23934122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 27;288(39):27927-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.420265. Epub
2013 Jul 31.

Knockdown of cyclin-dependent kinase 10 (cdk10) gene impairs neural progenitor
survival via modulation of raf1a gene expression.

Yeh CW(1), Kao SH, Cheng YC, Hsu LS.

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung City 40201, Taiwan.

In this study, we used zebrafish as an animal model to elucidate the
developmental function of cdk10 in vertebrates. In situ hybridization analyses
demonstrated that cdk10 is expressed throughout development with a relative
enrichment in the brain in the late stages. Similar to its mammalian ortholog,
cdk10 can interact with the transcription factor ETS2 and exhibit kinase activity
by phosphorylating histone H1. Morpholino-based loss of cdk10 expression caused
apoptosis in sox2-positive cells and decreased the expression of subsequent
neuronal markers. Acetylated tubulin staining revealed a significant reduction in
the number of Rohon-Beard sensory neurons in cdk10 morphants. This result is
similar to that demonstrated by decreased islet2 expression in the dorsal
regions. Moreover, cdk10 morphants exhibited a marked loss of huC-positive
neurons in the telencephalon and throughout the spinal cord axis. The population 
of retinal ganglion cells was also diminished in cdk10 morphants. These
phenotypes were rescued by co-injection of cdk10 mRNA. Interestingly, the
knockdown of cdk10 significantly elevated raf1a mRNA expression. Meanwhile, an
MEK inhibitor (U0126) recovered sox2 and ngn1 transcript levels in cdk10
morphants. Our findings provide the first functional characterization of cdk10 in
vertebrate development and reveal its critical function in neurogenesis by
modulation of raf1a expression.

PMCID: PMC3784707
PMID: 23902762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 Oct;80(10):826-39. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22212. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

CDX2 regulates multiple trophoblast genes in bovine trophectoderm CT-1 cells.

Schiffmacher AT(1), Keefer CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland.

The bovine trophectoderm (TE) undergoes a dramatic morphogenetic transition prior
to uterine endometrial attachment. Many studies have documented
trophoblast-specific gene expression profiles at various pre-attachment stages,
yet genetic interactions within the transitioning TE gene regulatory network are 
not well characterized. During bovine embryogenesis, transcription factors OCT4
and CDX2 are co-expressed during early trophoblast elongation. In this study, the
bovine trophectoderm-derived CT-1 cell line was utilized as a genetic model to
examine the roles of CDX2 and OCT4 within the bovine trophoblast gene regulatory 
network. An RT-PCR screen for TE-lineage transcription factors identified
expression of CDX2, ERRB, ID2, SOX15, ELF5, HAND1, and ASCL2. CT-1 cells also
express a nuclear-localized, 360 amino acid OCT4 ortholog of the
pluripotency-specific human OCT4A. To delineate the roles of CDX2 and OCT4 within
the CT-1 gene network, CDX2 and OCT4 levels were manipulated via overexpression
and siRNA-mediated knockdown. An increase in CDX2 negatively regulated OCT4
expression, but increased expression of IFNT, HAND1, ASCL2, SOX15, and ELF5. A
reduction of CDX2 levels exhibited a reciprocal effect, resulting in decreased
expression of IFNT, HAND1, ASCL2, and SOX15. Both overexpression and knockdown of
CDX2 increased ETS2 transcription. In contrast to CDX2, manipulation of OCT4
levels only revealed a positive autoregulatory mechanism and upregulation of
ASCL2. Together, these results suggest that CDX2 is a core regulator of multiple 
trophoblast genes within CT-1 cells.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23836438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Development. 2013 Aug;140(15):3095-106. doi: 10.1242/dev.093716. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

ERF and ETV3L are retinoic acid-inducible repressors required for primary
neurogenesis.

Janesick A(1), Abbey R, Chung C, Liu S, Taketani M, Blumberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, 2011 Biological Sciences 3,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA.

Cells in the developing neural tissue demonstrate an exquisite balance between
proliferation and differentiation. Retinoic acid (RA) is required for neuronal
differentiation by promoting expression of proneural and neurogenic genes. We
show that RA acts early in the neurogenic pathway by inhibiting expression of
neural progenitor markers Geminin and Foxd4l1, thereby promoting differentiation.
Our screen for RA target genes in early Xenopus development identified Ets2
Repressor Factor (Erf) and the closely related ETS repressors Etv3 and Etv3-like 
(Etv3l). Erf and Etv3l are RA responsive and inhibit the action of ETS genes
downstream of FGF signaling, placing them at the intersection of RA and growth
factor signaling. We hypothesized that RA regulates primary neurogenesis by
inducing Erf and Etv3l to antagonize proliferative signals. Loss-of-function
analysis showed that Erf and Etv3l are required to inhibit proliferation of
neural progenitors to allow differentiation, whereas overexpression of Erf led to
an increase in the number of primary neurons. Therefore, these RA-induced ETS
repressors are key components of the proliferation-differentiation switch during 
primary neurogenesis in vivo.

PMID: 23824578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Dec;70(23):4631-44. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1411-4. Epub 
2013 Jun 30.

MiR-126 promotes coxsackievirus replication by mediating cross-talk of ERK1/2 and
Wnt/ß-catenin signal pathways.

Ye X(1), Hemida MG, Qiu Y, Hanson PJ, Zhang HM, Yang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Institute for Heart and
Lung Health, St. Paul's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Rm 166, 1081
Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC, V6Z1Y6, Canada.

Coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) is one of the most prevalent causes of viral myocarditis
and is associated with many other pathological conditions. CVB3 replication
relies on host cellular machineries and causes direct damage to host cells.
MicroRNAs have been found to regulate viral infections but their roles in CVB3
infection are still poorly understood. Here we describe a novel mechanism by
which miR-126 regulates two signal pathways essential for CVB3 replication. We
found that CVB3-induced ERK1/2 activation triggered the phosphorylation of ETS-1 
and ETS-2 transcription factors, which induced miR-126 upregulation. By using
both microRNA mimics and inhibitors, we proved that the upregulated miR-126
suppressed sprouty-related, EVH1 domain containing 1 (SPRED1) and in turn
enhanced ERK1/2 activation. This positive feedback loop of ERK1/2-miR-126-ERK1/2 
promoted CVB3 replication. Meanwhile, miR-126 expression stimulated GSK-3ß
activity and induced degradation of ß-catenin through suppressing LRP6 and WRCH1,
two newly identified targets in the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, which sensitized the
cells to virus-induced cell death and increased viral progeny release to initiate
new infections. Our results demonstrate that upregulated miR-126 upon CVB3
infection targets SPRED1, LRP6, and WRCH1 genes, mediating cross-talk between
ERK1/2 and Wnt/ß-catenin pathways, and thus promoting viral replication and
contributes to the viral cytopathogenicity.

PMID: 23811937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biol Open. 2013 Apr 16;2(6):569-79. doi: 10.1242/bio.20134382. Print 2013 Jun 15.

The Rho-GEF Trio regulates a novel pro-inflammatory pathway through the
transcription factor Ets2.

Van Rijssel J(1), Timmerman I, Van Alphen FP, Hoogenboezem M, Korchynskyi O,
Geerts D, Geissler J, Reedquist KA, Niessen HW, Van Buul JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner
Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, 1066CX 
, The Netherlands.

Inflammation is characterized by endothelium that highly expresses numerous
adhesion molecules to trigger leukocyte extravasation. Central to this event is
increased gene transcription. Small Rho-GTPases not only control the actin
cytoskeleton, but are also implicated in gene regulation. However, in
inflammation, it is not clear how this is regulated. Here, we show that the
guanine-nucleotide exchange factor Trio expression is increased upon inflammatory
stimuli in endothelium. Additionally, increased Trio expression was found in the 
vessel wall of rheumatoid arthritis patients. Trio silencing impaired VCAM-1
expression. Finally, we excluded that Trio-controlled VCAM-1 expression used the 
classical NF<U+03BA>B or MAP-kinase pathways, but rather acts on the transcriptional
level by increasing phosphorylation and nuclear translocalization of Ets2. These 
data implicate Trio in regulating inflammation and provide novel targets for
therapeutic purposes to treat inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.

PMCID: PMC3683159
PMID: 23789107  [PubMed]


51. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 1;19(13):3383-95. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0341.
Epub 2013 May 9.

ETS2 mediated tumor suppressive function and MET oncogene inhibition in human
non-small cell lung cancer.

Kabbout M(1), Garcia MM, Fujimoto J, Liu DD, Woods D, Chow CW, Mendoza G, Momin
AA, James BP, Solis L, Behrens C, Lee JJ, Wistuba II, Kadara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX77030, USA.

PURPOSE: The ETS2 transcription factor is an evolutionarily conserved gene that
is deregulated in cancer. We analyzed the transcriptome of lung adenocarcinomas
and normal lung tissue by expression profiling and found that ETS2 was
significantly downregulated in adenocarcinomas. In this study, we probed the yet 
unknown functional role of ETS2 in lung cancer pathogenesis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Lung adenocarcinomas (n = 80) and normal lung tissues (n =
30) were profiled using the Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST platform.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis was conducted to determine ETS2 protein
expression in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) histologic tissue specimens (n =
201). Patient clinical outcome, based on ETS2 IHC expression, was statistically
assessed using the log-rank and Kaplan-Meier tests. RNA interference and
overexpression strategies were used to assess the effects of ETS2 expression on
the transcriptome and on various malignant phenotypes.
RESULTS: ETS2 expression was significantly reduced in lung adenocarcinomas
compared with normal lung (P < 0.001). Low ETS2 IHC expression was a significant 
predictor of shorter time to recurrence in NSCLC (P = 0.009, HR = 1.89) and
adenocarcinoma (P = 0.03, HR = 1.86). Moreover, ETS2 was found to significantly
inhibit lung cancer cell growth, migration, and invasion (P < 0.05), and
microarray and pathways analysis revealed significant (P < 0.001) activation of
the HGF pathway following ETS2 knockdown. In addition, ETS2 was found to suppress
MET phosphorylation and knockdown of MET expression significantly attenuated (P <
0.05) cell invasion mediated by ETS2-specific siRNA. Furthermore, knockdown of
ETS2 augmented HGF-induced MET phosphorylation, cell migration, and invasion.
CONCLUSION(S): Our findings point to a tumor suppressor role for ETS2 in human
NSCLC pathogenesis through inhibition of the MET proto-oncogene.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3846434
PMID: 23659968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2013 May;26(5):638-45. doi: 10.5713/ajas.2012.12462.

Presence of Transcription Factor OCT4 Limits Interferon-tau Expression during the
Pre-attachment Period in Sheep.

Kim MS(1), Sakurai T(1), Bai H(1), Bai R(1), Sato D(1), Nagaoka K(1), Chang
KT(1), Godkin JD(1), Min KS(1), Imakawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 113-8657, Japan.

Interferon-tau (IFNT) is thought to be the conceptus protein that signals
maternal recognition of pregnancy in ruminants. We and others have observed that 
OCT4 expression persists in the trophectoderm of ruminants; thus, both CDX2 and
OCT4 coexist during the early stages of conceptus development. The aim of this
study was to examine the effect of CDX2 and OCT4 on IFNT gene transcription when 
evaluated with other transcription factors. Human choriocarcinoma JEG-3 cells
were cotransfected with an ovine IFNT (-654-bp)-luciferase reporter
(-654-IFNT-Luc) construct and several transcription factor expression plasmids.
Cotransfection of the reporter construct with Cdx2, Ets2 and Jun increased
transcription of -654-IFNT-Luc by about 12-fold compared with transfection of the
construct alone. When cells were initially transfected with Oct4 (0 h) followed
by transfection with Cdx2, Ets2 and/or Jun 24 h later, the expression of
-654-IFNT-Luc was reduced to control levels. OCT4 also inhibited the stimulatory 
activity of CDX2 alone, but not when CDX2 was combined with JUN and/or ETS2.
Thus, when combined with the other transcription factors, OCT4 exhibited little
inhibitory activity towards CDX2. An inhibitor of the transcriptional coactivator
CREB binding protein (CREBBP), 12S E1A, reduced CDX2/ETS2/JUN stimulated
-654-IFNT-Luc expression by about 40%, indicating that the formation of an
appropriate transcription factor complex is required for maximum expression. In
conclusion, the presence of OCT4 may initially minimize IFNT expression; however,
as elongation proceeds, the increasing expression of CDX2 and formation of the
transcription complex leads to greatly increased IFNT expression, resulting in
pregnancy establishment in ruminants.

PMCID: PMC4093334
PMID: 25049833  [PubMed]


53. Transcription. 2013 May-Jun;4(3):92-6. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Transient Mesp1 expression: a driver of cardiac cell fate determination.

Liu Y(1), Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry; University of Houston; Houston, TX
USA.

Mesp1 sits on the tip of the cardiac regulatory hierarchy, recent evidences
support that it is regulated by stem cell factor Oct4, early gastrulation signal 
canonical Wnts and a couple of T-box factors, T and Eomes. With other
transcription factors, Mesp1 programs/reprograms human cells toward
cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC4042590
PMID: 23584093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1658. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2646.

Ets2-dependent trophoblast signalling is required for gastrulation progression
after primitive streak initiation.

Polydorou C(1), Georgiades P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, University Campus, PO
Box 20537, Nicosia 1678, Cyprus.

Although extraembryonic ectoderm trophoblast signals the embryo for primitive
streak initiation, a prerequisite for gastrulation, it is unknown whether it also
signals for the progression of gastrulation after primitive streak initiation.
Here, using Ets2-/- mice, we show that trophoblast signalling is also required in
vivo for primitive streak elongation, completion of intraembryonic mesoderm
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and the development of anterior primitive
streak derivatives such as the node. We show that Ets2-dependent trophoblast
signalling is required for the maintenance of high levels of Nodal and Wnt3
expression in the epiblast and for the induction of Snail expression in the
primitive streak, between embryonic day 6.3 and 6.7. Within extraembryonic
ectoderm trophoblast, Ets2 maintains the expression of the transcription factors 
Elf5, Cdx2 and Eomes, and that of the signalling molecule Bmp4. We propose a
model that provides a genetic explanation as to how Ets2 in trophoblast mediates 
the progression of gastrulation within the epiblast.

PMID: 23552073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;45(7):1174-85. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.03.015. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Hepatitis B virus core protein enhances human telomerase reverse transcriptase
expression and hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation in a c-Ets2-dependent 
manner.

Gai X(1), Zhao P, Pan Y, Shan H, Yue X, Du J, Zhang Z, Liu P, Ma H, Guo M, Yang
X, Sun W, Gao L, Ma C, Liang X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Experimental Teratology of Ministry of Education and
Institute of Immunology, Shandong University School of Medicine, 44 Wenhua Xi
Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, PR China.

Hepatitis B virus core protein can regulate viral replication and host gene
expression. However, it is unclear whether and how hepatitis B virus core protein
regulates hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation. Induction of hepatitis B
virus core protein over-expression significantly enhanced the proliferation of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells, while knockdown of hepatitis B virus core protein
expression inhibited the proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Altered
hepatitis B virus core protein expression significantly changed the growth of
implanted hepatocellular carcinoma in vivo. Microarray analysis indicated that
hepatitis B virus core protein up-regulated human telomerase reverse
transcriptase expression, which was further validated by over-expression and
knockdown assays in vitro. Furthermore, knockdown of human telomerase reverse
transcriptase expression mitigated the hepatitis B virus core protein-enhanced
hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation and clone formation in vitro.
Luciferase assays indicated that hepatitis B virus core protein enhanced the
promoter activity of human telomerase reverse transcriptase, which was dependent 
on the binding of c-Ets2 to the promoter region between -192 and -187. In
addition, hepatitis B virus core protein enhanced human telomerase reverse
transcriptase transcription in HepG2 cells, but not in the c-Ets2-silencing HepG2
cells. Moreover, hepatitis B virus core protein promoted c-Ets2 nuclear
translocation. Finally, significantly higher levels of human telomerase reverse
transcriptase expression and nuclear c-Ets2 accumulation were detected in
hepatitis B virus core protein-positive hepatocellular carcinoma samples. Our
findings demonstrate that hepatitis B virus core protein promotes hepatocellular 
carcinoma cell proliferation by up-regulating the c-Ets2-dependent expression of 
human telomerase reverse transcriptase.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23542016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 9;110(15):6079-84. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1303302110. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Oncogenic RAS pathway activation promotes resistance to anti-VEGF therapy through
G-CSF-induced neutrophil recruitment.

Phan VT(1), Wu X, Cheng JH, Sheng RX, Chung AS, Zhuang G, Tran C, Song Q,
Kowanetz M, Sambrone A, Tan M, Meng YG, Jackson EL, Peale FV, Junttila MR,
Ferrara N.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) promotes mobilization of
CD11b(+)Gr1(+) myeloid cells and has been implicated in resistance to anti-VEGF
therapy in mouse models. High G-CSF production has been associated with a poor
prognosis in cancer patients. Here we show that activation of the RAS/MEK/ERK
pathway regulates G-CSF expression through the Ets transcription factor. Several 
growth factors induced G-CSF expression by a MEK-dependent mechanism. Inhibition 
of G-CSF release with a MEK inhibitor markedly reduced G-CSF production in vitro 
and synergized with anti-VEGF antibodies to reduce CD11b(+)Ly6G(+) neutrophil
mobilization and tumor growth and led to increased survival in animal models of
cancer, including a genetically engineered mouse model of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Analysis of biopsies from pancreatic cancer patients revealed
increased phospho-MEK, G-CSF, and Ets expression and enhanced neutrophil
recruitment compared with normal pancreata. These results provide insights into
G-CSF regulation and on the mechanism of action of MEK inhibitors and point to
unique anticancer strategies.

PMCID: PMC3625253
PMID: 23530240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jun;34(6):1273-80. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt061. Epub 2013 Feb
15.

The rs391957 variant cis-regulating oncogene GRP78 expression contributes to the 
risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhu X(1), Zhang J, Fan W, Wang F, Yao H, Wang Z, Hou S, Tian Y, Fu W, Xie D, Zhu 
W, Long J, Wu L, Zheng X, Kung H, Zhou K, Lin MC, Luo H, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Diagnosis, Guangdong
Medical College, Dongguan, China.

Glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) is one of the most important responders to
disease-related stress. We assessed the association of the promoter polymorphisms
of GRP78 with risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and GRP78 expression in a
Chinese population. We examined 1007 patients undergoing diagnostic HCC and 810
unrelated healthy controls. Mechanisms by which the GRP78 promoter polymorphism
modulates HCC risk and GRP78 levels were analyzed. The promoter haplotype and
diplotype carrying rs391957 (-415bp) allele G and genotype GG was strongly
associated with HCC risk. Luciferase reporter assays indicated that the promoter 
carrying rs391957 allele G (haplotype GCCd) showed increased activity in HepG2
cells and Hela cells. rs391957 was also shown to increase the affinity of the
transcriptional activator Ets-2, the resistance to apoptosis, as well as cell
instability in stressful microenvironment. Furthermore, compared with allele A,
rs391957 allele G was associated with higher levels of GRP78 mRNA and protein in 
HCC tissues. These findings provided new insights into the pathogenesis of HCC
and an unexpected effect of the interaction between rs391957 and Ets-2 on
hepatocarcinogenesis, and especially supported the hypothesis that stress-related
and evolutionarily conserved genetic variant(s) influencing transcriptional
regulation could predict susceptibilities.

PMID: 23416888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Jan 23;14:12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-12.

Potential contribution of SIM2 and ETS2 functional polymorphisms in Down syndrome
associated malignancies.

Chatterjee A(1), Dutta S, Mukherjee S, Mukherjee N, Dutta A, Mukherjee A, Sinha
S, Panda CK, Chaudhuri K, Roy AL, Mukhopadhyay K.

Author information: 
(1)Manovikas Biomedical Research and Diagnostic Centre, MRIH, Kolkata, India.

BACKGROUND: Proper expression and functioning of transcription factors (TFs) are 
essential for regulation of different traits and thus could be crucial for the
development of complex diseases. Subjects with Down syndrome (DS) have a higher
incidence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) while solid tumors, like breast
cancer (BC) and oral cancer (OC), show rare incidences. Triplication of the human
chromosome 21 in DS is associated with altered genetic dosage of different TFs.
V-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 (ETS2) and Single Minded 2
(SIM2) are two such TFs that regulate several downstream genes involved in
developmental and neurological pathways. Here we studied functional genetic
polymorphisms (fSNP) in ETS2 and SIM2 encoding genes in a group of patients and
control subjects to better understand association of these variants with DS
phenotypes.
METHODS: We employed an in silico approach to identify potential target pathways 
of ETS2 and SIM2. fSNPs in genes encoding for these two TFs were identified using
available databases. Selected sites were genotyped in individuals with DS, their 
parents, ALL, BC, OC as well as ethnically matched control individuals. We
further analyzed these data by population-based statistical methods.
RESULTS: Allelic/genotypic association analysis showed significant (P < 0.03)
differences of rs2070530, rs1051476, rs11254, rs711 for DS subjects compared to
control. rs711 also exhibited significantly different genotypic distribution
pattern in parents of DS probands (P < 0.02) and BC patients (P < 0.02).
Interaction analysis revealed independent main effect of rs711 in all the groups,
while rs11254 exhibited independent main effect in DS subjects only. High entropy
values were noticed for rs461155 in the solid tumor groups. Significant
interactive effects of rs2070531 with rs1051475, rs1051476, rs11254 were observed
in all the groups except DS.
CONCLUSIONS: We infer from the present investigation that the difference in
frequencies of fSNPs and their independent as well as interactive effects may be 
the cause for altered expression of SIM2 and ETS2 in DS and malignant groups,
which affects different downstream biological pathways. Thus, altered expression 
of SIM2 and ETS2 could be one of the reasons for variable occurrence of different
malignant conditions in DS.

PMCID: PMC3563522
PMID: 23343470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Apoptosis. 2013 Feb;18(2):121-34. doi: 10.1007/s10495-012-0785-3.

Apoptosis in Down's syndrome: lessons from studies of human and mouse models.

Rueda N(1), Flórez J, Martínez-Cué C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine University of
Cantabria, 39011 Santander, Spain.

Down syndrome (DS) is the most common chromosomal abnormality in humans. DS is
characterized by a number of phenotypes, including the development of Alzheimer's
disease-like pathology and immunological, hematological and cardiovascular
alterations. Apoptosis or programmed cell death is physiologically involved in
development and aging, as well as in numerous pathological processes. Altered
apoptosis has been proposed as a putative mechanism underlying many DS
phenotypes. Evidence from human and animal studies indicates that apoptosis does 
not have a prominent role in the disturbances found in brain development in
trisomy 21. However, alterations in apoptosis have been associated with
neurodegeneration in the aging DS brain, with impairments in general growth and
with immunological, cardiovascular and oncological alterations. Altered apoptosis
in DS is likely to be the result of the interplay between several chromosome 21
(Hsa21) and non-Hsa21 genes. The interplay between these genes may affect
physiological programmed cell death either directly, by modifying the activity of
the apoptotic pathways, or indirectly, by inducing degeneration and rendering the
cell more vulnerable to apoptosis-inducing factors.

PMID: 23224708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Signal Transduct. 2012;2012:204236. doi: 10.1155/2012/204236. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Estrogen Regulates MAPK-Related Genes through Genomic and Nongenomic Interactions
between IGF-I Receptor Tyrosine Kinase and Estrogen Receptor-Alpha Signaling
Pathways in Human Uterine Leiomyoma Cells.

Yu L(1), Moore AB, Castro L, Gao X, Huynh HL, Klippel M, Flagler ND, Lu Y,
Kissling GE, Dixon D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathogenesis Group, National Toxicology Program (NTP) Laboratory,
NTP, Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Estrogen and growth factors play a major role in uterine leiomyoma (UtLM) growth 
possibly through interactions of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and estrogen
receptor-alpha (ERa) signaling. We determined the genomic and nongenomic effects 
of 17ß-estradiol (E(2)) on IGF-IR/MAPKp44/42 signaling and gene expression in
human UtLM cells with intact or silenced IGF-IR. Analysis by RT(2) Profiler
PCR-array showed genes involved in IGF-IR/MAPK signaling were upregulated in UtLM
cells by E(2) including cyclin D kinases, MAPKs, and MAPK kinases; RTK signaling 
mediator, GRB2; transcriptional factors ELK1 and E2F1; CCNB2 involved in cell
cycle progression, proliferation, and survival; and COL1A1 associated with
collagen synthesis. Silencing (si)IGF-IR attenuated the above effects and
resulted in upregulation of different genes, such as transcriptional factor ETS2;
the tyrosine kinase receptor, EGFR; and DLK1 involved in fibrosis. E(2) rapidly
activated IGF-IR/MAPKp44/42 signaling nongenomically and induced phosphorylation 
of ERa at ser118 in cells with a functional IGF-IR versus those without. E(2)
also upregulated IGF-I gene and protein expression through a prolonged genomic
event. These results suggest a pivotal role of IGF-IR and possibly other RTKs in 
mediating genomic and nongenomic hormone receptor interactions and signaling in
fibroids and provide novel genes and targets for future intervention and
prevention strategies.

PMCID: PMC3474284
PMID: 23094148  [PubMed]


61. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43789. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043789. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Genomic alterations in breast cancer patients in betel quid and non betel quid
chewers.

Kaushal M(1), Mishra AK, Sharma J, Zomawia E, Kataki A, Kapur S, Saxena S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Pathology, ICMR, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi, 
India.

Betel Quid (BQ) chewing independently contributes to oral, hepatic and esophageal
carcinomas. Strong association of breast cancer risk with BQ chewing in Northeast
Indian population has been reported where this habit is prodigal. We investigated
genomic alterations in breast cancer patients with and without BQ chewing
exposure. Twenty six BQ chewers (BQC) and 17 non BQ chewer (NBQC) breast cancer
patients from Northeast India were analyzed for genomic alterations and pathway
networks using SNP array and IPA. BQC tumors showed significantly (P<0.01) higher
total number of alterations, as compared with NBQC tumors, 48 ± 17% versus 32 ±
25 respectively. Incidence of gain in fragile sites in BQC tumors were
significantly (P<0.001) higher as compared with NBQC tumors, 34 versus 23%
respectively. Two chromosomal regions (7q33 and 21q22.13) were significantly
(p<0.05) associated with BQC tumors while two regions (19p13.3-19p12 and
20q11.22) were significantly associated with NBQC tumors. GO terms oxidoreductase
and aldo-keto reductase activity in BQC tumors in contrast to G-protein coupled
receptor protein signaling pathway and cell surface receptor linked signal
transduction in NBQC tumors were enriched in DAVID. One network "Drug Metabolism,
Molecular Transport, Nucleic Acid Metabolism" including genes AKR1B1, AKR1B10,
ETS2 etc in BQC and two networks "Molecular Transport, Nucleic Acid Metabolism,
Small Molecule Biochemistry" and "Cellular Development, Embryonic Development,
Organismal Development" including genes RPN2, EMR3, VAV1, NNAT and MUC16 etc were
seen in NBQC. Common alterations (>30%) were seen in 27 regions. Three networks
were significant in common regions with key roles of PTK2, RPN2, EMR3, VAV1,
NNAT, MUC16, MYC and YWHAZ genes. These data show that breast cancer arising by
environmental carcinogens exemplifies genetic alterations differing from those
observed in the non exposed ones. A number of genetic changes are shared in both 
tumor groups considered as crucial in breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3427153
PMID: 22937096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Protein Sci. 2012 Nov;21(11):1716-25. doi: 10.1002/pro.2151. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

The PNT domain from Drosophila pointed-P2 contains a dynamic N-terminal helix
preceded by a disordered phosphoacceptor sequence.

Lau DK(1), Okon M, McIntosh LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Pointed-P2, the Drosophila ortholog of human ETS1 and ETS2, is a transcription
factor involved in Ras/MAP kinase-regulated gene expression. In addition to a
DNA-binding ETS domain, Pointed-P2 contains a PNT (or SAM) domain that serves as 
a docking module to enhance phosphorylation of an adjacent phosphoacceptor
threonine by the ERK2 MAP kinase Rolled. Using NMR chemical shift, ¹5N
relaxation, and amide hydrogen exchange measurements, we demonstrate that the
Pointed-P2 PNT domain contains a dynamic N-terminal helix H0 appended to a core
conserved five-helix bundle diagnostic of the SAM domain fold. Neither the
secondary structure nor dynamics of the PNT domain is perturbed significantly
upon in vitro ERK2 phosphorylation of three threonine residues in a disordered
sequence immediately preceding this domain. These data thus confirm that the
Drosophila Pointed-P2 PNT domain and phosphoacceptors are highly similar to those
of the well-characterized human ETS1 transcription factor. NMR-monitored
titrations also revealed that the phosphoacceptors and helix H0, as well as
region of the core helical bundle identified previously by mutational analyses as
a kinase docking site, are selectively perturbed upon ERK2 binding by Pointed-P2.
Based on a homology model derived from the ETS1 PNT domain, helix H0 is predicted
to partially occlude the docking interface. Therefore, this dynamic helix must be
displaced to allow both docking of the kinase, as well as binding of Mae, a
Drosophila protein that negatively regulates Pointed-P2 by competing with the
kinase for its docking site.

Copyright © 2012 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3527708
PMID: 22936607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. BioData Min. 2012 Aug 29;5(1):12. doi: 10.1186/1756-0381-5-12.

Finding biomarkers in non-model species: literature mining of transcription
factors involved in bovine embryo development.

Turenne N(1), Tiys E, Ivanisenko V, Yudin N, Ignatieva E, Valour D, Degrelle SA, 
Hue I.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, SenS, UR1326, IFRIS, Champs-sur-Marne, F-77420, France.
nturenne@jouy.inra.fr.

BACKGROUND: Since processes in well-known model organisms have specific features 
different from those in Bos taurus, the organism under study, a good way to
describe gene regulation in ruminant embryos would be a species-specific
consideration of closely related species to cattle, sheep and pig. However, as
highlighted by a recent report, gene dictionaries in pig are smaller than in
cattle, bringing a risk to reduce the gene resources to be mined (and so for
sheep dictionaries). Bioinformatics approaches that allow an integration of
available information on gene function in model organisms, taking into account
their specificity, are thus needed. Besides these closely related and
biologically relevant species, there is indeed much more knowledge of (i)
trophoblast proliferation and differentiation or (ii) embryogenesis in human and 
mouse species, which provides opportunities for reconstructing proliferation
and/or differentiation processes in other mammalian embryos, including ruminants.
The necessary knowledge can be obtained partly from (i) stem cell or cancer
research to supply useful information on molecular agents or molecular
interactions at work in cell proliferation and (ii) mouse embryogenesis to supply
useful information on embryo differentiation. However, the total number of
publications for all these topics and species is great and their manual
processing would be tedious and time consuming. This is why we used text mining
for automated text analysis and automated knowledge extraction. To evaluate the
quality of this "mining", we took advantage of studies that reported gene
expression profiles during the elongation of bovine embryos and defined a list of
transcription factors (or TF, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>64) that we used as biological "gold standard".
When successful, the "mining" approach would identify them all, as well as novel 
ones.
METHODS: To gain knowledge on molecular-genetic regulations in a non model
organism, we offer an approach based on literature-mining and score arrangement
of data from model organisms. This approach was applied to identify novel
transcription factors during bovine blastocyst elongation, a process that is not 
observed in rodents and primates. As a result, searching through human and mouse 
corpuses, we identified numerous bovine homologs, among which 11 to 14% of
transcription factors including the gold standard TF as well as novel TF
potentially important to gene regulation in ruminant embryo development. The
scripts of the workflow are written in Perl and available on demand. They require
data input coming from all various databases for any kind of biological issue
once the data has been prepared according to keywords for the studied topic and
species; we can provide data sample to illustrate the use and functionality of
the workflow.
RESULTS: To do so, we created a workflow that allowed the pipeline processing of 
literature data and biological data, extracted from Web of Science (WoS) or
PubMed but also from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), Gene Ontology (GO), Uniprot, 
HomoloGene, TcoF-DB and TFe (TF encyclopedia). First, the human and mouse
homologs of the bovine proteins were selected, filtered by text corpora and
arranged by score functions. The score functions were based on the gene name
frequencies in corpora. Then, transcription factors were identified using TcoF-DB
and double-checked using TFe to characterise TF groups and families. Thus, among 
a search space of 18,670 bovine homologs, 489 were identified as transcription
factors. Among them, 243 were absent from the high-throughput data available at
the time of the study. They thus stand so far for putative TF acting during
bovine embryo elongation, but might be retrieved from a recent RNA sequencing
dataset (Mamo et al. , 2012). Beyond the 246 TF that appeared expressed in bovine
elongating tissues, we restricted our interpretation to those occurring within a 
list of 50 top-ranked genes. Among the transcription factors identified therein, 
half belonged to the gold standard (ASCL2, c-FOS, ETS2, GATA3, HAND1) and half
did not (ESR1, HES1, ID2, NANOG, PHB2, TP53, STAT3).
CONCLUSIONS: A workflow providing search for transcription factors acting in
bovine elongation was developed. The model assumed that proteins sharing the same
protein domains in closely related species had the same protein functionalities, 
even if they were differently regulated among species or involved in somewhat
different pathways. Under this assumption, we merged the information on different
mammalian species from different databases (literature and biology) and proposed 
489 TF as potential participants of embryo proliferation and differentiation,
with (i) a recall of 95% with regard to a biological gold standard defined in
2011 and (ii) an extension of more than 3 times the gold standard of TF detected 
so far in elongating tissues. The working capacity of the workflow was supported 
by the manual expertise of the biologists on the results. The workflow can serve 
as a new kind of bioinformatics tool to work on fused data sources and can thus
be useful in studies of a wide range of biological processes.

PMCID: PMC3563503
PMID: 22931563  [PubMed]


64. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Nov;30(5):1029-33. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1097. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

ERG is specifically associated with ETS-2 and ETV-4, but not with ETS-1, in
prostate cancer.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Ochsenfahrt J, Fuchs K, Kristiansen G, Perner S, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany.

The erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS) family of transcription factors
plays important roles in both physiological and pathological conditions. Even
though many studies have focused on single ETS factors within a single tissue and
within the context of specific promoters, the functional impact of multiple ETS
members present within a specific cell type has not yet been investigated,
especially in prostate cancer (PCa). As the most prominent gene rearrangement in 
PCa leads to the overexpression of the ETS-related gene (ERG), the aim of this
study was to investigate whether ERG is part of a complex integrated
transcriptional network that involves other ETS factors. More specifically, as
the ETS family consists of 27 members, we focused our efforts initially on
investigating whether ERG is associated with the three family members, ETS-1,
ETS-2 and ETS variant gene-4 (ETV-4), in PCa as a proof of principle. Using
western blot analysis, we show that ERG, ETS-1, ETS-2 and ETV-4 are expressed in 
PC3 cell nuclear extracts and in protein lysates prepared from human PCa
prostatectomy specimens. Immunoprecipitations using an anti-ERG antibody were
used with PC3 cell nuclear extracts as well as with a pooled protein lysate
sample prepared from the PCa tissue samples of five patients. Importantly, our
results revealed that ERG is specifically associated with ETS-2 and ETV-4, but
not with ETS-1, in PC3 cell nuclear extracts and PCa tissue protein lysates. Our 
findings strongly support the notion that ERG is part of a complex integrated
transcriptional network that involves other ETS factors, which are likely to
cooperate or influence the activity of ERG in PCa. The functional impact of
multiple ETS factors being associated with ERG in PCa requires further study, as 
it may provide insights into the mechanism by which ERG exerts its influence in
PCa and may subsequently contribute to our understanding of the molecular basis
of PCa.

PMCID: PMC3572757
PMID: 22922762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Oct;23(19):3873-81. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-04-0276. Epub 2012
Aug 8.

Semaphorin-7a reverses the ERF-induced inhibition of EMT in Ras-dependent mouse
mammary epithelial cells.

Allegra M(1), Zaragkoulias A, Vorgia E, Ioannou M, Litos G, Beug H,
Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete, Crete, Greece.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key process in cancer progression
and metastasis, requiring cooperation of the epidermal growth factor/Ras with the
transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signaling pathway in a multistep process.
The molecular mechanisms by which Ras signaling contributes to EMT, however,
remain elusive to a large extent. We therefore examined the transcriptional
repressor Ets2-repressor factor (ERF)-a bona fide Ras-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase effector-for its ability
to interfere with TGF-ß-induced EMT in mammary epithelial cells (EpH4) expressing
oncogenic Ras (EpRas). ERF-overexpressing EpRas cells failed to undergo
TGF-ß-induced EMT, formed three-dimensional tubular structures in collagen gels, 
and retained expression of epithelial markers. Transcriptome analysis indicated
that TGF-ß signaling through Smads was mostly unaffected, and ERF suppressed the 
TGF-ß-induced EMT via Semaphorin-7a repression. Forced expression of
Semaphorin-7a in ERF-overexpressing EpRas cells reestablished their ability to
undergo EMT. In contrast, inhibition of Semaphorin-7a in the parental EpRas cells
inhibited their ability to undergo TGF-ß-induced EMT. Our data suggest that
oncogenic Ras may play an additional role in EMT via the ERF, regulating
Semaphorin-7a and providing a new interconnection between the Ras- and the
TGF-ß-signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3459863
PMID: 22875994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Asian J Androl. 2012 Nov;14(6):799-800. doi: 10.1038/aja.2012.73. Epub 2012 Jul
30.

A picture with more details is painted for prostate cancer.

Liu W(1), Feng J, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Comment on
    Nature. 2012 Jul 12;487(7406):239-43.
    Nat Genet. 2012 Jun;44(6):685-9.

PMCID: PMC3720117
PMID: 22842705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 7;109(32):13016-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1120299109. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

Transcription factors ETS2 and MESP1 transdifferentiate human dermal fibroblasts 
into cardiac progenitors.

Islas JF(1), Liu Y, Weng KC, Robertson MJ, Zhang S, Prejusa A, Harger J,
Tikhomirova D, Chopra M, Iyer D, Mercola M, Oshima RG, Willerson JT, Potaman VN, 
Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Bioscience and
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Unique insights for the reprograming of cell lineages have come from embryonic
development in the ascidian Ciona, which is dependent upon the transcription
factors Ci-ets1/2 and Ci-mesp to generate cardiac progenitors. We tested the idea
that mammalian v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 (ETS2) and
mesoderm posterior (MESP) homolog may be used to convert human dermal fibroblasts
into cardiac progenitors. Here we show that murine ETS2 has a critical role in
directing cardiac progenitors during cardiopoiesis in embryonic stem cells. We
then use lentivirus-mediated forced expression of human ETS2 to convert normal
human dermal fibroblasts into replicative cells expressing the cardiac mesoderm
marker KDR(+). However, although neither ETS2 nor the purported cardiac master
regulator MESP1 can by themselves generate cardiac progenitors de novo from
fibroblasts, forced coexpression of ETS2 and MESP1 or cell treatment with
purified proteins reprograms fibroblasts into cardiac progenitors, as shown by
the de novo appearance of core cardiac transcription factors, Ca(2+) transients, 
and sarcomeres. Our data indicate that ETS2 and MESP1 play important roles in a
genetic network that governs cardiopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3420197
PMID: 22826236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2012 Sep;44(9):752-8. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gms058. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Involvement of V-Ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 in regulation 
of transcription activity of MDR1 gene.

Wang J(1), Zeng X, Luo T, Jin W, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200032, China. wangjianzhongshan@163.com

Over-expression of MDR1 confers multidrug resistance (MDR) in cancers and remains
a major cause for the failure of chemotherapy. In the present study, we found
that V-Ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 (ETS2) could activate
MDR1 transcription and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) expression in SGC7901 cells.
Knockdown of ETS2 attenuated MDR1 transcription and P-gp expression, and
increased the sensitivity of MDR cancer cells to cytotoxic drugs that were
transported by P-gp in SGC7901/VCR cells. ETS2 could bind to the ETS2 sites on
the MDR1 promoter and activate its transcription. The regulation of MDR1
expression by ETS2 may provide potential ways to overcome MDR in cancer
treatment.

PMID: 22819965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Oct;39(10):9445-51. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1809-3. Epub 2012 
Jun 28.

Ets-2 is involved in transcriptional regulation of C1qTNF-related protein 5 in
muscle cells.

Park EJ(1), Kim MJ, Lee W, Park SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Dongguk University, Gyeongju
780-714, Republic of Korea.

It was recently reported that C1qTNF-related protein 5 (CTRP5) regulates glucose 
and lipid metabolism in muscle cells. However, the molecular mechanism of CTRP5
expression has not been fully investigated. In this study we demonstrate the
mechanism regulating the transcription of the CTRP5 gene in muscle cells. We
found that potential binding sites for transcription factors were conserved in
proximal region of CTRP5 promoters in human, mouse and rat. Among these factors, 
Ets-2 was found to increase the promoter activity of the CTRP5 gene in C2C12
cells. Deletion of -166 to -80 in the CTRP5 promoter region significantly
decreased Ets-2-induced CTRP5 promoter activity. Mutagenesis evaluation indicated
that two putative Ets-2-binding sites in the CTRP5 promoter are important in
CTRP5 activation. Promoter enzyme immunoassay showed that Ets-2 binds directly to
two Ets-2-responsive elements at regions -166/-80 of the CTRP5 promoter. Taken
together, these results suggest that Ets-2 play a key role in transcriptional
regulation of CTRP5 in muscle cells.

PMID: 22740135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Nature. 2012 Jul 12;487(7406):239-43. doi: 10.1038/nature11125.

The mutational landscape of lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Grasso CS(1), Wu YM, Robinson DR, Cao X, Dhanasekaran SM, Khan AP, Quist MJ, Jing
X, Lonigro RJ, Brenner JC, Asangani IA, Ateeq B, Chun SY, Siddiqui J, Sam L,
Anstett M, Mehra R, Prensner JR, Palanisamy N, Ryslik GA, Vandin F, Raphael BJ,
Kunju LP, Rhodes DR, Pienta KJ, Chinnaiyan AM, Tomlins SA.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 May;14(5):399-400.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 Jul;9(7):367.
    Nat Rev Urol. 2012 Jul;9(7):352.
    Asian J Androl. 2012 Nov;14(6):801-2.
    Asian J Androl. 2012 Nov;14(6):799-800.

Characterization of the prostate cancer transcriptome and genome has identified
chromosomal rearrangements and copy number gains and losses, including ETS gene
family fusions, PTEN loss and androgen receptor (AR) amplification, which drive
prostate cancer development and progression to lethal, metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, less is known about the
role of mutations. Here we sequenced the exomes of 50 lethal, heavily pre-treated
metastatic CRPCs obtained at rapid autopsy (including three different foci from
the same patient) and 11 treatment-naive, high-grade localized prostate cancers. 
We identified low overall mutation rates even in heavily treated CRPCs (2.00 per 
megabase) and confirmed the monoclonal origin of lethal CRPC. Integrating exome
copy number analysis identified disruptions of CHD1 that define a subtype of ETS 
gene family fusion-negative prostate cancer. Similarly, we demonstrate that ETS2,
which is deleted in approximately one-third of CRPCs (commonly through
TMPRSS2:ERG fusions), is also deregulated through mutation. Furthermore, we
identified recurrent mutations in multiple chromatin- and histone-modifying
genes, including MLL2 (mutated in 8.6% of prostate cancers), and demonstrate
interaction of the MLL complex with the AR, which is required for AR-mediated
signalling. We also identified novel recurrent mutations in the AR collaborating 
factor FOXA1, which is mutated in 5 of 147 (3.4%) prostate cancers (both
untreated localized prostate cancer and CRPC), and showed that mutated FOXA1
represses androgen signalling and increases tumour growth. Proteins that
physically interact with the AR, such as the ERG gene fusion product, FOXA1,
MLL2, UTX (also known as KDM6A) and ASXL1 were found to be mutated in CRPC. In
summary, we describe the mutational landscape of a heavily treated metastatic
cancer, identify novel mechanisms of AR signalling deregulated in prostate
cancer, and prioritize candidates for future study.

PMCID: PMC3396711
PMID: 22722839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. EMBO J. 2012 May 29;31(14):3092-103. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.153.

Inactivation of Rb in stromal fibroblasts promotes epithelial cell invasion.

Pickard A(1), Cichon AC, Barry A, Kieran D, Patel D, Hamilton P, Salto-Tellez M, 
James J, McCance DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast City Hospital, UK.

Stromal-derived growth factors are required for normal epithelial growth but are 
also implicated in tumour progression. We have observed inactivation of the
retinoblastoma protein (Rb), through phosphorylation, in cancer-associated
fibroblasts in oro-pharyngeal cancer specimens. Rb is well known for its
cell-autonomous effects on cancer initiation and progression; however, cell
non-autonomous functions of Rb are not well described. We have identified a cell 
non-autonomous role of Rb, using three-dimensional cultures, where depletion of
Rb in stromal fibroblasts enhances invasive potential of transformed epithelia.
In part, this is mediated by upregulation of keratinocyte growth factor (KGF),
which is produced by the depleted fibroblasts. KGF drives invasion of epithelial 
cells through induction of MMP1 expression in an AKT- and Ets2-dependent manner. 
Our data identify that stromal fibroblasts can alter the invasive behaviour of
the epithelium, and we show that altered expression of KGF can mediate these
functions.

PMCID: PMC3400012
PMID: 22643222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37151. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037151. Epub 2012 May 17.

The SAM domain of human TEL2 can abrogate transcriptional output from TEL1
(ETV-6) and ETS1/ETS2.

Vivekanand P(1), Rebay I.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America.

Regulation of gene expression downstream of the Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
signaling pathway in Drosophila relies on a transcriptional effector network
featuring two conserved Ets family proteins, Yan and Pointed, known as TEL1
(ETV6) and ETS1/ETS2, respectively, in mammals. As in Drosophila, both TEL1 and
ETS1/ETS2 operate as Ras pathway transcriptional effectors and misregulated
activity of either factor has been implicated in many human leukemias and solid
tumors. Providing essential regulation to the Drosophila network, direct
interactions with the SAM domain protein Mae attenuate both Yan-mediated
repression and PointedP2-mediated transcriptional activation. Given the critical 
contributions of Mae to the Drosophila circuitry, we investigated whether the
human Ets factors TEL1 and ETS1/ETS2 could be subject to analogous regulation.
Here we demonstrate that the SAM domain of human TEL2 can inhibit the
transcriptional activities of ETS1/2 and TEL1. Drosophila Mae can also attenuate 
human ETS1/ETS2 function, suggesting there could be cross-species conservation of
underlying mechanism. In contrast, Mae is not an effective inhibitor of TEL1,
suggesting the mode of TEL2SAM-mediated inhibition of TEL1 may be distinct from
how Drosophila Mae antagonizes Yan. Together our results reveal both further
similarities and new differences between the mammalian and Drosophila networks
and more broadly suggest that SAM domain-mediated interactions could provide an
effective mechanism for modulating output from the TEL1 and ETS1/2 oncogenes.

PMCID: PMC3355116
PMID: 22615925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):e123. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks394. Epub 2012 May
8.

FusionAnalyser: a new graphical, event-driven tool for fusion rearrangements
discovery.

Piazza R(1), Pirola A, Spinelli R, Valletta S, Redaelli S, Magistroni V,
Gambacorti-Passerini C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, 20900,
Italy. rocco.piazza@unimib.it

Gene fusions are common driver events in leukaemias and solid tumours; here we
present FusionAnalyser, a tool dedicated to the identification of driver fusion
rearrangements in human cancer through the analysis of paired-end high-throughput
transcriptome sequencing data. We initially tested FusionAnalyser by using a set 
of in silico randomly generated sequencing data from 20 known human
translocations occurring in cancer and subsequently using transcriptome data from
three chronic and three acute myeloid leukaemia samples. in all the cases our
tool was invariably able to detect the presence of the correct driver fusion
event(s) with high specificity. In one of the acute myeloid leukaemia samples,
FusionAnalyser identified a novel, cryptic, in-frame ETS2-ERG fusion. A fully
event-driven graphical interface and a flexible filtering system allow complex
analyses to be run in the absence of any a priori programming or scripting
knowledge. Therefore, we propose FusionAnalyser as an efficient and robust
graphical tool for the identification of functional rearrangements in the context
of high-throughput transcriptome sequencing data.

PMCID: PMC3439881
PMID: 22570408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Genes Dev. 2012 Apr 15;26(8):830-45. doi: 10.1101/gad.181685.111.

Mutant p53 cooperates with ETS2 to promote etoposide resistance.

Do PM(1), Varanasi L, Fan S, Li C, Kubacka I, Newman V, Chauhan K, Daniels SR,
Boccetta M, Garrett MR, Li R, Martinez LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Cancer Institute,
University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA.

Mutant p53 (mtp53) promotes chemotherapy resistance through multiple mechanisms, 
including disabling proapoptotic proteins and regulating gene expression.
Comparison of genome wide analysis of mtp53 binding revealed that the ETS-binding
site motif (EBS) is prevalent within predicted mtp53-binding sites. We
demonstrate that mtp53 regulates gene expression through EBS in promoters and
that ETS2 mediates the interaction with this motif. Importantly, we identified
TDP2, a 5'-tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterase involved in the repair of DNA damage
caused by etoposide, as a transcriptional target of mtp53. We demonstrate that
suppression of TDP2 sensitizes mtp53-expressing cells to etoposide and that mtp53
and TDP2 are frequently overexpressed in human lung cancer; thus, our analysis
identifies a potentially "druggable" component of mtp53's gain-of-function
activity.

PMCID: PMC3337457
PMID: 22508727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 May;26(5):859-72. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1146. Epub 2012 Mar
22.

Squelching of ETS2 transactivation by POU5F1 silences the human chorionic
gonadotropin CGA subunit gene in human choriocarcinoma and embryonic stem cells.

Gupta R(1), Ezashi T, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Bond Life Sciences Center, University
of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

The subunit genes encoding human chorionic gonadotropin, CGA, and CGB, are
up-regulated in human trophoblast. However, they are effectively silenced in
choriocarcinoma cells by ectopically expressed POU domain class 5 transcription
factor 1 (POU5F1). Here we show that POU5F1 represses activity of the CGA
promoter through its interactions with ETS2, a transcription factor required for 
both placental development and human chorionic gonadotropin subunit gene
expression, by forming a complex that precludes ETS2 from interacting with the
CGA promoter. Mutation of a POU5F1 binding site proximal to the ETS2 binding site
does not alter the ability of POU5F1 to act as a repressor but causes a drop in
basal promoter activity due to overlap with the binding site for DLX3. DLX3 has
only a modest ability to raise basal CGA promoter activity, but its coexpression 
with ETS2 can up-regulate it 100-fold or more. The two factors form a complex,
and both must bind to the promoter for the combination to be transcriptionally
effective, a synergy compromised by POU5F1. Similarly, in human embryonic stem
cells, which express ETS2 but not CGA, ETS2 does not occupy its binding site on
the CGA promoter but is found instead as a soluble complex with POU5F1. When
human embryonic stem cells differentiate in response to bone morphogenetic
protein-4 and concentrations of POU5F1 fall and hCG and DLX3 rise, ETS2 then
occupies its binding site on the CGA promoter. Hence, a squelching mechanism
underpins the transcriptional silencing of CGA by POU5F1 and could have general
relevance to how pluripotency is maintained and how the trophoblast lineage
emerges from pluripotent precursor cells.

PMCID: PMC3355552
PMID: 22446105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Retrovirology. 2012 Mar 15;9:21. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-21.

The endogenous retrovirus ENS-1 provides active binding sites for transcription
factors in embryonic stem cells that specify extra embryonic tissue.

Mey A(1), Acloque H, Lerat E, Gounel S, Tribollet V, Blanc S, Curton D, Birot AM,
Nieto MA, Samarut J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon, CNRS, INRA,
Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France. anne.mey@lyon.inra.fr

BACKGROUND: Long terminal repeats (LTR) from endogenous retroviruses (ERV) are
source of binding sites for transcription factors which affect the host
regulatory networks in different cell types, including pluripotent cells. The
embryonic epiblast is made of pluripotent cells that are subjected to opposite
transcriptional regulatory networks to give rise to distinct embryonic and
extraembryonic lineages. To assess the transcriptional contribution of ERV to
early developmental processes, we have characterized in vitro and in vivo the
regulation of ENS-1, a host adopted and developmentally regulated ERV that is
expressed in chick embryonic stem cells.
RESULTS: We show that Ens-1 LTR activity is controlled by two transcriptional
pathways that drive pluripotent cells to alternative developmental fates. Indeed,
both Nanog that maintains pluripotency and Gata4 that induces differentiation
toward extraembryonic endoderm independently activate the LTR. Ets coactivators
are required to support Gata factors' activity thus preventing inappropriate
activation before epigenetic silencing occurs during differentiation. Consistent 
with their expression patterns during chick embryonic development, Gata4, Nanog
and Ets1 are recruited on the LTR in embryonic stem cells; in the epiblast the
complementary expression of Nanog and Gata/Ets correlates with the Ens-1 gene
expression pattern; and Ens-1 transcripts are also detected in the hypoblast, an 
extraembryonic tissue expressing Gata4 and Ets2, but not Nanog. Accordingly, over
expression of Gata4 in embryos induces an ectopic expression of Ens-1.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that Ens-1 LTR have co-opted conditions required for
the emergence of extraembryonic tissues from pluripotent epiblasts cells. By
providing pluripotent cells with intact binding sites for Gata, Nanog, or both,
Ens-1 LTR may promote distinct transcriptional networks in embryonic stem cells
subpopulations and prime the separation between embryonic and extraembryonic
fates.

PMCID: PMC3362752
PMID: 22420414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Front Cell Neurosci. 2011 Dec 27;5:28. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2011.00028. eCollection
2011.

Identification of Arx targets unveils new candidates for controlling cortical
interneuron migration and differentiation.

Friocourt G(1), Parnavelas JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Histocompatibility Inserm U613, Brest,
France.

Mutations in the homeobox transcription factor ARX have been found to be
responsible for a wide spectrum of disorders extending from phenotypes with
severe neuronal migration defects, such as lissencephaly, to mild forms of
intellectual disabilities without apparent brain abnormalities, but with
associated features of dystonia and epilepsy. Arx expression is mainly restricted
to populations of GABA-containing neurons. Studies of the effects of ARX loss of 
function, either in humans or mutant mice, revealed varying defects, suggesting
multiple roles of this gene in brain patterning, neuronal proliferation and
migration, cell maturation and differentiation, as well as axonal outgrowth and
connectivity. However, to date, little is known about how Arx functions as a
transcription factor or which genes it binds and regulates. Recently, we combined
chromatin immunoprecipitation and mRNA expression with microarray analysis and
identified approximately 1000 gene promoters bound by Arx in transfected
neuroblastoma N2a cells and mouse embryonic brain. To narrow the analysis of Arx 
targets to those most likely to control cortical interneuron migration and/or
differentiation, we compare here our data to previously published studies
searching for genes enriched or down-regulated in cortical interneurons between
E13.5 and E15.5. We thus identified 14 Arx-target genes enriched (Cxcr7, Meis1,
Ppap2a, Slc 12a5, Ets2, Phlda1, Egr1, Igf1, Lmo3, Sema6, Lgi1, Alk, Tgfb3, and
Napb) and 5 genes specifically down-regulated (Hmgn3, Lmo1, Ebf3, Rasgef1b, and
Slit2) in cortical migrating neurons. In this review, we present these genes and 
discuss how their possible regulation by Arx may lead to the dysfunction of
GABAergic neurons, resulting in mental retardation and epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC3280452
PMID: 22355284  [PubMed]


78. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):11833-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.333997. Epub 2012
Feb 21.

c-Jun and Ets2 proteins regulate expression of spleen tyrosine kinase in T cells.

Ghosh D(1), Tsokos GC, Kyttaris VC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Effector T cells and T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) express increased levels of the spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk). Syk binds to 
the T cell receptor (TCR)-CD3 complex and transduces the TCR-mediated signal in
the cell more efficiently than the canonical CD3<U+03B6> chain. The reasons for the
increased expression of Syk are unclear. In the present study, we found that Syk 
is regulated by the transcription factor c-Jun in cooperation with Ets2. c-Jun
and Ets2 bound to the SYK promoter in close proximity and increased the promoter 
activity in a specific manner. Disruption of c-Jun and Ets2 expression by siRNA
resulted in decreased expression of Syk. Overexpression of c-Jun but not Ets2
resulted in increase in Syk protein. c-Jun and Ets2 co-immunoprecipitated and had
an additive effect on Syk expression. c-Jun-driven SYK promoter activation showed
a similar pattern in B cells; however, as expected, basal promoter activity was
much higher in B cells as compared with T cells. Overexpression of c-Jun led to
increase in intracytoplasmic calcium flux following TCR stimulation. Moreover, we
found that SLE T cells had increased levels of c-Jun at baseline and
phosphorylated c-Jun upon activation. Finally, disruption of c-Jun and Ets2 in
SLE T cells resulted in a decrease in calcium flux upon TCR stimulation. In
conclusion, c-Jun in cooperation with Ets2 increases the expression of Syk and
contributes to Syk-mediated heightened calcium responses in SLE T cells.

PMCID: PMC3320931
PMID: 22354960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Apr;33(4):760-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs023. Epub 2012 Jan
31.

Transcriptional regulation of miR-196b by ETS2 in gastric cancer cells.

Liao YL(1), Hu LY, Tsai KW, Wu CW, Chan WC, Li SC, Lai CH, Ho MR, Fang WL, Huang 
KH, Lin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academic Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

E26 transformation-specific sequence (ETS)-2 is a transcriptional modulator
located on chromosome 21, alterations in its expression have been implicated with
a reduced incidence of solid tumors in Down syndrome patients. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
are thought to participate in diverse biological functions; however, the
regulation of miRNAs is not well characterized. Recently, we reported that
miR-196b is highly expressed in gastric cancers. Herein, we demonstrate that
miR-196b expression was significantly repressed by ETS2 during gastric cancer
oncogenesis. We demonstrate that knockdown of endogenous ETS2 expression
increases miR-196b expression. A genomic region between -751 and -824 bp upstream
of the miR-196b transcriptional start site was found to be critical for the
repression activity. This putative regulatory promoter region contains three
potential ETS2-binding motifs. Mutations within the ETS2 binding sites blocked
the repression activity of ETS2. Furthermore, knockdown of ETS2 or overexpression
of miR-196b significantly induced migration and invasion in gastric cancer cells.
In addition, alterations in ETS2 and miR-196b expression in gastric cancer cell
lines affected the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related genes.
The levels of vimentin, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP9 were
drastically induced, but levels of E-cadherin were decreased in shETS2- or
miR-196b-transfected cells. Our data indicate that ETS2 plays a key role in
controlling the expression of miR-196b, and miR-196b may mediate the tumor
suppressor effects of ETS2. We demonstrated that miR-196b was transcriptionally
regulated by ETS2 and there was an inverse expression profile between miR-196b
and ETS2 in clinical samples. This finding could be beneficial for the
development of effective cancer diagnostic and alternative therapeutic
strategies.

PMCID: PMC3324441
PMID: 22298639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. BMC Med Genomics. 2012 Jan 19;5:3. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-5-3.

An in silico analysis of dynamic changes in microRNA expression profiles in
stepwise development of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Luo Z(1), Zhang L, Li Z, Li X, Li G, Yu H, Jiang C, Dai Y, Guo X, Xiang J, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer
Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of Ministry
of Health, Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410078,
P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that participate in the 
spatiotemporal regulation of messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein synthesis. Recent
studies have shown that some miRNAs are involved in the progression of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). However, the aberrant miRNAs implicated in
different clinical stages of NPC remain unknown and their functions have not been
systematically studied.
METHODS: In this study, miRNA microarray assay was performed on biopsies from
different clinical stages of NPC. TargetScan was used to predict the target genes
of the miRNAs. The target gene list was narrowed down by searching the data from 
the UniGene database to identify the nasopharyngeal-specific genes. The data
reduction strategy was used to overlay with nasopharyngeal-specifically expressed
miRNA target genes and complementary DNA (cDNA) expression data. The selected
target genes were analyzed in the Gene Ontology (GO) biological process and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) biological pathway. The
microRNA-Gene-Network was build based on the interactions of miRNAs and target
genes. miRNA promoters were analyzed for the transcription factor (TF) binding
sites. UCSC Genome database was used to construct the TF-miRNAs interaction
networks.
RESULTS: Forty-eight miRNAs with significant change were obtained by Multi-Class 
Dif. The most enriched GO terms in the predicted target genes of miRNA were cell 
proliferation, cell migration and cell matrix adhesion. KEGG analysis showed that
target genes were significantly involved in adherens junction, cell adhesion
molecules, p53 signalling pathway et al. Comprehensive analysis of the coordinate
expression of miRNAs and mRNAs reveals that miR-29a/c, miR-34b, miR-34c-3p,
miR-34c-5p, miR-429, miR-203, miR-222, miR-1/206, miR-141, miR-18a/b, miR-544,
miR-205 and miR-149 may play important roles on the development of NPC. We
proposed an integrative strategy for identifying the miRNA-mRNA regulatory
modules and TF-miRNA regulatory networks. TF including ETS2, MYB, Sp1, KLF6,
NFE2, PCBP1 and TMEM54 exert regulatory functions on the miRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides perspective on the microRNA expression during
the development of NPC. It revealed the global trends in miRNA interactome in
NPC. It concluded that miRNAs might play important regulatory roles through the
target genes and transcription factors in the stepwise development of NPC.

PMCID: PMC3293045
PMID: 22260379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Aging Cell. 2012 Apr;11(2):350-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2012.00794.x. Epub
2012 Feb 15.

Linkage of cardiac gene expression profiles and ETS2 with lifespan variability in
rats.

Sheydina A(1), Volkova M, Jiang L, Juhasz O, Zhang J, Tae HJ, Perino MG, Wang M, 
Zhu Y, Lakatta EG, Boheler KR.

Author information: 
(1)Gerontology Research Center, Laboratory of Cardiovascular Sciences, National
Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Longevity variability is a common feature of aging in mammals, but the mechanisms
responsible for this remain largely unknown. Using microarray datasets coupled
with prediction analysis of microarrays (PAM), we identified a set of 252 cardiac
transcripts predictive of relative lifespan in Wistar and Fisher 344 rats.
Prediction analysis of microarrays 'tests' of rat heart transcriptomes from a
third longer lived Fisher × Norway Brown rat strain validated the predictive
value of this gene subset. The expression patterns of these genes were highly
conserved, and corresponding promoter regions were employed to identify common
cis-elements and trans-activating factors implicated in their control.
Specifically, four transcription factors (Max, Ets2, Erg, and Msx2) present in
heart displayed longevity-dependent, strain-independent changes in abundance, but
only ETS2 had an expression profile that directly correlated with the relative
lifespan gene set. In heart, ETS2 was prevalent in cardiomyocytes (CMs) and
showed a high degree of myocyte-to-myocyte variability predominantly in adult rat
hearts prior to the exponential increase in the rate of mortality. Exclusively in
this group, elevated ETS2 significantly overlapped with TUNEL staining in heart
myocytes. In response to sympathetic stimuli, ETS2 is also up-regulated, and
functionally, adenovirus-mediated over-expression of ETS2 promotes
apoptosis-inducing factor-mediated, caspase-independent programmed necrosis
exclusively in CMs that can be fully inhibited by the PARP-1 inhibitor DPQ. We
conclude that variations in ETS2 abundance in hearts of adult rodents and the
associated loss of CMs contribute at least partially, to the longevity
variability observed during normal aging of rats through activation of programmed
necrosis.

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3306452
PMID: 22247964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Br J Haematol. 2012 Apr;157(2):197-200. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08985.x.
Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Amplified segment in the 'Down syndrome critical region' on HSA21 shared between 
Down syndrome and euploid AML-M0 excludes RUNX1, ERG and ETS2.

Canzonetta C(1), Hoischen A, Giarin E, Basso G, Veltman JA, Nacheva E, Nizetic D,
Groet J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Paediatrics, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London Medical
School, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.

Children with Down syndrome have a 20- to 50-fold increased risk of acute
lymphocytic or myeloid leukaemia. Whole or partial gains of chromosome 21 have
been described in multiple childhood leukaemias, and have recently been reported 
as a likely primary event in B-precursor-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. It is
unclear which amplified gene(s) on chromosome 21 play a key role in leukaemia
progression. We describe a minimal amplified segment within the so-called 'Down
syndrome critical region' shared between two cases of AML-M0; a Down syndrome,
and a constitutionally normal individual. Interestingly, the amplified region
does not include the oncogenes RUNX1, ETS2 and ERG.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22221250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. FASEB J. 2012 Apr;26(4):1582-92. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-194654. Epub 2011 Dec 23.

EGR1 and the ERK-ERF axis drive mammary cell migration in response to EGF.

Tarcic G(1), Avraham R, Pines G, Amit I, Shay T, Lu Y, Zwang Y, Katz M,
Ben-Chetrit N, Jacob-Hirsch J, Virgilio L, Rechavi G, Mavrothalassitis G, Mills
GB, Domany E, Yarden Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

Comment in
    Cell Adh Migr. 2013 Jan-Feb;7(1):33-7.

The signaling pathways that commit cells to migration are incompletely
understood. We employed human mammary cells and two stimuli: epidermal growth
factor (EGF), which induced cellular migration, and serum factors, which
stimulated cell growth. In addition to strong activation of ERK by EGF, and AKT
by serum, early transcription remarkably differed: while EGF induced early growth
response-1 (EGR1), and this was required for migration, serum induced c-Fos and
FosB to enhance proliferation. We demonstrate that induction of EGR1 involves
ERK-mediated down-regulation of microRNA-191 and phosphorylation of the ETS2
repressor factor (ERF) repressor, which subsequently leaves the nucleus.
Unexpectedly, knockdown of ERF inhibited migration, which implies migratory roles
for exported ERF molecules. On the other hand, chromatin immunoprecipitation
identified a subset of direct EGR1 targets, including EGR1 autostimulation and
SERPINB2, whose transcription is essential for EGF-induced cell migration. In
summary, EGR1 and the EGF-ERK-ERF axis emerge from our study as major drivers of 
growth factor-induced mammary cell migration.

PMCID: PMC3316897
PMID: 22198386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Dec 18;14(2):159-67. doi: 10.1038/ncb2396.

Reprogramming of the tumour microenvironment by stromal PTEN-regulated miR-320.

Bronisz A(1), Godlewski J, Wallace JA, Merchant AS, Nowicki MO, Mathsyaraja H,
Srinivasan R, Trimboli AJ, Martin CK, Li F, Yu L, Fernandez SA, Pécot T, Rosol
TJ, Cory S, Hallett M, Park M, Piper MG, Marsh CB, Yee LD, Jimenez RE, Nuovo G,
Lawler SE, Chiocca EA, Leone G, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Microenvironment Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;14(2):124-5.

PTEN (Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10) expression in
stromal fibroblasts suppresses epithelial mammary tumours, but the underlying
molecular mechanisms remain unknown. Using proteomic and expression profiling, we
show that Pten loss from mammary stromal fibroblasts activates an oncogenic
secretome that orchestrates the transcriptional reprogramming of other cell types
in the microenvironment. Downregulation of miR-320 and upregulation of one of its
direct targets, ETS2 (v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2) are
critical events in Pten-deleted stromal fibroblasts responsible for inducing this
oncogenic secretome, which in turn promotes tumour angiogenesis and tumour-cell
invasion. Expression of the Pten-miR-320-Ets2-regulated secretome distinguished
human normal breast stroma from tumour stroma and robustly correlated with
recurrence in breast cancer patients. This work reveals miR-320 as a critical
component of the Pten tumour-suppressor axis that acts in stromal fibroblasts to 
reprogramme the tumour microenvironment and curtail tumour progression.

PMCID: PMC3271169
PMID: 22179046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 15;72(2):548-59. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2073. Epub
2011 Nov 22.

Metastatic progression with resistance to aromatase inhibitors is driven by the
steroid receptor coactivator SRC-1.

McBryan J(1), Theissen SM, Byrne C, Hughes E, Cocchiglia S, Sande S, O'Hara J,
Tibbitts P, Hill AD, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Oncology Research Group, Department of Surgery, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

Aromatase inhibitors (AI) are a standard-of-care treatment for postmenopausal,
estrogen receptor-positive breast cancers. Although tumor recurrence on AI
therapy occurs, the mechanisms underlying acquired resistance to AIs remain
unknown. In this study, we examined a cohort of endocrine-treated breast cancer
patients and used a cell line model of resistance to the AI letrozole. In
patients treated with a first-line AI, hormone receptor switching between primary
and resistant tumors was a common feature of disease recurrence. Resistant cells 
exhibited a switch from steroid-responsive growth to growth factor-responsive and
endocrine-independent growth, which was accompanied by the development of a more 
migratory and disorganized phenotype. Both the resistant cells and tumors from
AI-resistant patients showed high expression of the steroid receptor coactivator 
SRC-1. Direct interactions between SRC-1 and the transcription factor Ets2
regulated Myc and MMP9. SRC-1 was required for the aggressive and motile
phenotype of AI-resistant cells. Interestingly, SRC-1 expression in primary
and/or recurrent tumors was associated with a reduction in disease-free survival 
in treated patients. Moreover, there was a significant association between SRC-1 
and Ets2 in the recurrent tissue compared with the matched primary tumor.
Together, our findings elucidate a mechanism of AI-specific metastatic
progression in which interactions between SRC-1 and Ets2 promote
dedifferentiation and migration in hormone-dependent breast cancer.

PMID: 22108824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Endod. 2011 Dec;37(12):1647-52. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2011.08.023. Epub 2011 Oct 
6.

Potential characteristics of stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth
compared with bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells for mineralized
tissue-forming cell biology.

Hara K(1), Yamada Y, Nakamura S, Umemura E, Ito K, Ueda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine using stem cell
biology has been a promising field for treatment of local and systemic
intractable diseases. Recently, stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth 
(SHED) have been identified as a novel population of stem cells. This study
focused on the characterization of SHED as compared with bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs).
METHODS: We investigated potential characteristics of SHED by using DNA
microarray, real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, and
immunofluorescence analysis.
RESULTS: Multiple gene expression profiles indicated that the expression of 2753 
genes in SHED had changed by =2.0-fold as compared with that in BMMSCs. One of
the most significant pathways that accelerated in SHED was that of bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptor signaling, which contains several cascades
such as PKA, JNK, and ASK1. When the BMP signaling pathway was stimulated by
BMP-2, the expression of BMP-2, BMP-4, Runx2, and DSPP was up-regulated
significantly in SHED than that in BMMSCs. Furthermore, the BMP-4 protein was
expressed much higher in SHED but not in BMMSCs, as confirmed by
immunofluorescence.
CONCLUSIONS: By using the gene expression profiles, this study indicates that
SHED is involved in the BMP signaling pathway and suggests that BMP-4 might play 
a crucial role in this. These results might be useful for effective cell-based
tissue regeneration, including that of bone, pulp, and dentin, by applying the
characteristics of SHED.

Copyright © 2011 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22099898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Dis Markers. 2011;31(5):247-57. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0825.

Exploratory investigation on functional significance of ETS2 and SIM2 genes in
Down syndrome.

Chatterjee A(1), Dutta S, Sinha S, Mukhopadhyay K.

Author information: 
(1)Manovikas Biomedical Research and Diagnostic Centre, MRIH, Kolkata, India.

Trisomy of the 21{st} chromosome leads to an over dosage of several regulatory
genes in Down syndrome (DS). Though allelic and genotypic combinations formed
between genes are interesting, till date, this particular area has never been
explored in DS. In the present investigation four SNPs in two transcription
factors, Single minded 2 (SIM2) and V-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene
homolog2 (ETS<formula>2</formula>), located in the 21{st} chromosome were
genotyped to understand their role in DS. Genomic DNA of eastern Indian probands 
with DS (N=132), their parents (N=209) and ethnically matched controls (N=149)
was subjected to PCR-based analyses of functionally important SNPs followed by
statistical analyses. ETS2 rs461155 showed high heterozygosity in DS.
Significantly lower frequency of SIM2 C-G haplotype (rs2073601-rs2073416) was
noticed in individuals with DS (P value =0.01669) and their fathers (P
value=0.01185). Significantly lower frequency of the A-C-C-G with higher
frequency of A-C-A-G haplotypes was also noticed in subjects with DS (P value
=0.02089 and 0.00588 respectively). Data obtained indicate that the rs2073601 'A'
allele, responsible for nonsynonymous substitution of leucine to methionine, may 
have some role in DS in this population.

PMCID: PMC3826905
PMID: 22048266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 2011 Nov;138(21):4709-19. doi: 10.1242/dev.067710.

Analysis of gene networks in white adipose tissue development reveals a role for 
ETS2 in adipogenesis.

Birsoy K(1), Berry R, Wang T, Ceyhan O, Tavazoie S, Friedman JM, Rodeheffer MS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Obesity is characterized by an expansion of white adipose tissue mass that
results from an increase in the size and the number of adipocytes. However, the
mechanisms responsible for the formation of adipocytes during development and the
molecular mechanisms regulating their increase and maintenance in adulthood are
poorly understood. Here, we report the use of leptin-luciferase BAC transgenic
mice to track white adipose tissue (WAT) development and guide the isolation and 
molecular characterization of adipocytes during development using DNA
microarrays. These data reveal distinct transcriptional programs that are
regulated during murine WAT development in vivo. By using a de novo
cis-regulatory motif discovery tool (FIRE), we identify two early gene clusters
whose promoters show significant enrichment for NRF2/ETS transcription factor
binding sites. We further demonstrate that Ets transcription factors, but not
Nrf2, are regulated during early adipogenesis and that Ets2 is essential for the 
normal progression of the adipocyte differentiation program in vitro. These data 
identify ETS2 as a functionally important transcription factor in adipogenesis
and its possible role in regulating adipose tissue mass in adults can now be
tested. Our approach also provides the basis for elucidating the function of
other gene networks during WAT development in vivo. Finally these data confirm
that although gene expression during adipogenesis in vitro recapitulates many of 
the patterns of gene expression in vivo, there are additional developmental
transitions in pre and post-natal adipose tissue that are not evident in cell
culture systems.

PMCID: PMC3190384
PMID: 21989915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jan;5(1):177-83. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.595. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Obtain osteoarthritis related molecular signature genes through regulation
network.

Li Y(1), Wang B, Lv G, Xiong G, Liu WD, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spinal Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Hunan 410011, PR China.

Osteoarthritis (OA), also known as degenerative joint disease or osteoarthrosis, 
is the most common form of arthritis. OA occurs when cartilage in the joints
wears down over time. We used the GSE1919 series to identify potential genes that
correlated to OA. The aim of our study was to obtain a molecular signature of OA 
through the regulation network based on differentially expressed genes. From the 
result of regulation network construction in OA, a number of transcription
factors (TFs) and pathways closely related to OA were linked by our method.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> also arises as hub nodes in our
transcriptome network and certain TFs containing CEBPD, EGR2 and ETS2 were shown 
to be related to OA by a previous study.

PMID: 21946934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Genetics. 2011 Dec;189(4):1487-95. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.131391. Epub 2011
Sep 16.

Trisomic and allelic differences influence phenotypic variability during
development of Down syndrome mice.

Deitz SL(1), Roper RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Indiana University Center for Regenerative Biology
and Medicine, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, Indiana 46202,
USA.

Individuals with full or partial Trisomy 21 (Ts21) present with clinical features
collectively referred to as Down syndrome (DS), although DS phenotypes vary in
incidence and severity between individuals. Differing genetic and phenotypic
content in individuals with DS as well as mouse models of DS facilitate the
understanding of the correlation between specific genes and phenotypes associated
with Ts21. The Ts1Rhr mouse model is trisomic for 33 genes (the "Down syndrome
critical region" or DSCR) hypothesized to be responsible for many clinical DS
features, including craniofacial dysmorphology with a small mandible. Experiments
with Ts1Rhr mice showed that the DSCR was not sufficient to cause all DS
phenotypes by identifying uncharacteristic craniofacial abnormalities not found
in individuals with DS or other DS mouse models. We hypothesized that the origins
of the larger, dysmorphic mandible observed in adult Ts1Rhr mice develop from
larger embryonic craniofacial precursors. Because of phenotypic variability seen 
in subsequent studies with Ts1Rhr mice, we also hypothesized that genetic
background differences would alter Ts1Rhr developmental phenotypes. Using Ts1Rhr 
offspring from two genetic backgrounds, we found differences in mandibular
precursor volume as well as total embryonic volume and postnatal body size of
Ts1Rhr and nontrisomic littermates. Additionally, we observed increased relative 
expression of Dyrk1a and differential expression of Ets2 on the basis of the
genetic background in the Ts1Rhr mandibular precursor. Our results suggest that
trisomic gene content and allelic differences in trisomic or nontrisomic genes
influence variability in gene expression and developmental phenotypes associated 
with DS.

PMCID: PMC3241431
PMID: 21926299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Jan;29(1):95-101. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.796. Epub 2011 Sep
15.

Transcriptome network analysis reveals potential candidate genes for squamous
lung cancer.

Bai J(1), Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, PR
China. jingbaidoc@gmail.com

Squamous lung cancer is a common type of lung cancer; however, its mechanism of
oncogenesis is still unknown. The aim of this study was to screen candidate genes
of squamous lung cancer using a bioinformatics strategy and elucidate the
mechanism of squamous lung cancer. Published microarray data of the GSE3268
series was obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Significance analysis of 
microarrays was performed using the software R, and differentially expressed
genes by R analysis were harvested. The relationship between transcription
factors and target genes in cancer were collected from the Transcriptional
regulatory element database. A transcriptome network analysis method was used to 
construct gene regulation networks and select the candidate genes for squamous
lung cancer. SPI1, FLI1, FOS, ETS2, EGR1 and PPARG were defined as candidate
genes for squamous lung cancer by the transcriptome network analysis method.
Among them, 5 genes had been reported to be involved in lung cancer, except SPI1 
and FLI1. Effective recall on previous knowledge conferred strong confidence in
these methods. It is demonstrated that transcriptome network analysis is useful
in the identification of candidate genes in disease.

PMID: 21922129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 2;412(3):500-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.07.130. Epub 2011 Aug 6.

All-trans retinoic acid induces cellular senescence by up-regulating levels of
p16 and p21 via promoter hypomethylation.

Lim JS(1), Park SH, Jang KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induces cellular senescence via up-regulation of
p16 and p21; however, the action mechanism of ATRA is unknown. Here, we show that
ATRA induces promoter hypomethylation of p16 and p21 via down-regulation of DNA
methyltransferases 1, 3a, and 3b to facilitate binding of Ets1/2 to the p16
promoter and p53 to the p21 promoter, resulting in up-regulation of their
expression and subsequent induction of cellular senescence in HepG2 cells. These 
effects were mediated by retinoic acid receptor ß2 whose promoter was also
hypomethylated in the presence of ATRA. Therefore, ATRA can be considered as an
epi-drug in cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21843507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. FEBS Lett. 2011 Aug 4;585(15):2537-44. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.07.005. Epub
2011 Jul 13.

RuvBl2 cooperates with Ets2 to transcriptionally regulate hTERT in colon cancer.

Flavin P(1), Redmond A, McBryan J, Cocchiglia S, Tibbitts P, Fahy-Browne P, Kay
E, Treumann A, Perrem K, McIlroy M, Hill AD, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Oncology Research, Department of Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons 
in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

Human cancers utilise telomerase to maintain telomeres and prohibit cell
senescence. Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT), an essential
component of this complex, is regulated at the level of gene transcription. Using
SILAC-proteomic analysis and molecular studies, we identified the AAA+ ATPase,
RuvBl2 as a transcriptional regulator of hTERT and established that this
regulation is through cooperation with Ets-2. In colon cancer patients, nuclear
expression of RuvBl2 associated with nuclear expression of hTERT, pEts2 and
advanced nodal disease (P<0.01, P=0.05 and P=0.03 respectively, n=170). These
data firmly implicate RuvBl2 in Ets2 mediated regulation of hTERT in colon cancer
which has functional and clinical consequences.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21763315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Cell Commun Signal. 2011 Dec;5(4):325-6. doi: 10.1007/s12079-011-0145-z. Epub
2011 Jul 12.

Eureka! Ets a target for fibrosis!

Leask A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, Dental Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, ON, Canada, N6A 5C1, Andrew.leask@schulich.uwo.ca.

The oncogenic Ets family of transcription factors is now recognized to play a key
role in fibroblasts as it controls the expression of a variety of pro-fibrotic
genes, including the induction of CCN2 by transforming growth factor ß. A recent 
report (Baran et al., Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 May 11) shows that mice
containing a version of ets2 that is incapable of being phosphorylated are
resistant to bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. This latter paper is the subject of
this commentary.

PMCID: PMC3245763
PMID: 21748431  [PubMed]


95. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2896-905. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-330589. Epub 2011 
Jun 28.

The manipulation of miRNA-gene regulatory networks by KSHV induces endothelial
cell motility.

Wu YH(1), Hu TF, Chen YC, Tsai YN, Tsai YH, Cheng CC, Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

miRNAs have emerged as master regulators of cancer-related events. miRNA
dysregulation also occurs in Kaposi sarcoma (KS). Exploring the roles of
KS-associated miRNAs should help to identify novel angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis pathways. In the present study, we show that Kaposi
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), the etiological agent of KS, induces
global miRNA changes in lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs). Specifically, the
miR-221/miR-222 cluster is down-regulated, whereas miR-31 is up-regulated. Both
latent nuclear antigen (LANA) and Kaposin B repress the expression of the
miR-221/miR-222 cluster, which results in an increase of endothelial cell (EC)
migration. In contrast, miR-31 stimulates EC migration, so depletion of miR-31 in
KSHV-transformed ECs reduces cell motility. Analysis of the putative miRNA
targets among KSHV-affected genes showed that ETS2 and ETS1 are the downstream
targets of miR-221 and miR-222, respectively. FAT4 is one of the direct targets
of miR-31. Overexpression of ETS1 or ETS2 alone is sufficient to induce EC
migration, whereas a reduction in FAT4 enhances EC motility. Our results show
that KSHV regulates multiple miRNA-mRNA networks to enhance EC motility, which
eventually contributes to KS progression by promoting the spread of malignant KS 
progenitor cells. Targeting KSHV-regulated miRNAs or genes might allow the
development of novel therapeutic strategies that induce angiogenesis or allow the
treatment of pathogenic (lymph)angiogenesis.

PMID: 21715310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Circ Res. 2011 Aug 5;109(4):382-95. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.243444. Epub 2011
Jun 23.

Ets2 determines the inflammatory state of endothelial cells in advanced
atherosclerotic lesions.

Cheng C(1), Tempel D, Den Dekker WK, Haasdijk R, Chrifi I, Bos FL, Wagtmans K,
van de Kamp EH, Blonden L, Biessen EA, Moll F, Pasterkamp G, Serruys PW,
Schulte-Merker S, Duckers HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Experimental Cardiology, Thoraxcenter,
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

RATIONALE: Neovascularization is required for embryonic development and plays a
central role in diseases in adults. In atherosclerosis, the role of
neovascularization remains to be elucidated. In a genome-wide microarray-screen
of Flk1+ angioblasts during murine embryogenesis, the v-ets erythroblastosis
virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 (Ets2) transcription factor was identified as a
potential angiogenic factor.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the role of Ets2 in endothelial cells during
atherosclerotic lesion progression toward plaque instability.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In 91 patients treated for carotid artery disease, Ets2
levels showed modest correlations with capillary growth, thrombogenicity, and
rising levels of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa), monocyte chemoattractant protein
1, and interleukin-6 in the atherosclerotic lesions. Experiments in ApoE(-/-)
mice, using a vulnerable plaque model, showed that Ets2 expression was increased 
under atherogenic conditions and was augmented specifically in the vulnerable
versus stable lesions. In endothelial cell cultures, Ets2 expression and
activation was responsive to the atherogenic cytokine TNFa. In the murine
vulnerable plaque model, overexpression of Ets2 promoted lesion growth with
neovessel formation, hemorrhaging, and plaque destabilization. In contrast, Ets2 
silencing, using a lentiviral shRNA construct, promoted lesion stabilization. In 
vitro studies showed that Ets2 was crucial for TNFa-induced expression of
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, interleukin-6, and vascular cell adhesion
molecule 1 in endothelial cells. In addition, Ets2 promoted tube formation and
amplified TNFa-induced loss of vascular endothelial integrity. Evaluation in a
murine retina model further validated the role of Ets2 in regulating vessel
inflammation and endothelial leakage.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first evidence for the plaque-destabilizing role of
Ets2 in atherosclerosis development by induction of an intraplaque
proinflammatory phenotype in endothelial cells.

PMID: 21700929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Nov;45(5):999-1006. doi:
10.1165/rcmb.2010-0490OC. Epub 2011 May 11.

Transcription factor ets-2 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
pulmonary fibrosis.

Baran CP(1), Fischer SN, Nuovo GJ, Kabbout MN, Hitchcock CL, Bringardner BD,
McMaken S, Newland CA, Cantemir-Stone CZ, Phillips GS, Ostrowski MC, Marsh CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Dorothy M. 
Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210, 
USA.

Ets-2 is a ubiquitous transcription factor activated after phosphorylation at
threonine-72. Previous studies highlighted the importance of phosphorylated ets-2
in lung inflammation and extracellular matrix remodeling, two pathways involved
in pulmonary fibrosis. We hypothesized that phosphorylated ets-2 played an
important role in pulmonary fibrosis, and we sought to determine the role of
ets-2 in its pathogenesis. We challenged ets-2 (A72/A72) transgenic mice
(harboring a mutated form of ets-2 at phosphorylation site threonine-72) and
ets-2 (wild-type/wild-type [WT/WT]) control mice with sequential intraperitoneal 
injections of bleomycin, followed by quantitative measurements of lung fibrosis
and inflammation and primary cell in vitro assays. Concentrations of
phosphorylated ets-2 were detected via the single and dual immunohistochemical
staining of murine lungs and lung sections from patients with idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. Ets-2 (A72/A72) mice were protected from bleomycin-induced
pulmonary fibrosis, compared with ets-2 (WT/WT) mice. This protection was
characterized by decreased lung pathological abnormalities and the fibrotic gene 
expression of Type I collagen, Type III collagen, a-smooth muscle actin, and
connective tissue growth factor. Immunohistochemical staining of lung sections
from bleomycin-treated ets-2 (WT/WT) mice and from patients with idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis demonstrated increased staining of phosphorylated ets-2 that
colocalized with Type I collagen expression and to fibroblastic foci. Lastly,
primary lung fibroblasts from ets-2 (A72/A72) mice exhibited decreased expression
of Type I collagen in response to stimulation with TGF-ß, compared with
fibroblasts from ets-2 (WT/WT) mice. These data indicate the importance of
phosphorylated ets-2 in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis through the
expression of Type I collagen and (myo)fibroblast activation.

PMCID: PMC3262682
PMID: 21562315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cancer Res. 2011 May 15;71(10):3573-81. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-4489. Epub 
2011 Apr 5.

Increased survival following tumorigenesis in Ts65Dn mice that model Down
syndrome.

Yang A(1), Reeves RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and McKusick Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine, 
School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Epidemiologic results tend to suggest that adults with Down syndrome have a
reduced incidence of cancer, but some studies have reached the opposite
conclusion. In this study, we offer direct biological evidence in support of the 
notion that Down syndrome reduces incidence of multiple types of cancer. Previous
studies showed that introduction of the Apc(Min) mutation into the Ts65Dn mouse
model of Down syndrome by interbreeding caused formation of intestinal adenomas
at a significantly reduced incidence compared with control (euploid) animals that
did not have trisomy. To a large degree, this reduction was determined to reflect
an increased dosage of the Ets2 tumor repressor gene due to trisomy. Studies of
tumor grafts using Ts65Dn suggested angiogenesis as a mechanism that mediated
reduced tumor growth, metastasis, and mortality in individuals with Down
syndrome. To confirm and extend these findings, we employed the complex cancer
mouse model NPcis, which is heterozygous for the Trp53 and Nf1 genes and through 
LOH develops lymphomas, sarcomas, or carcinomas with 100% penetrance. In this
aggressive model, trisomy did not prevent cancer, but it nevertheless extended
host survival relative to euploid littermates. However, protection in this case
was not attributable to either Ets2 dosage or to reduced angiogenesis. Together, 
our findings indicate that the genetic complexity underlying Down syndrome
supports multiple mechanisms that contribute to reduced mortality from cancer.

©2011 AACR

PMCID: PMC3096739
PMID: 21467166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Aug;128(3):891-8. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1492-4.
Epub 2011 Apr 5.

Identification and characterization of novel potentially oncogenic mutations in
the human BAF57 gene in a breast cancer patient.

Villaronga MA(1), López-Mateo I, Markert L, Espinosa E, Fresno Vara JA, Belandia 
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

BAF57 is a core subunit present in all mammalian SWI/SNF ATP-dependent chromatin 
remodeling complexes, which regulates important biological processes including
gene transcription, DNA recombination, DNA repair, and DNA replication. Among
other functions, BAF57 mediates the recruitment of SWI/SNF to sequence-specific
transcription factors. Thus, BAF57 plays a crucial role in regulating
estrogen-dependent gene expression and proliferation in human cell lines derived 
from breast tumors. Increasing genetic and biochemical evidences suggest that
mutations in BAF57 or alterations in its expression could play an oncogenic role 
in the mammary gland. Here, we describe two novel mutations in the BAF57 gene
found in a breast cancer patient. Both mutations originate premature stop codons,
leading to truncated proteins, structurally similar to another BAF57 mutant
previously found in a human cell line derived from a breast tumor (BT-549). The
expression of these novel BAF57 mutants has abnormally high estrogen receptor
alpha (ERa) coactivating potential, suggesting that they might be involved in the
aberrant estrogen-dependent proliferation that occur in the majority of breast
tumors that retain ERa expression. In addition, the mutations in BAF57 affect its
functional interaction with the androgen receptor and ETS2, two transcription
factors that play an important role in breast cell biology. Therefore, mutations 
in BAF57 could impinge on several oncogenic signaling pathways contributing to
the origin and/or development of breast cancer.

PMID: 21465167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Oncogene. 2011 Aug 25;30(34):3705-15. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.90. Epub 2011 Mar 28.

Mutant K-Ras increases GSK-3ß gene expression via an ETS-p300 transcriptional
complex in pancreatic cancer.

Zhang JS(1), Koenig A, Harrison A, Ugolkov AV, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Couch FJ,
Billadeau DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Division of Oncology Research, Schulze Center for
Novel Therapeutics, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
zhang.jinsan@mayo.edu

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3ß) is overexpressed in a number of human
malignancies and has been shown to contribute to tumor cell proliferation and
survival. Although regulation of GSK-3ß activity has been extensively studied,
the mechanisms governing GSK-3ß gene expression are still unknown. Using
pancreatic cancer as a model, we find that constitutively active Ras signaling
increases GSK-3ß gene expression via the canonical mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling pathway. Analysis of the mechanism revealed that K-Ras regulates
the expression of this kinase through two highly conserved E-twenty six (ETS)
binding elements within the proximal region. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
mutant K-Ras enhances ETS2 loading onto the promoter, and ETS requires its
transcriptional activity to increase GSK-3ß gene transcription in pancreatic
cancer cells. Lastly, we show that ETS2 cooperates with p300 histone
acetyltransferase to remodel chromatin and promote GSK-3ß expression. Taken
together, these results provide a general mechanism for increased expression of
GSK-3ß in pancreatic cancer and perhaps other cancers, where Ras signaling is
deregulated.

PMCID: PMC3162070
PMID: 21441955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2011 Aug;108(8):1776-87. doi: 10.1002/bit.23141. Epub 2011 Apr
3.

Construction of Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains with enhanced ethanol tolerance 
by mutagenesis of the TATA-binding protein gene and identification of novel genes
associated with ethanol tolerance.

Yang J(1), Bae JY, Lee YM, Kwon H, Moon HY, Kang HA, Yee SB, Kim W, Choi W.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Resources Research Center, College of Natural Sciences, Ewha
Womans,University, Seoul, Korea.

Since elevated ethanol is a major stress during ethanol fermentation, yeast
strains tolerant to ethanol are highly desirable for the industrial scale ethanol
production. A technology called global transcriptional machinery engineering
(gTME), which exploits a mutant library of SPT15 encoding the TATA-binding
protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Alper et al., 2006; Science 314: 1565-1568),
seems to a powerful tool for creating ethanol-tolerant strains. However, the
ability of created strains to tolerate high ethanol on rich media remains
unproven. In this study, a similar strategy was used to obtain five strains with 
enhanced ethanol tolerance (ETS1-5) of S. cerevisiae. Comparing global
transcriptional profiles of two selected strains ETS2 and ETS3 with that of the
control identified 42 genes that were commonly regulated with twofold change. Out
of 34 deletion mutants available from a gene knockout library, 18 were ethanol
sensitive, suggesting that these genes were closely associated with ethanol
tolerance. Eight of them were novel with most being functionally unknown. To
establish a basis for future industrial applications, strains iETS2 and iETS3
were created by integrating the SPT15 mutant alleles of ETS2 and ETS3 into the
chromosomes, which also exhibited enhanced ethanol tolerance and survival upon
ethanol shock on a rich medium. Fermentation with 20% glucose for 24 h in a
bioreactor revealed that iETS2 and iETS3 grew better and produced approximately
25% more ethanol than a control strain. The ethanol yield and productivity were
also substantially enhanced: 0.31 g/g and 2.6 g/L/h, respectively, for control
and 0.39 g/g and 3.2 g/L/h, respectively, for iETS2 and iETS3. Thus, our study
demonstrates the utility of gTME in generating strains with enhanced ethanol
tolerance that resulted in increase of ethanol production. Strains with enhanced 
tolerance to other stresses such as heat, fermentation inhibitors, osmotic
pressure, and so on, may be further created by using gTME.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21437883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Stem Cells. 2011 Mar;29(3):430-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.599.

Ets2 regulates colonic stem cells and sensitivity to tumorigenesis.

Múnera J(1), Ceceña G, Jedlicka P, Wankell M, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Development Program, Cancer Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Ets2 has both tumor repressive and supportive functions for different types of
cancer. We have investigated the role of Ets2 within intestinal epithelial cells 
in postnatal mouse colon development and tumorigenesis. Conditional inactivation 
of Ets2 within intestinal epithelial cells results in over representation of
Ets2-deficient colon crypts within young and adult animals. This preferential
representation is associated with an increased number of proliferative cells
within the stem cell region and an increased rate of crypt fission in young mice 
that result in larger patches of Ets2-deficient crypts. These effects are
consistent with a selective advantage of Ets2-deficient intestinal stem cells in 
colonizing colonic crypts and driving crypt fission. Ets2-deficient colon crypts 
have an increased mucosal thickness, an increased number of goblet cells, and an 
increased density. Mice with Ets2-deficient intestinal cells develop more colon
tumors in response to treatment with azoxymethane and dextran sulfate sodium. The
selective population of colon crypts, the altered differentiation state and
increased sensitivity to carcinogen-induced tumors all indicate that Ets2
deficiency alters colon stem cell number or behavior. Ets2-dependent, epithelial 
cell-autonomous repression of intestinal tumors may contribute to protection from
colon cancer of persons with increased dosage of chromosome 21.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3339631
PMID: 21425406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 15;6(3):e17442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017442.

Genes and gene ontologies common to airflow obstruction and emphysema in the
lungs of patients with COPD.

Savarimuthu Francis SM(1), Larsen JE, Pavey SJ, Duhig EE, Clarke BE, Bowman RV,
Hayward NK, Fong KM, Yang IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, The Prince Charles Hospital, Brisbane,
Australia. ss.francis@uqconnect.edu.au

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major public health problem
with increasing prevalence worldwide. The primary aim of this study was to
identify genes and gene ontologies associated with COPD severity. Gene expression
profiling was performed on total RNA extracted from lung tissue of 18 former
smokers with COPD. Class comparison analysis on mild (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>9, FEV(1) 80-110%
predicted) and moderate (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>9, FEV(1) 50-60% predicted) COPD patients identified
46 differentially expressed genes (p<0.01), of which 14 genes were technically
confirmed by quantitative real-time-PCR. Biological replication in an independent
test set of 58 lung samples confirmed the altered expression of ten genes with
increasing COPD severity, with eight of these genes (NNMT, THBS1, HLA-DPB1, IGHD,
ETS2, ELF1, PTGDS and CYRBD1) being differentially expressed by greater than 1.8 
fold between mild and moderate COPD, identifying these as candidate determinants 
of COPD severity. These genes belonged to ontologies potentially implicated in
COPD including angiogenesis, cell migration, proliferation and apoptosis. Our
secondary aim was to identify gene ontologies common to airway obstruction,
indicated by impaired FEV(1) and KCO. Using gene ontology enrichment analysis we 
have identified relevant biological and molecular processes including regulation 
of cell-matrix adhesion, leukocyte activation, cell and substrate adhesion, cell 
adhesion, angiogenesis, cell activation that are enriched among genes involved in
airflow obstruction. Exploring the functional significance of these genes and
their gene ontologies will provide clues to molecular changes involved in
severity of COPD, which could be developed as targets for therapy or biomarkers
for early diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3057973
PMID: 21423603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Br J Cancer. 2011 Mar 15;104(6):1007-12. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.33. Epub 2011 Feb 
22.

Expression of osteopontin coregulators in primary colorectal cancer and
associated liver metastases.

Mole DJ(1), O'Neill C, Hamilton P, Olabi B, Robinson V, Williams L, Diamond T,
El-Tanani M, Campbell FC.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Surgical Sciences (Surgery), The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH8 9YL, Scotland, UK.

BACKGROUND: A transcription regulatory complex (TRC) that includes Ets1, Ets2,
PEA3 and ß-catenin/T-cell factors regulates osteopontin (OPN) that is implicated 
in colorectal cancer (CRC) dissemination. The consistency of OPN transcriptional 
control between primary CRC and metastases is unclear. This study investigates
expression and prognostic significance of the OPN-TRC in primary human CRC and
associated colorectal liver metastases (CRLM).
METHODS: Osteopontin-TRC factors were assayed by digital microscopy in 38 primary
CRCs and matched CRLM specimens and assessed against clinical prognosis.
RESULTS: In primary CRC, OPN expression intensity correlated with that of its
co-activators, PEA3 (r=0.600; P<0.01), Ets1 (r=0.552; P<0.01), Ets2 (r=0.521;
P<0.01) and had prognostic significance. Osteopontin intensity in primary CRC
inversely correlated with the interval between diagnosis and resection of CRLM.
Overall OPN intensity was lower in CRLM than primary CRC and correlations with
co-activators were weaker, for example, Ets1 (P=0.047), PEA3 (P=0.022) or
nonsignificant (Ets2). The ratio of OPN expression in CRLM vs primary CRC had
prognostic significance.
CONCLUSION: This study supports transcriptional control of OPN by known
coregulators in both primary and secondary CRC. Weaker associations in CRLM
suggest involvement of other unknown factors possibly from the liver
microenvironment or resulting from additional genetic or epigenetic changes that 
drive tumour metastatic capability in OPN transcriptional control.

PMCID: PMC3065273
PMID: 21343932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 14;6(2):e16623. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016623.

Chromosomal minimal critical regions in therapy-related leukemia appear different
from those of de novo leukemia by high-resolution aCGH.

Itzhar N(1), Dessen P, Toujani S, Auger N, Preudhomme C, Richon C, Lazar V, Saada
V, Bennaceur A, Bourhis JH, de Botton S, Bernheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de la Santé et de la Reherche Médicale U985, Génétique des tumeurs,
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Therapy-related acute leukemia (t-AML), is a severe complication of cytotoxic
therapy used for primary cancer treatment. The outcome of these patients is poor,
compared to people who develop de novo acute leukemia (p-AML). Cytogenetic
abnormalities in t-AML are similar to those found in p-AML but present more
frequent unfavorable karyotypes depending on the inducting agent. Losses of
chromosome 5 or 7 are observed after alkylating agents while balanced
translocations are found after topoisomerase II inhibitors. This study compared
t-AML to p-AML using high resolution array CGH in order to find copy number
abnormalities (CNA) at a higher resolution than conventional cytogenetics. More
CNAs were observed in 30 t-AML than in 36 p-AML: 104 CNAs were observed with 63
losses and 41 gains (mean number 3.46 per case) in t-AML, while in p-AML, 69 CNAs
were observed with 32 losses and 37 gains (mean number of 1.9 per case). In
primary leukemia with a previously "normal" karyotype, 18% exhibited a previously
undetected CNA, whereas in the (few) t-AML with a normal karyotype, the rate was 
50%. Several minimal critical regions (MCRs) were found in t-AML and p-AML. No
common MCRs were found in the two groups. In t-AML a 40 kb deleted MCR pointed to
RUNX1 on 21q22, a gene coding for a transcription factor implicated in frequent
rearrangements in leukemia and in familial thrombocytopenia. In de novo AML, a 1 
Mb MCR harboring ERG and ETS2 was observed from patients with complex aCGH
profiles. High resolution cytogenomics obtained by aCGH and similar techniques
already published allowed us to characterize numerous non random chromosome
abnormalities. This work supports the hypothesis that they can be classified into
several categories: abnormalities common to all AML; those more frequently found 
in t-AML and those specifically found in p-AML.

PMCID: PMC3038855
PMID: 21339820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jan 19;12:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-43.

MMP1 bimodal expression and differential response to inflammatory mediators is
linked to promoter polymorphisms.

Affara M(1), Dunmore BJ, Sanders DA, Johnson N, Print CG, Charnock-Jones DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QP, UK.

BACKGROUND: Identifying the functional importance of the millions of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome is a difficult challenge.
Therefore, a reverse strategy, which identifies functionally important SNPs by
virtue of the bimodal abundance across the human population of the SNP-related
mRNAs will be useful. Those mRNA transcripts that are expressed at two distinct
abundances in proportion to SNP allele frequency may warrant further study.
Matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) is important in both normal development and in 
numerous pathologies. Although much research has been conducted to investigate
the expression of MMP1 in many different cell types and conditions, the
regulation of its expression is still not fully understood.
RESULTS: In this study, we used a novel but straightforward method based on
agglomerative hierarchical clustering to identify bimodally expressed transcripts
in human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) microarray data from 15
individuals. We found that MMP1 mRNA abundance was bimodally distributed in
un-treated HUVECs and showed a bimodal response to inflammatory mediator
treatment. RT-PCR and MMP1 activity assays confirmed the bimodal regulation and
DNA sequencing of 69 individuals identified an MMP1 gene promoter polymorphism
that segregated precisely with the MMP1 bimodal expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments indicated that the transcription factors
(TFs) ETS1, ETS2 and GATA3, bind to the MMP1 promoter in the region of this
polymorphism and may contribute to the bimodal expression.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a simple method to identify putative bimodally expressed
RNAs from transcriptome data that is effective yet easy for non-statisticians to 
understand and use. This method identified bimodal endothelial cell expression of
MMP1, which appears to be biologically significant with implications for
inflammatory disease. (271 Words).

PMCID: PMC3040839
PMID: 21244711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Theriogenology. 2011 Apr 1;75(6):995-1004. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.11.006. Epub 2011 Jan 8.

Effect of different culture media on the temporal gene expression in the bovine
developing embryos.

Saadeldin IM(1), Kim B, Lee B, Jang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine
and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Republic of Korea.

We have previously shown that the in vitro embryonic development and the yield of
viable calves were increased by using a two-step chemically defined medium for
post-fertilization culture of bovine embryos. In this study, we explored the
embryonic development and the temporal behavioral interaction of the genes
involved in IFNt gene expression and how they behave in an orchestrated manner to
increase the developmental competence of IVF produced embryos by culturing in the
chemically defined medium. Behavior of genes included ETS2, CDX2, GATA2, GATA3,
OCT4 and NANOG was analyzed in early bovine IVF produced embryos, (from compact
morulae to the blastocyst hatching stages), by semi- and relative quantitative
PCR and compared between two in vitro culture (IVC) systems, two-step chemically 
defined medium and modified synthetic oviductal fluid (mSOF) containing 8 mg/mL, 
BSA. Early embryonic development was found to be better in two-step chemically
defined culture system than that of mSOF as indicated by the increment of
blastocyst yield, 33.1% in two-step culture system vs 18.8% in mSOF medium, and
the blastocyst hatching, 52.3% in two-step culture system vs 33.5% in mSOF
medium. Relative quantitative gene expression showed harmonic behavior in the
two-step culture system rather than the culture in mSOF, IFNt showed even
increase throughout the embryonic development in the two-step culture medium
while it decreased with blastocyst hatching in mSOF culture condition. Temporal
dominance of OCT4 over all the transcription factors was found in regulation of
IFNt expression (the major factor of expression regulation but in inverse
manner). However, ETS2, CDX2, GATA2 and GATA3 are potent IFNt stimulator in
cumulative manner but in case of OCT4 decrement. CDX2 directly related with IFNt,
but still under OCT4 dominance and also regulated by the subservient of OCT4
which is NANOG. In conclusion, this study confirmed our previous results about
the usefulness of using the two-step chemically defined culture medium for
increasing the developmental competence of IVF produced embryos and elucidated
the dominance of OCT4 over the other genes implicated in regulation of IFNt
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21220156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer Res. 2010 Dec 15;70(24):10265-76. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2839.

Loss of metallothionein predisposes mice to diethylnitrosamine-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis by activating NF-kappaB target genes.

Majumder S(1), Roy S, Kaffenberger T, Wang B, Costinean S, Frankel W, Bratasz A, 
Kuppusamy P, Hai T, Ghoshal K, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA. sarmila.majumder@osumc.edu

Metallothioneins (MT) are potent scavengers of free radicals that are silenced in
primary hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) of human and rodent origin. To examine
whether loss of MT promotes hepatocarcinogenesis, male Mt-1 and Mt-2 double
knockout (MTKO) and wild-type (WT) mice were exposed to diethylnitrosamine (DEN) 
and induction of HCC was monitored at 23 and 33 weeks. The size and number of
liver tumors, the ratio between liver and body weight, and liver damage were
markedly elevated in the MTKO mice at both time points compared with the WT mice.
At 23 weeks, MTKO mice developed HCC whereas WT mice developed only preneoplastic
nodules suggesting that loss of MT accelerates hepatocarcinogenesis. MTKO tumors 
also exhibited higher superoxide anion levels. Although NF-<U+03BA>B activity increased 
in the liver nuclear extracts of both genotypes after DEN exposure, the complex
formed in MTKO mice was predominantly p50/65 heterodimer (transcriptional
activator) as opposed to p50 homodimer (transcriptional repressor) in WT mice.
Phosphorylation of p65 at Ser276 causing its activation was also significantly
augmented in DEN-exposed MTKO livers. NF-<U+03BA>B targets that include early growth
response genes and proinflammatory cytokines were significantly upregulated in
MTKO mice. Concurrently, there was a remarkable increase (~100-fold) in Pai-1
expression; significant increase in c-Jun, c-Fos, c-Myc, Ets2, and ATF3
expressions; and growth factor signaling that probably contributed to the
increased tumor growth in MTKO mice. Taken together, these results demonstrate
that MTs protect mice from hepatocarcinogen-induced liver damage and
carcinogenesis, underscoring their potential therapeutic application against
hepatocellular cancer.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3059562
PMID: 21159647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Jan;6(1):132-8. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318200f415.

Genome-wide association study on overall survival of advanced non-small cell lung
cancer patients treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel.

Sato Y(1), Yamamoto N, Kunitoh H, Ohe Y, Minami H, Laird NM, Katori N, Saito Y,
Ohnami S, Sakamoto H, Sawada J, Saijo N, Yoshida T, Tamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Our goal was to identify candidate polymorphisms that could influence
overall survival (OS) in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
treated with carboplatin (CBDCA) and paclitaxel (PTX).
METHODS: Chemotherapy-naïve stage IIIB or IV NSCLC patients treated with CBDCA
(area under the curve = 6 mg/mL/min) and PTX (200 mg/m, 3-hour period) were
eligible for this study. The DNA samples were extracted from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells before treatment, and genotypes at approximately 110,000
gene-centric single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were obtained by Illumina's
Sentrix Human-1 Genotyping BeadChip. Statistical analyses were performed by the
log-rank test and Cox proportional hazards model.
RESULTS: From July 2002 to May 2004, 105 patients received a total of 308 cycles 
of treatment. The median survival time (MST) of 105 patients was 17.1 months. In 
the genome-wide association study, three SNPs were associated significantly with 
shortened OS after multiple comparison adjustment: rs1656402 in the EIF4E2 gene
(MST was 18.0 and 7.7 months for AG [n = 50] + AA [n = 40] and GG [n = 15],
respectively; p = 8.4 × 10), rs1209950 in the ETS2 gene (MST = 17.7 and 7.4
months for CC [n = 94] and CT [n = 11] + TT [n = 0]; p = 2.8 × 10), and rs9981861
in the DSCAM gene (MST = 17.1 and 3.8 months for AA [n = 75] + AG [n = 26] and GG
[n = 4]; p = 3.5 × 10).
CONCLUSION: Three SNPs were identified as new prognostic biomarker candidates for
advanced NSCLC treated with CBDCA and PTX. The agnostic genome-wide association
study may unveil unexplored molecular pathways associated with the drug response,
but our findings should be replicated by other investigators.

PMID: 21079520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Exp Dermatol. 2011 Feb;20(2):147-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2010.01162.x. Epub
2010 Nov 5.

Gene expression changes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in occupational
exposure to nickel.

Bonin S, Larese FF, Trevisan G, Avian A, Rui F, Stanta G, Bovenzi M.

Allergic contact dermatitis is preceded by a clinically silent phase of
sensitisation. In this study, we investigated whether the expression levels of
six genes were related to nickel exposure and/or nickel sensitisation, and
whether they could predict allergic manifestations to nickel. The mRNA expression
level of six genes involved in cell growth (PIM1 and ETS2), metabolism/synthesis 
(HSD11B1 and PRDX4), apoptosis (CASP8) and signal transduction (CISH) was
investigated by means of quantitative real-time RT-PCR in a cohort of 110
subjects, including healthy controls (n=51), nickel-exposed workers (n=23) and
patients allergic to nickel (n=36). Our findings show that the expression levels 
of the analysed genes did not differ between allergic patients and healthy
controls, while higher expression levels of ETS2 and CASP8 were detected in the
nickel-exposed workers. Changes in ETS2 and CASP8 expression are likely to be
related to nickel exposure rather than to allergy.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21054559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Feb 22;52(2):1055-63. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5777.

Quercetin induces the expression of peroxiredoxins 3 and 5 via the Nrf2/NRF1
transcription pathway.

Miyamoto N(1), Izumi H, Miyamoto R, Kondo H, Tawara A, Sasaguri Y, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Fukuoka, Japan.

PURPOSE: The flavonoids have potent antioxidant and free-radical scavenging
properties and are beneficial in the prevention and treatment of ocular diseases 
including glaucoma. The authors have previously reported that antiglaucoma agents
could transcriptionally activate the antioxidant protein peroxiredoxin (PRDX)2.
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether quercetin can activate
transcription factors and induce the expression of the PRDX family.
METHODS: To demonstrate whether quercetin can transcriptionally induce the
expression of the PRDX family, trabecular meshwork cells were treated with
quercetin, and PRDX expression and transcription factors were both investigated
by Western blot analysis, reporter assays, and siRNA strategies. Subsequently,
cellular sensitivity to oxidative stress was determined.
RESULTS: Expression of the PRDX3 and PRDX5 genes was induced by quercetin in a
time- and dose-dependent manner. NRF1 transactivates the promoter activity of
both PRDX3 and PRDX5 but not PRDX2 and PRDX4. Quercetin can also induce the
expression of Nrf2 and NRF1 but not of Ets1, Ets2, or Foxo3a. Knockdown of NRF1
expression significantly reduced the expression of both PRDX3 and PRDX5. Reporter
assays showed that NRF1 transactivated the promoter activity of both PRDX3 and
PRDX5 and that the downregulation of NRF1 with siRNA repressed the promoter
activity of both PRDX3 and PRDX5. Furthermore, the downregulation of NRF1, PRDX3,
and PRDX5 renders trabecular meshwork cells sensitive to hydrogen peroxide.
Finally, NRF1 activation by quercetin was completely abolished by the knockdown
of Nrf2.
CONCLUSIONS: Quercetin upregulates the antioxidant peroxiredoxins through the
activation of the Nrf2/NRF1 transcription pathway and protects against oxidative 
stress-induced ocular disease.

PMID: 21051700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 1;70(21):8822-31. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0638. Epub
2010 Oct 26.

EGFR promotes lung tumorigenesis by activating miR-7 through a Ras/ERK/Myc
pathway that targets the Ets2 transcriptional repressor ERF.

Chou YT(1), Lin HH, Lien YC, Wang YH, Hong CF, Kao YR, Lin SC, Chang YC, Lin SY, 
Chen SJ, Chen HC, Yeh SD, Wu CW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences and NRPGM Core Facilities for Proteomics and 
Glycomcis and Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) mediate distinct gene regulatory pathways triggered by
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation, which occurs commonly in lung
cancers with poor prognosis. In this study, we report the discovery and
mechanistic characterization of the miRNA miR-7 as an oncogenic "oncomiR" and its
role as a key mediator of EGFR signaling in lung cancer cells. EGFR activation or
ectopic expression of Ras as well as c-Myc stimulated miR-7 expression in an
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent manner, suggesting that
EGFR induces miR-7 expression through a Ras/ERK/Myc pathway. In support of this
likelihood, c-Myc bound to the miR-7 promoter and enhanced its activity. Ectopic 
miR-7 promoted cell growth and tumor formation in lung cancer cells,
significantly increasing the mortality of nude mice hosts, which were
orthotopically implanted with lung cancers. Quantitative proteomic analysis
revealed that miR-7 decreased levels of the Ets2 transcriptional repression
factor ERF, the coding sequence of which was found to contain a miR-7
complementary sequence. Indeed, ectopic miR-7 inhibited production of ERF
messages with a wild-type but not a silently mutated coding sequence, and ectopic
miR-7 rescued growth arrest produced by wild-type but not mutated ERF. Together, 
these results identified that ERF is a direct target of miR-7 in lung cancer. Our
findings suggest that miR-7 may act as an important modulator of EGFR-mediated
oncogenesis, with potential applications as a novel prognostic biomarker and
therapeutic target in lung cancer.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 20978205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Sep;129(2):347-60. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1219-y. 
Epub 2010 Oct 23.

Biologic role of activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule overexpression in
breast cancer cell lines and clinical tumor tissue.

Hein S(1), Müller V, Köhler N, Wikman H, Krenkel S, Streichert T, Schweizer M,
Riethdorf S, Assmann V, Ihnen M, Beck K, Issa R, Jänicke F, Pantel K,
Milde-Langosch K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistr. 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.

The activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) is overexpressed in many
mammary tumors, but controversial results about its role and prognostic impact in
breast cancer have been reported. Therefore, we evaluated the biologic effects of
ALCAM expression in two breast cancer cell lines and a larger cohort of mammary
carcinomas. By stable transfections, MCF7 cells with ALCAM overexpression and
MDA-MB231 cells with reduced ALCAM levels were generated and analyzed in
functional assays and cDNA microarrays. In addition, an immunohistochemical study
on 347 patients with breast cancer with long-term follow-up and analysis of
disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) was performed. In both cell lines, high ALCAM
expression was associated with reduced cell motility. In addition, ALCAM
silencing in MDA-MB231 cells resulted in lower invasive potential, whereas high
ALCAM expression was associated with increased apoptosis in both cell lines.
Among genes which were differentially expressed in clones with altered ALCAM
expression, there was an overlap of 15 genes between both cell lines, among them 
cathepsin D, keratin 7, gelsolin, and ets2 whose deregulation was validated by
western blot analysis. In MDA-MB231 cells, we observed a correlation with VEGF
expression which was validated by enzyme-linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA). Our
IHC results on primary breast carcinomas showed that ALCAM expression was
associated with an estrogen receptor-positive phenotype. In addition, strong
ALCAM immunostaining correlated with nodal involvement and the presence of tumor 
cells in bone marrow. By Kaplan-Meier analysis, strong ALCAM expression in ductal
carcinomas correlated with shorter recurrence-free intervals (P=0.048) and
overall survival (OAS, P=0.003). Our results indicate that the biologic role of
ALCAM in breast cancer is complex, but overexpression might be relevant for
outcome in ductal carcinomas.

PMID: 20972617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Transl Oncol. 2010 Aug 1;3(4):230-8.

Effect of ovarian cancer ascites on cell migration and gene expression in an
epithelial ovarian cancer in vitro model.

Meunier L(1), Puiffe ML, Le Page C, Filali-Mouhim A, Chevrette M, Tonin PN,
Provencher DM, Mes-Masson AM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal/Institut
du cancer de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

A third of patients with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) present ascites. The
cellular fraction of ascites often consists of EOC cells, lymphocytes, and
mesothelial cells, whereas the acellular fraction contains cytokines and
angiogenic factors. Clinically, the presence of ascites correlates with
intraperitoneal and retroperitoneal tumor spread. We have used OV-90, a
tumorigenic EOC cell line derived from the malignant ascites of a chemonaive
ovarian cancer patient, as a model to assess the effect of ascites on migration
potential using an in vitro wound-healing assay. A recent report of an invasion
assay described the effect of ascites on the invasion potential of the OV-90 cell
line. Ascites sampled from 31 ovarian cancer patients were tested and compared
with either 5% fetal bovine serum or no serum for their nonstimulatory or
stimulatory effect on the migration potential of the OV-90 cell line. A
supervised analysis of data generated by the Affymetrix HG-U133A GeneChip
identified differentially expressed genes from OV-90 cells exposed to ascites
that had either a nonstimulatory or a stimulatory effect on migration. Ten genes 
(IRS2, CTSD, NRAS, MLXIP, HMGCR, LAMP1, ETS2, NID1, SMARCD1, and CD44) were
upregulated in OV-90 cells exposed to ascites, allowing a nonstimulatory effect
on cell migration. These findings were validated by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. In addition, the gene expression of IRS2 and MLXIP each correlated with
prognosis when their expression was assessed in an independent set of primary
cultures established from ovarian ascites. This study revealed novel candidates
that may play a role in ovarian cancer cell migration.

PMCID: PMC2915414
PMID: 20689764  [PubMed]


115. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Oct;30(10):1990-7. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.211706. Epub 2010 Jul 29.

Ets-1 and Ets-2 regulate the expression of microRNA-126 in endothelial cells.

Harris TA(1), Yamakuchi M, Kondo M, Oettgen P, Lowenstein CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Medicine Program, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: MicroRNA plays important roles in vascular biology, but the regulation
of endothelial-specific microRNA is not well characterized. MicroRNA-126
(miR-126) is highly expressed in endothelial cells, and it regulates angiogenesis
and vascular inflammation. Here we show that the transcription factors Ets-1 and 
Ets-2 regulate miR-126 expression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A genomic region between -71 and -100 bp upstream of the
miR-126 transcriptional start site is critical for transactivation of the gene
containing miR-126. This genomic region contains a potential Ets binding site.
Mutations within the Ets binding site block transactivation, and Ets-1 and Ets-2 
interact with this critical genomic region. Knockdown of endogenous Ets-1 and
Ets-2 decreases miR-126 expression. Finally, knockdown of miR-126 alters
regulation of an Ets-1 target gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data show that the transcription factors Ets-1
and Ets-2 play a key role in controlling the expression of miR-126 and suggest
that miR-126 may mediate some of their vascular effects.

PMCID: PMC3121560
PMID: 20671229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;163(4):523-9. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0245. Epub 2010 Jul 
8.

Upregulation of CDKN2A and suppression of cyclin D1 gene expressions in
ACTH-secreting pituitary adenomas.

Tani Y(1), Inoshita N, Sugiyama T, Kato M, Yamada S, Shichiri M, Hirata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Endocrinology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University Graduate School, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Cushing's disease (CD) is usually caused by ACTH-secreting pituitary
microadenomas, while silent corticotroph adenomas (SCA) are macroadenomas without
Cushingoid features. However, the molecular mechanism(s) underlying their
different tumor growth remains unknown. The aim of the current study was to
evaluate and compare the gene expression profile of cell cycle regulators and
cell growth-related transcription factors in CD, SCA, and non-functioning
adenomas (NFA).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Tumor tissue specimens resected from 43 pituitary tumors were
studied: CD (n=10), SCA (n=11), and NFA (n=22). The absolute transcript numbers
of the following genes were quantified with real-time quantitative PCR assays:
CDKN2A (or p16(INK4a)), cyclin family (A1, B1, D1, and E1), E2F1, RB1, BUB1,
BUBR1, ETS1, and ETS2. Protein expressions of p16 and cyclin D1 were
semi-quantitatively evaluated by immunohistochemical study.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: CDKN2A gene expression was about fourfold greater in CD
than in SCA and NFA. The gene expressions of cyclins D1, E1, and B1, but not of
A1, in CD were significantly suppressed than those in NFA. Cyclin D1 gene
expression positively correlated with cyclins B1 and E1. The gene expressions of 
E2F1, RB1, BUB1, BUBR1, ETS1, and ETS2 did not differ between each group.
Positive immunostaining for p16 and negative immunostaining for cyclin D1 were
more frequent in CD than in NFA; there were positive correlations between mRNA
and protein expressions of p16 and cyclin D1. Thus, it is suggested that
upregulated CDKN2A with the concomitant downregulated cyclin gene family is
partly involved in the small size of ACTH-secreting adenoma.

PMID: 20616110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 9;397(4):697-705. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.06.010. Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Gene expression profiles of cryopreserved CD34(+) human umbilical cord blood
cells are related to their bone marrow reconstitution abilities in mouse
xenografts.

Sudo K(1), Yasuda J, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Japan.

Human umbilical cord blood (UCB) cells are an alternative source of hematopoietic
stem cells for treatment of leukemia and other diseases. It is very difficult to 
assess the quality of UCB cells in the clinical situation. Here, we sought to
assess the quality of UCB cells by transplantation to immunodeficient mice.
Cryopreserved CD34(+) UCB cells from twelve different human donors were
transplanted into sublethally irradiated NOD/shi-scid Jic mice. In parallel, the 
gene expression profiles of the UCB cells were determined from oligonucleotide
microarrays. UCB cells from three donors failed to establish an engraftment in
the host mice, while the other nine succeeded to various extents. Gene expression
profiling indicated that 71 genes, including HOXB4, C/EBP-beta, and ETS2, were
specifically overexpressed and 23 genes were suppressed more than 2-fold in the
successful UCB cells compared to those that failed. Functional annotation
revealed that cell growth and cell cycle regulators were more abundant in the
successful UCB cells. Our results suggest that hematopoietic ability may vary
among cryopreserved UCB cells and that this ability can be distinguished by
profiling expression of certain sets of genes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20570655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Placenta. 2010 Jul;31(7):630-40. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.05.001. Epub 2010
May 31.

New insights for Ets2 function in trophoblast using lentivirus-mediated gene
knockdown in trophoblast stem cells.

Odiatis C(1), Georgiades P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, University Campus,
Nicosia, Cyprus.

Mouse trophoblast stem (TS) cells represent a unique in vitro system that
provides an unlimited supply of TS cells for the study of trophoblast
differentiation and TS cell self-renewal. Although the mouse transcription factor
Ets2 is required for TS cell self-renewal, its role in this and in TS cell
differentiation has not been explored fully, partly due to the early lethality of
Ets2 null mice. To address this, we developed a novel lentivirus-based system
that resulted in efficient Ets2 knockdown in the overwhelming majority of TS
cells. This system enables functional studies in TS cells, especially for genes
required for TS cell self-renewal because TS cell derivation using gene-knockout 
embryos for such genes depends on TS cell self-renewal. Using
morphological/morphometric criteria and gene expression analysis, we show that
the requirement for Ets2 in self-renewal of TS cells cultured in 'stem cell
medium' (SCM) involves maintenance of the expression of genes that inhibit TS
cell differentiation in SCM, such as Cdx2 and Esrrb, and preservation of the
undifferentiated TS cell morphology. During TS cell differentiation caused by
Cdx2/Esrrb downregulation, due to either Ets2 knockdown in SCM or culture in
differentiation medium (DM), Ets2 is also required for the promotion of
trophoblast giant cell (TGC) and junctional zone trophoblast (JZT)
differentiation. This TGC differentiation involves Ets2-dependent expression of
Hand1, a gene required for the differentiation of all TGC types. This study
uncovers new roles for Ets2 in TS cell self-renewal and differentiation and
demonstrates the usefulness of this lentivirus system for gene function studies
in TS cells.

PMID: 20569982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 20;285(34):26417-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.121830. Epub
2010 Jun 16.

Differential up-regulation of MAP kinase phosphatases MKP3/DUSP6 and DUSP5 by
Ets2 and c-Jun converge in the control of the growth arrest versus proliferation 
response of MCF-7 breast cancer cells to phorbol ester.

Nunes-Xavier CE(1), Tárrega C, Cejudo-Marín R, Frijhoff J, Sandin A, Ostman A,
Pulido R.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia 46012, Spain.

Different levels of regulation account for the inactivation of MAP kinases by
MAPK phosphatases (MKPs), in a cell type- and stimuli-dependent manner. MCF-7
human breast carcinoma cells treated with the phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA) suffer growth arrest and show morphological alterations, which depend on
the activation of the ERK1/2 MAP kinases. MKP3/DUSP6 and DUSP5 MAP kinase
phosphatases, two negative regulators of ERK1/2, were specifically up-regulated
in MCF-7 and SKBR3 cells in response to PMA. MKP3 and DUSP5 up-regulation
required the prolonged activation of the ERK1/2 pathway, and correlated with the 
shutdown of this route. MKP3 induction relied on the activation of the Ets2
transcription factor, whereas DUSP5 induction depended on the activation of
c-Jun. Diminishing the expression of MKP3 and DUSP5 raised the activation of
ERK1/2, and accelerated growth arrest of PMA-treated MCF-7 cells. Conversely,
MCF-7 cell lines expressing high levels of MKP3 or DUSP5 did not undergo
PMA-triggered growth arrest, displayed a migratory phenotype, and formed colonies
in soft agar. We propose that the differential up-regulation of MKP3 by Ets2 and 
of DUSP5 by c-Jun may converge in similar functional roles for these MAP kinase
phosphatases in the growth arrest versus proliferation decisions of breast cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC2924073
PMID: 20554528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Jul 14;58(13):7616-23. doi: 10.1021/jf101084e.

Ethyl acetate fraction of adlay bran ethanolic extract inhibits oncogene
expression and suppresses DMH-induced preneoplastic lesions of the colon in F344 
rats through an anti-inflammatory pathway.

Chung CP(1), Hsu HY, Huang DW, Hsu HH, Lin JT, Shih CK, Chiang W.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Food Science and Technology, Center for Food and
Biomolecules, College of Bioresources and Agriculture, National Taiwan
University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.

Adlay ( Coix lachryma-jobi L. var. ma-yuen Stapf) is a grass crop and was
reported to possess anti-inflammatory activity and an antiproliferative effect in
cancer cell lines. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of the
ethyl acetate fraction of an adlay bran ethanolic extract (ABE-Ea) on colon
carcinogenesis in an animal model and investigate its mechanism. Male F344 rats
received 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH) and consumed different doses of ABE-Ea. The 
medium-dose group (17.28 mg of ABE-Ea/day) exhibited the best suppressive effect 
on colon carcinogenesis and prevented preneoplastic mucin-depleted foci (MDF)
formation. Moreover, RAS and Ets2 oncogenes were significantly down-regulated in 
this group compared to the negative control group, whereas Wee1, a gene involved 
in the cell cycle, was up-regulated. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) protein expression 
was significantly suppressed in all colons receiving the ABE-Ea, indicating that 
ABE-Ea delayed carcinogenesis by suppressing chronic inflammation. ABE-Ea
included considerable a proportion of phenolic compounds, and ferulic acid was
the major phenolic acid (5206 microg/g ABE-Ea) on the basis of HPLC analysis.
Results from this study suggest that ABE-Ea suppressed DMH-indued preneoplastic
lesions of the colon in F344 rats and that ferulic acid may be one of the active 
compounds.

PMID: 20536243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nature. 2010 Jun 10;465(7299):813-7. doi: 10.1038/nature09106.

Tumour angiogenesis is reduced in the Tc1 mouse model of Down's syndrome.

Reynolds LE(1), Watson AR, Baker M, Jones TA, D'Amico G, Robinson SD, Joffre C,
Garrido-Urbani S, Rodriguez-Manzaneque JC, Martino-Echarri E, Aurrand-Lions M,
Sheer D, Dagna-Bricarelli F, Nizetic D, McCabe CJ, Turnell AS, Kermorgant S,
Imhof BA, Adams R, Fisher EM, Tybulewicz VL, Hart IR, Hodivala-Dilke KM.

Author information: 
(1)Adhesion and Angiogenesis Laboratory, Barts Institute of Cancer, Barts and The
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, John
Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.
l.reynolds@qmul.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Nature. 2010 Jul 15;466(7304):398.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Aug;10(8):534-5.

Down's syndrome (DS) is a genetic disorder caused by full or partial trisomy of
human chromosome 21 and presents with many clinical phenotypes including a
reduced incidence of solid tumours. Recent work with the Ts65Dn model of DS,
which has orthologues of about 50% of the genes on chromosome 21 (Hsa21), has
indicated that three copies of the ETS2 (ref. 3) or DS candidate region 1 (DSCR1)
genes (a previously known suppressor of angiogenesis) is sufficient to inhibit
tumour growth. Here we use the Tc1 transchromosomic mouse model of DS to dissect 
the contribution of extra copies of genes on Hsa21 to tumour angiogenesis. This
mouse expresses roughly 81% of Hsa21 genes but not the human DSCR1 region. We
transplanted B16F0 and Lewis lung carcinoma tumour cells into Tc1 mice and showed
that growth of these tumours was substantially reduced compared with wild-type
littermate controls. Furthermore, tumour angiogenesis was significantly repressed
in Tc1 mice. In particular, in vitro and in vivo angiogenic responses to vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were inhibited. Examination of the genes on the 
segment of Hsa21 in Tc1 mice identified putative anti-angiogenic genes
(ADAMTS1and ERG) and novel endothelial cell-specific genes, never previously
shown to be involved in angiogenesis (JAM-B and PTTG1IP), that, when
overexpressed, are responsible for inhibiting angiogenic responses to VEGF. Three
copies of these genes within the stromal compartment reduced tumour angiogenesis,
explaining the reduced tumour growth in DS. Furthermore, we expect that, in
addition to the candidate genes that we show to be involved in the repression of 
angiogenesis, the Tc1 mouse model of DS will permit the identification of other
endothelium-specific anti-angiogenic targets relevant to a broad spectrum of
cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC3479956
PMID: 20535211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Genet Mol Res. 2010 May 25;9(2):987-93. doi: 10.4238/vol9-2gmr786.

Genetic relationships among turnip (Brassica rapa var. rapa) genotypes.

Yildirim E(1), Yildirim N, Ercisli S, Agar G, Karlidag H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture, Ispir Hamza Polat Vacational School, Erzurum,
Turkey.

Turnip (Brassica rapa var. rapa) is one of the main vegetables consumed by people
living in Eastern Anatolia in Turkey. In this region, farmers obtain their own
seeds for production, which results in considerable morphological variability. We
examined the genetic variation and relationships among 11 turnip genotypes
sampled from diverse environments of the Erzurum region located in Eastern
Anatolia in Turkey. Thirty-two Operon RAPD primers were screened; among them, 20 
gave reproducible and clear DNA fragments after amplification. The average
polymorphism ratio was 90.4%. The genetic distance between turnip genotypes were 
found to range from 0.302 to 0.733, indicating high genetic variability. Eleven
genotypes were divided into three main clusters in a dendrogram; ETS2 and ETS8
genotypes were the most distant. We conclude that RAPD analysis would be useful
for genotyping turnip genotypes.

PMID: 20506086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Evol Biol. 2010 Feb;23(2):335-49. doi: 10.1111/j.1420-9101.2009.01904.x.

Evolutionary history of the butterflyfishes (f: Chaetodontidae) and the rise of
coral feeding fishes.

Bellwood DR(1), Klanten S, Cowman PF, Pratchett MS, Konow N, van Herwerden L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Marine and Tropical Biology, James Cook University, Townsville, Qld,
Australia. david.bellwood@jcu.edu.au

Of the 5000 fish species on coral reefs, corals dominate the diet of just 41
species. Most (61%) belong to a single family, the butterflyfishes
(Chaetodontidae). We examine the evolutionary origins of chaetodontid corallivory
using a new molecular phylogeny incorporating all 11 genera. A 1759-bp sequence
of nuclear (S7I1 and ETS2) and mitochondrial (cytochrome b) data yielded a fully 
resolved tree with strong support for all major nodes. A chronogram, constructed 
using Bayesian inference with multiple parametric priors, and recent ecological
data reveal that corallivory has arisen at least five times over a period of 12
Ma, from 15.7 to 3 Ma. A move onto coral reefs in the Miocene foreshadowed rapid 
cladogenesis within Chaetodon and the origins of corallivory, coinciding with a
global reorganization of coral reefs and the expansion of fast-growing corals.
This historical association underpins the sensitivity of specific butterflyfish
clades to global coral decline.

PMID: 20487131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Gut. 2010 Sep;59(9):1236-44. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.195701. Epub 2010 May 17.

Expression of an ASCL2 related stem cell signature and IGF2 in colorectal cancer 
liver metastases with 11p15.5 gain.

Stange DE(1), Engel F, Longerich T, Koo BK, Koch M, Delhomme N, Aigner M, Toedt
G, Schirmacher P, Lichter P, Weitz J, Radlwimmer B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer 
Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Gut. 2010 Sep;59(9):1164-5.
    Gut. 2011 Nov;60(11):1606-7; author reply 1607.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Liver metastases are the leading cause of death in
colorectal cancer. To gain better insight into the biology of metastasis and
possibly identify new therapeutic targets we systematically investigated
liver-metastasis-specific molecular aberrations.
METHODS: Primary colorectal cancer (pCRC) and matched liver metastases (LMs) from
the same patients were analysed by microarray-based comparative genomic
hybridisation in 21 pairs and gene expression profiling in 18 pairs. Publicly
available databases were used to confirm findings in independent datasets.
RESULTS: Chromosome aberration patterns and expression profiles of pCRC and
matched LMs were strikingly similar. Unsupervised cluster analysis of genomic
data showed that 20/21 pairs were more similar to each other than to any other
analysed tumour. A median of only 11 aberrations per patient was found to be
different between pCRC and LM, and expression of only 16 genes was overall
changed upon metastasis. One region on chromosome band 11p15.5 showed a
characteristic gain in LMs in 6/21 patients. This gain could be confirmed in an
independent dataset of LMs (n=50). Localised within this region, the growth
factor IGF2 (p=0.003) and the intestinal stem cell specific transcription factor 
ASCL2 (p=0.029) were found to be over-expressed in affected LM. Several ASCL2
target genes were upregulated in this subgroup of LM, including the intestinal
stem cell marker OLFM4 (p=0.013). The correlation between ASCL2 expression and
four known direct transcriptional targets (LGR5, EPHB3, ETS2 and SOX9) could be
confirmed in an independent expression dataset (n=50).
CONCLUSIONS: With unprecedented resolution a striking conservation of genomic
alterations was demonstrated in liver metastases, suggesting that metastasis
typically occurs after the pCRC has fully matured. In addition, we characterised 
a subset of liver metastases with an ASCL2-related stem-cell signature likely to 
affect metastatic behaviour of tumour cells.

PMID: 20479215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Genome Res. 2010 Apr;20(4):458-72. doi: 10.1101/gr.101469.109. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

Examination of transcriptional networks reveals an important role for TCFAP2C,
SMARCA4, and EOMES in trophoblast stem cell maintenance.

Kidder BL(1), Palmer S.

Author information: 
(1)EMD Serono Research Institute, Inc., Rockland, MA 02370, USA.
benjamin.kidder@emdserono.com

Trophoblast stem cells (TS cells), derived from the trophectoderm (TE) of
blastocysts, require transcription factors (TFs) and external signals (FGF4,
INHBA/NODAL/TGFB1) for self-renewal. While many reports have focused on TF
networks that regulate embryonic stem cell (ES cell) self-renewal and
pluripotency, little is know about TF networks that regulate self-renewal in TS
cells. To further understand transcriptional networks in TS cells, we used
chromatin immunoprecipitation with DNA microarray hybridization (ChIP-chip)
analysis to investigate targets of the TFs-TCFAP2C, EOMES, ETS2, and GATA3-and a 
chromatin remodeling factor, SMARCA4. We then evaluated the transcriptional
states of target genes using transcriptome analysis and genome-wide analysis of
histone H3 acetylation (AcH3). Our results describe previously unknown
transcriptional networks in TS cells, including TF occupancy of genes involved in
ES cell self-renewal and pluripotency, co-occupancy of TCFAP2C, SMARCA4, and
EOMES at a significant number of genes, and transcriptional regulatory circuitry 
within the five factors. Moreover, RNAi depletion of Tcfap2c, Smarca4, and Eomes 
transcripts resulted in a loss of normal colony morphology and down-regulation of
TS cell-specific genes, suggesting an important role for TCFAP2C, SMARCA4, and
EOMES in TS cell self-renewal. Through genome-wide mapping and global expression 
analysis of five TF target genes, our data provide a comprehensive analysis of
transcriptional networks that regulate TS cell self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC2847749
PMID: 20176728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cancer. 2010 Feb 19;9:39. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-39.

Analysis of an alternative human CD133 promoter reveals the implication of
Ras/ERK pathway in tumor stem-like hallmarks.

Tabu K(1), Kimura T, Sasai K, Wang L, Bizen N, Nishihara H, Taga T, Tanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, Hokkaido University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: An increasing number of studies support the presence of stem-like
cells in human malignancies. These cells are primarily responsible for tumor
initiation and thus considered as a potential target to eradicate tumors. CD133
has been identified as an important cell surface marker to enrich the stem-like
population in various human tumors. To reveal the molecular machinery underlying 
the stem-like features in tumor cells, we analyzed a promoter of CD133 gene using
human colon carcinoma Caco-2 and synovial sarcoma Fuji cells, which endogenously 
express CD133 gene.
RESULTS: A reporter analysis revealed that P5 promoter, located far upstream in a
human CD133 gene locus, exhibits the highest activity among the five putative
promoters (P1 to P5). Deletion and mutation analysis identified two ETS binding
sites in the P5 region as being essential for its promoter activity.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated the specific binding between
nuclear factors and the ETS binding sequence. Overexpression of dominant-negative
forms of Ets2 and Elk1 resulted in the significant decrease of P5 activity.
Furthermore, treatment of Fuji cells with a specific MEK/ERK inhibitor, U0126,
also markedly decreased CD133 expression, but there was no significant effect in 
Caco-2 cells, suggesting cell type-specific regulation of CD133 expression.
Instead, the side population, another hallmark of TSLCs, was dramatically
diminished in Caco-2 cells by U0126. Finally, Ras-mediated oncogenic
transformation in normal human astrocytes conferred the stem-like capability to
form neurosphere-like colonies with the increase of CD133 mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the Ras/ERK pathway at least in part contributes to
the maintenance and the acquisition of stem-like hallmarks, although the extent
of its contribution is varied in a cell type-specific manner. These findings
could help our comprehensive understanding of tumor stemness, and also improve
the development of eradicative therapies against human malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2836276
PMID: 20167130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 15;70(4):1323-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1474. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

An ets2-driven transcriptional program in tumor-associated macrophages promotes
tumor metastasis.

Zabuawala T(1), Taffany DA, Sharma SM, Merchant A, Adair B, Srinivasan R, Rosol
TJ, Fernandez S, Huang K, Leone G, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Center for Biostatistics,
College of Public Health, and Tumor Microenvironment Program, Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) are implicated in breast cancer metastasis,
but relatively little is known about the underlying genes and pathways that are
involved. The transcription factor Ets2 is a direct target of signaling pathways 
involved in regulating macrophage functions during inflammation. We conditionally
deleted Ets in TAMs to determine its function at this level on mouse mammary
tumor growth and metastasis. Ets2 deletion in TAMs decreased the frequency and
size of lung metastases in three different mouse models of breast cancer
metastasis. Expression profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in
isolated TAMs established that Ets2 repressed a gene program that included
several well-characterized inhibitors of angiogenesis. Consistent with these
results, Ets2 ablation in TAMs led to decreased angiogenesis and decreased growth
of tumors. An Ets2-TAM expression signature consisting of 133 genes was
identified within human breast cancer expression data which could retrospectively
predict overall survival of patients with breast cancer in two independent data
sets. In summary, we identified Ets2 as a central driver of a transcriptional
program in TAMs that acts to promote lung metastasis of breast tumors.

PMCID: PMC2822898
PMID: 20145133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biochimie. 2010 Mar;92(3):317-20. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2009.12.012. Epub 2010
Jan 1.

Mechanisms of triplex DNA-mediated inhibition of transcription initiation in
cells.

Jain A(1), Magistri M, Napoli S, Carbone GM, Catapano CV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, Via Vela 6, Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Triplex-forming oligonucleotides (TFOs) are attractive tools to control gene
expression at the transcriptional level. This anti-gene approach has proven to be
successful in various experimental settings. However, the mechanisms leading to
transcriptional repression in cells have not been fully investigated yet. Here,
we examined the consequence of triplex DNA formation on the binding of
transcriptional activators, co-activators and RNA Polymerase II to the ets2 gene 
promoter using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. The triplex target sequence 
was located approximately 40-bp upstream of the transcription start site (TSS)
and overlapped an Sp1 binding site relevant for ets2 transcription. We found that
the ets2-TFO prevented binding of Sp1, TAF(II)130 and TAF(II)250 to the ets2
promoter, while binding of RNA polymerase II and TBP were not affected. The
effects were both sequence and target specific, since the TFO had no effect on
the c-myc promoter and a mutated ets2 promoter construct. Thus, triplex DNA
formation near a TSS leads to formation of a non-functional pre-initiation
complex (PIC) by blocking binding of transcriptional activators and co-activator 
molecules. This is the first direct demonstration of interference with PIC
assembly at the TSS by oligonucleotide-triplex DNA formation in cells.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20045441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Gene Expr. 2010;15(2):61-73.

Differential allelic distribution of V-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene
homolog2 (ETS2) functional polymorphisms in different group of patients.

Chatterjee A(1), Dutta S, Mukherjee S, Mukherjee N, Chandra S, Mukherjee A, Sinha
S, Panda CK, Chaudhuri K, Mukhopadyay K.

Author information: 
(1)Manovikas Biomedical Research and Diagnostic Centre, MRIH, Kolkata, India.

V-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog2 (ETS2), located at chromosome 
21 and overexpressed in Down's syndrome (DS), has known cancer regulatory
functions. Because leukemia is of common occurrence in DS subjects while solid
tumors are rare, we have explored the role of ETS2 functional genetic
polymorphisms in this differential oncological development. In silico methods
were used for identifying deleterious SNPs, tagged SNPs, and linkage
disequilibrium followed by genotyping of 14 SNPs in Indo-Caucasoid individuals
(N=668). Significantly different allelic frequencies for rs457705, rs1051420, and
rs1051425 were observed in Indian controls (N=149) compared to other ethnic
groups. A heterozygous "T" insertion, between chromosomal contig positions
40195541 and 40195542, was observed in DS subjects and their parents. rs461155
showed significant allelic and genotypic association in breast and oral cancer
patients. Significantly higher occurrence of G-C haplotype (rs461155-rs1051425)
was also observed in these patients compared to DS and leukemic patients. This is
the first report on this type of allelic discrimination pattern of ETS2 under
different disease conditions. From the data obtained it may be proposed that
allelic discrimination of deleterious SNPs in ETS2 may play a regulatory role in 
the differential development of malignancy in DS subjects.

PMID: 21526717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2010 Jan 1;2:22-35.

Transcriptional regulation of the presenilin-1 gene controls gamma-secretase
activity.

Lee S(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, Texas 76107,
USA.

Inhibition of basal JNK activity by JNK inhibitor SP600125 or JNK1siRNA repressed
presenilin-1 (PS1) expression in SK-N-SH cells by augmenting the level of p53, a 
repressor of the PS1 gene (1). We now showed that repression of PS1 transcription
by JNK inhibitor SP600125 inhibited gamma-secretase mediated processing of
amyloid precursor protein (APP) resulting in the accumulation of C99 fragment and
the reduction of secreted Abeta40 level without altering the expression of
nicastrin (NCT). Co-treatment of cells with SP600125 and p53 inhibitor,
pifithrin-alpha, partially nullified the suppressive effects of SP610025 on PS1
expression and secreted Abeta40 level. Suppression of JNK1 by JNK1siRNA also
decreased Abeta40 level. Furthermore, overexpression of the repressors p53,
ZNF237 and CHD3 of the PS1 gene also suppressed the processing of APP through
repression of PS1 transcription by deacetylation of histone at the PS1 promoter. 
Transcriptional activator Ets2 increased PS1 protein and secreted Abeta40 levels 
without affecting the expression of NCT by activating PS1 transcription via
hyper-acetylation of histone at the PS1 promoter. Therefore, regulation of PS1
transcription modulates gamma-secretase activity.

PMID: 20036849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov 25;7:135. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-135.

Ets-2 and p53 mediate cAMP-induced MMP-2 expression, activity and trophoblast
invasion.

Staun-Ram E(1), Goldman S, Shalev E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Research in Reproductive Sciences, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Ha'Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel. elsebeth@technion.ac.il

BACKGROUND: We have previously shown that Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) -2 is a 
key-enzyme in early trophoblast invasion and that Protein Kinase A (PKA)
increases MMP-2 expression and trophoblast invasion. The aim of this study was to
examine MMP -2 regulation by PKA in invasive trophoblasts: JAR choriocarcinoma
cell-line and 6-8 w first trimester trophoblasts.
METHODS: The effect of Forskolin (PKA) on MMP-2 expression was assessed by
Northern Blot and RT-PCR. Possible transcription factors binding to consensus
MMP-2 promoter sequences in response to Forskolin, were detected by EMSA binding 
assay and their expression assessed by western blot analysis. Antisense
transfection of relevant transcription factors was performed and the inhibitory
effect assessed on MMP-2 expression (RT-PCR), secretion (zymography) and
trophoblast invasiveness (transwell migration assay).
RESULTS: We found that Forskolin increased MMP-2 mRNA in JAR cells within 24
hours, and induced binding to p53, Ets, C/EBP and AP-2. Transcription factors
Ets-2, phospho- p53, C/EBP epsilon, C/EBP lambda and AP-2 alpha bound to their
respective binding sequences in response to Forskolin and the expressions of
these transcription factors were all elevated in Forskolin- treated cells.
Inhibition of Ets-2 and p53 reduced MMP-2 expression, secretion and invasiveness 
of Forskolin treated cells.
CONCLUSION: MMP-2 is regulated by PKA through several binding sites and
transcription factors including Ets-2, p53, C/EBP, C/EBP lambda and AP-2 alpha.
Ets-2 and p53 mediate cAMP- induced trophoblast invasiveness, through regulation 
of MMP-2.

PMCID: PMC2787504
PMID: 19939245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Gene. 2010 Jan 15;450(1-2):103-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.10.008.

Epigenetic regulation of caspase-3 gene expression in rat brain development.

Yakovlev A(1), Khafizova M, Abdullaev Z, Loukinov D, Kondratyev A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The expression levels of caspase-3, a major contributor to the execution of
neuronal apoptosis, markedly decrease in the process of brain maturation. We have
previously cloned the rat caspase-3 gene promoter and identified its essential
regulatory elements. In the present study, we extended previous findings by
examining transcriptional regulation of caspase-3 expression in the rat brain of 
two different ages, corresponding to the immature and mature brain. In
particular, we determined that the rate of transcription initiation substantially
declines during brain maturation. Furthermore, we established that mRNA levels of
Ets1, Ets2, and Sp1 do not change in the brain with maturation, suggesting that
these transcription factors do not contribute to age-dependent caspase-3
down-regulation. Hence, we examined a role of DNA methylation and histone
modification in this process. Utilizing bisulfite DNA sequencing, we determined
the presence of age-dependent differentially methylated fragments within the
caspase-3 promoter region. Strikingly, differentially methylated CpG sites
correspond to the predicted binding sites for a number of transcription factors
that have been previously shown to be involved in neuronal development and
differentiation. Moreover, using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found that
mature brains displayed significantly lower levels of histone 3 acetylated Lys14 
and histone 4 acetylated Lys5, 8, 12, and 16. This observation is consistent with
the decreased level of expression of caspase-3 in the mature brain. Together with
our observation that histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, increased the
level of caspase-3 mRNA in cortical neurons in vitro, these results further
indicate an important role of epigenetic factors in the regulation of caspase-3
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2795079
PMID: 19909801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Nature. 2009 Oct 22;461(7267):1084-91. doi: 10.1038/nature08486.

Pten in stromal fibroblasts suppresses mammary epithelial tumours.

Trimboli AJ(1), Cantemir-Stone CZ, Li F, Wallace JA, Merchant A, Creasap N,
Thompson JC, Caserta E, Wang H, Chong JL, Naidu S, Wei G, Sharma SM, Stephens JA,
Fernandez SA, Gurcan MN, Weinstein MB, Barsky SH, Yee L, Rosol TJ, Stromberg PC, 
Robinson ML, Pepin F, Hallett M, Park M, Ostrowski MC, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Biological Sciences, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The tumour stroma is believed to contribute to some of the most malignant
characteristics of epithelial tumours. However, signalling between stromal and
tumour cells is complex and remains poorly understood. Here we show that the
genetic inactivation of Pten in stromal fibroblasts of mouse mammary glands
accelerated the initiation, progression and malignant transformation of mammary
epithelial tumours. This was associated with the massive remodelling of the
extracellular matrix (ECM), innate immune cell infiltration and increased
angiogenesis. Loss of Pten in stromal fibroblasts led to increased expression,
phosphorylation (T72) and recruitment of Ets2 to target promoters known to be
involved in these processes. Remarkably, Ets2 inactivation in Pten stroma-deleted
tumours ameliorated disruption of the tumour microenvironment and was sufficient 
to decrease tumour growth and progression. Global gene expression profiling of
mammary stromal cells identified a Pten-specific signature that was highly
represented in the tumour stroma of patients with breast cancer. These findings
identify the Pten-Ets2 axis as a critical stroma-specific signalling pathway that
suppresses mammary epithelial tumours.

PMCID: PMC2767301
PMID: 19847259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genesis. 2009 Dec;47(12):793-8. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20563.

Placenta-specific gene activation and inactivation using integrase-defective
lentiviral vectors with the Cre/LoxP system.

Morioka Y(1), Isotani A, Oshima RG, Okabe M, Ikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka,
Japan.

Transgenic and knockout studies have advanced our understanding of the genetic
control of embryonic development over the past decades. However, interpretation
of the phenotype of mutant mice is potentially complicated, since the commonly
used knockout approach modifies both the fetal and placental genome. To
circumvent this problem, we previously developed a placenta-specific gene
manipulation system by lentiviral vector transduction of embryos at the
blastocyst stage. In the present study, by combination with the Cre/LoxP system, 
we successfully demonstrate placenta-specific gene activation and inactivation in
EGFP reporter mice and Ets2 floxed mice, respectively. Transient expression using
integrase-defective lentiviral (IDLV) vectors diminished the toxic effect of Cre 
expression and solved the dilemma of mosaic recombination with lower
concentrations and toxic effects with higher concentrations of Cre recombinase.
We also show that placenta-specific Ets2 disruption causes embryonic lethality
and reconfirmed the critical role of Ets2 during placentation. This technology
facilitates both gain and loss of gene function analyses in placental development
during pregnancy. Since IDLV vectors can efficiently transduce a variety of cell 
types similarly to wild-type vectors, our IDLV-Cre strategy is potentially useful
for a wide range of applications.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19830817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Genes Immun. 2010 Mar;11(2):161-72. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.73. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

The mouse and human Fli1 genes are similarly regulated by Ets factors in T cells.

Svenson JL(1), Chike-Harris K, Amria MY, Nowling TK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Children's Research
Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, 96 Jonathon Lucas Street,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Fli1 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors and is preferentially
expressed in hematopoietic cell lineages. Its expression level is linked to the
pathogenesis of lupus. In this study, we identified mechanisms involved in the
transcriptional regulation of the mouse and human Fli1 promoters. We show that
the Fli1 promoter is upregulated by Ets factors Ets1, Ets2, Fli1 and Elf1 either 
alone or in combination with GATA factors, but is inhibited by Tel. In vitro
binding studies show that Elf1, Tel and Fli1 in T cells bind the three
Ets-binding sites in the murine Fli1 proximal promoter. We identified
transcription factor-binding sites in the human Fli1 promoter region that
function in T cells in a similar manner to those in the mouse promoter.
Furthermore, we show similar binding of Ets factors to the endogenous mouse and
human Fli1 promoters in T cells and knocking down Ets1 results in an upregulation
of Fli1 expression. Together, these results suggest that the human and mouse
genes are regulated similarly and that Ets1 may be important in preventing the
overexpression of Fli1 in T cells. This report lays the groundwork for
identifying targets for manipulating Fli1 expression as a possible therapeutic
approach.

PMCID: PMC2832078
PMID: 19829305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Oct;149A(10):2158-65. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33012.

Complex contributions of Ets2 to craniofacial and thymus phenotypes of trisomic
"Down syndrome" mice.

Hill CA(1), Sussan TE, Reeves RH, Richtsmeier JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Ts65Dn mice have segmental trisomy for orthologs of about half of the genes on
human chromosome 21, including Ets2. These mice develop anomalies of the cranial 
skeleton and thymus that parallel those in Down syndrome. Overexpression of the
Ets2 transcription factor gene was posited to be sufficient to produce these
craniofacial and thymus deficits in transgenic mice that constitutively
overexpress a processed Ets2 transcript under a promiscuous promoter [Sumarsono
et al. (1996); Nature 379:534-537; Wolvetang et al. (2003); Hum Mol Genet
12:247-255]. Evaluation of trisomic mice with varying copy numbers of a properly 
regulated Ets2 gene indicated increased dosage of Ets2 was not sufficient to
produce effects on thymus and most of the cranial anomalies seen in Ts65Dn mice. 
However, mesoderm-derived cranial skeletal elements are significantly more
affected in Ts65Dn, Ets2(+/-) mice compared to Ts65Dn littermates suggesting a
differential interaction of Ets2-related processes with mesoderm-derived and
neural crest-derived formative tissues. Our results support the growing evidence 
for interactions among multiple genes contributing to developmental perturbations
resulting in variation in complex Down syndrome phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC2903219
PMID: 19764029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Blood. 2009 Oct 1;114(14):3001-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-211334. Epub 2009
Aug 7.

Gene expression profiling of minimally differentiated acute myeloid leukemia: M0 
is a distinct entity subdivided by RUNX1 mutation status.

Silva FP(1), Swagemakers SM, Erpelinck-Verschueren C, Wouters BJ, Delwel R,
Vrieling H, van der Spek P, Valk PJ, Giphart-Gassler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicogenetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Minimally differentiated acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M0) is defined by immature
morphology and expression of early hematologic markers. By gene expression
profiling (GEP) and subsequent unsupervised analysis of 35 AML-M0 samples and 253
previously reported AML cases, we demonstrate that AML-M0 cases express a unique 
signature that is largely separated from other molecular subtypes. Hematologic
transcription regulators such as CEBPA, CEBPD, and ETV6, and the differentiation 
associated gene MPO appeared strongly down-regulated, in line with the primitive 
state of this leukemia. AML-M0 frequently carries loss-of-function RUNX1
mutation. Unsupervised analyses revealed a subdivision between AML-M0 cases with 
and without RUNX1 mutations. RUNX1 mutant AML-M0 samples showed a distinct
up-regulation of B cell-related genes such as members of the B-cell receptor
complex, transcription regulators RUNX3, ETS2, IRF8, or PRDM1, and major
histocompatibility complex class II genes. Importantly, prediction with high
accuracy of the AML-M0 subtype and prediction of patients carrying RUNX1 mutation
within this subtype were possible based on the expression level of only a few
transcripts. We propose that RUNX1 mutations in this AML subgroup cause lineage
infidelity, leading to aberrant coexpression of myeloid and B-lymphoid genes.
Furthermore, our results imply that AML-M0, although originally determined by
morphology, constitutes a leukemia subgroup.

PMID: 19666867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cancer Lett. 2010 Feb 28;288(2):226-35. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.07.007. Epub
2009 Aug 4.

Hepatitis B virus X protein overcomes stress-induced premature senescence by
repressing p16(INK4a) expression via DNA methylation.

Kim YJ(1), Jung JK, Lee SY, Jang KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pusan National University, Busan, Republic of
Korea.

Cellular senescence is an important tumor suppression process under diverse
oncogenic conditions, entering a state of irreversible growth arrest to prevent
damaged cells from undergoing aberrant proliferation. Developing a means of
evading senescence thus seems to be a fundamental task that all cancer cells
should solve early on. Here, we show that an oncogenic X protein of hepatitis B
virus (HBx) overcomes cellular senescence provoked by a universal premature
senescence inducer, H(2)O(2), in human hepatoma cells, as demonstrated by
impaired induction of senescence-associated biomarkers, including morphological
change, G(1) arrest, and beta-galactosidase activity, in the presence of HBx. HBx
induced DNA hypermethylation of p16(INK4a) promoter and subsequently interfered
action of transcription factors like Ets1 and Ets2 activated by H(2)O(2) through 
the p38(MAPK) pathway, resulting in inhibition of its transcription.
Down-regulation of p16(INK4a) expression by HBx subsequently led to activation of
G(1)-CDKs, phosphorylation of Rb, activation of E2F1, and finally evasion from
G(1) arrest induced by H(2)O(2). Levels of another senescence regulator,
p21(waf1), however, were not affected by HBx under our senescence-inducing
conditions. In addition, the potentials of HBx to inactivate Rb and subsequently 
inhibit cellular senescence almost completely disappeared when levels of
p16(INK4a) were recovered either by exogenous complementation or inhibition of
the promoter hypermethylation. To our knowledge, our present study represents the
first report that an oncogenic virus evades cellular senescence through
epigenetic down-regulation of p16(INK4a) expression.

2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19656618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):934-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-221812.

Functional redundancy of Ets1 and Ets2.

Oettgen P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

Comment on
    Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):1123-30.

PMID: 19643995  [PubMed]


140. Mol Reprod Dev. 2009 Dec;76(12):1143-52. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21082.

Involvement of GATA transcription factors in the regulation of endogenous bovine 
interferon-tau gene transcription.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Kim MS, Muroi Y, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Nakajima H, Takahashi M,
Nagaoka K, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Expression of interferon-tau (IFNT), necessary for pregnancy establishment in
ruminant ungulates, is regulated in a temporal and spatial manner. However,
molecular mechanisms by which IFNT gene transcription is regulated in this manner
have not been firmly established. In this study, DNA microarray/RT-PCR analysis
between bovine trophoblast CT-1 and Mardin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells was
initially performed, finding that transcription factors GATA2, GATA3, and GATA6
mRNAs were specific to CT-1 cells. These mRNAs were also found in Days 17, 20,
and 22 (Day 0 = day of estrus) bovine conceptuses. In examining other bovine cell
lines, ovary cumulus granulosa (oCG) and ear fibroblast (EF) cells, GATA2 and
GATA3, but not GATA6, were found specific to the bovine trophoblast cells. In
transient transfection analyses using the upstream region (-631 to +59 bp) of
bovine IFNT gene (bIFNT, IFN-tau-c1), over-expression of GATA2/GATA3 did not
affect the transcription of bIFNT-reporter construct in human choriocarcinoma
JEG3 cells. Transfection of GATA2, GATA3, ETS2, and/or CDX2, however, was
effective in the up-regulation of the bIFNT construct transfected into bovine oCG
and EF cells. One Point mutation studies revealed that among six potential GATA
binding sites located on the upstream region of the bIFNT gene, the one next to
ETS2 site exhibited reduced luciferase activity. In CT-1 cells, endogenous bIFNT 
gene transcription was up-regulated by over-expression of GATA2 or GATA3, but
down-regulated by siRNA specific to GATA2 mRNA. These data suggest that GATA2/3
is involved in trophoblast-specific regulation of bIFNT gene transcription.

PMID: 19598245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2010 Jan;37(1):83-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2009.05236.x. Epub 2009 Jun 29.

Ets2 transcription factor, telomerase activity and breast cancer.

Dwyer JM(1), Liu JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Molecular Signalling Laboratory, Monash University
Central Clinical School, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

1. The enzyme telomerase maintains telomeres (ends of chromosomes) by
synthesizing telomeric DNA at each end of the chromosomes. Its association with
telomeres has implicated telomerase in cell immortalization. 2. Numerous studies 
have shown significant levels of telomerase activity in 85% of various types of
cancer. Transcriptional control of the catalytic subunit, telomerase reverse
transcriptase (TERT), dominates regulation of telomerase. Although several major 
factors have been identified in regulating TERT, they cannot explain all the
transcriptional activity of the hTERT gene. 3. The Ets transcription factor (TF) 
family is becoming a regular feature in tumourigenesis, particularly in breast
cancer. However, the roles and mechanisms of different Ets TFs are largely
unknown. 4. The present minireview discusses the research that identified Ets as 
a regulator of telomerase required for breast cancer cell survival and
proliferation, highlighting the discoveries central to understanding the
molecular acts used by Ets TFs to mediate TERT gene transcription.

PMID: 19566835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Chem Res Toxicol. 2009 Jun;22(6):990-6. doi: 10.1021/tx8003467.

ETS2 regulating neurodegenerative signaling pathway of human neuronal (SH-SY5Y)
cells exposed to single and repeated low-dose sarin (GB).

Pachiappan A(1), Thwin MM, Weng Keong L, Lee FK, Manikandan J, Sivakumar V,
Gopalakrishnakone P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anatomy and Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117597.

The mechanistic understanding of low-level sarin-induced neurotoxicity after
single or repeated doses has yet to be explored at a cellular level. Using the
microarray (Affymetrix-GeneChips) transcription profiling approach, the present
study examined gene expression in human SH-SY5Y cells exposed to single (3 and 24
h) or repeated (2 x 24 h) doses of sarin (5 microg/mL) to delineate the possible 
mechanism. Two hundred twenty-four genes whose expression was significantly (P < 
0.01) altered by at least 3-fold were selected by GeneSpringGX analysis. The
comparative gene expression data confirmed the transcriptional changes to be
related to dose and exposure time of sarin. The effect of a single noncytotoxic
sarin dose on gene transcription was variable, whereas repeated doses over 48 h
persistently down-regulated genes linked to neurodegenerative mechanisms. Thirty 
persistently altered genes were validated using real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Similar qRT-PCR profiles
obtained in sarin-treated SH-SY5Y and HCN-1A cells confirmed the cell-independent
alterations in expression levels. Genes (ETS2, APOE, PSEN1, DDC, and CD9)
implicated mainly in the regulation of sarin-induced neuropathogenesis were
further confirmed by Western blot and double-immunofluorescence assays. The
regulome pathway suggests a new feasible mechanism by which sarin increases ETS2 
expression and takes control over other genes involved in the neurodegenerative
pathway. The overall data delineate an in vitro experimental model suitable for
studying the neuropathology of cells and may provide novel insights into
therapeutic interventions.

PMID: 19522546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 31;284(31):20540-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.022541. Epub 2009
Jun 1.

Transcriptional regulation of the novel Toll-like receptor Tlr13.

Shi Z(1), Cai Z, Wen S, Chen C, Gendron C, Sanchez A, Patterson K, Fu S, Yang J, 
Wildman D, Finnell RH, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious and Inflammatory Disease, Institute of Bioscience and
Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

Little has been known about Tlr13 (Toll-like receptor 13), a novel member of the 
Toll-like receptor family. To elucidate the molecular basis of murine Tlr13 gene 
expression, the activity of the Tlr13 gene promoter was characterized. Reporter
gene analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that Tlr13
gene transcription was regulated through three cis-acting elements that
interacted with the Ets2, Sp1, and PU.1 transcription factors. Furthermore, our
work suggests that these transcription factors may cooperate, culminating in
maximal transcription of the Tlr13 gene. In contrast, NF-kappaB appeared to act
as an inhibitor of Tlr13 transcription. Overexpression of Ets2 caused a strong
increase in the transcriptional activity of the Tlr13 promoter; however,
overexpression of NF-kappaB p65 dramatically inhibited it. Additionally,
interferon-beta is capable of acting Tlr13 transcription, but the activated
signaling of lipopolysaccharide/TLR4 and peptidoglycan/TLR2 strongly inhibited
the Tlr13 gene promoter. Thus, these findings reveal the mechanism of Tlr13 gene 
regulation, thereby providing insight into the function of Tlr13 in the immune
response to pathogen.

PMCID: PMC2742818
PMID: 19487701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009 Jul;66(13):2195-204. doi: 10.1007/s00018-009-0040-4. Epub
2009 May 12.

PAP1 signaling involves MAPK signal transduction.

Ferrés-Masó M(1), Sacilotto N, López-Rodas G, Dagorn JC, Iovanna JL, Closa D,
Folch-Puy E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology,Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas, Barcelona,
Spain.

Pancreatitis-associated protein 1 (PAP1) belongs to the Reg family of secretory
proteins. Several important biological roles have been attributed to PAP1 but the
signaling pathways activated by this protein remain only partially understood.
Here, we describe the intracellular pathways triggered by PAP1 in a pancreatic
acinar cell line. Taking advantage of the fact that PAP1 induces its own
transcription, we performed ChIP assays to analyze the recruitment of
transcriptional factors on its promoter. Our results show that PAP1 increased the
transactivation activity of pap1 and the binding on its promoter of the nuclear
factors C/EBPbeta, P-CREB, P-ELK1, EGR1, STAT3, and ETS2, which are downstream
targets of MAPK signaling. p44/42, p38, and JNK MAPKs activity increased after
PAP1 treatment. In addition, pharmacological inhibition of these kinases markedly
inhibited the induction of pap1 mRNA. Taken together, these results indicated
that the mechanism of PAP1 action involves the activation of the MAPK
superfamily.

PMID: 19434369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):1123-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-211391. Epub 2009
May 1.

Ets1 and Ets2 are required for endothelial cell survival during embryonic
angiogenesis.

Wei G(1), Srinivasan R, Cantemir-Stone CZ, Sharma SM, Santhanam R, Weinstein M,
Muthusamy N, Man AK, Oshima RG, Leone G, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The OhioState University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):934-5.

The ras/Raf/Mek/Erk pathway plays a central role in coordinating endothelial cell
activities during angiogenesis. Transcription factors Ets1 and Ets2 are targets
of ras/Erk signaling pathways that have been implicated in endothelial cell
function in vitro, but their precise role in vascular formation and function in
vivo remains ill-defined. In this work, mutation of both Ets1 and Ets2 resulted
in embryonic lethality at midgestation, with striking defects in vascular
branching having been observed. The action of these factors was endothelial cell 
autonomous as demonstrated using Cre/loxP technology. Analysis of Ets1/Ets2
target genes in isolated embryonic endothelial cells demonstrated down-regulation
of Mmp9, Bcl-X(L), and cIAP2 in double mutants versus controls, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that both Ets1 and Ets2 were loaded at target
promoters. Consistent with these observations, endothelial cell apoptosis was
significantly increased both in vivo and in vitro when both Ets1 and Ets2 were
mutated. These results establish essential and overlapping functions for Ets1 and
Ets2 in coordinating endothelial cell functions with survival during embryonic
angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2721789
PMID: 19411629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mod Pathol. 2009 Aug;22(8):996-1005. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.63. Epub 2009
May 1.

Analysis of the fibroblastic growth factor
receptor-RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK-ETS2/brachyury signalling pathway in chordomas.

Shalaby AA(1), Presneau N, Idowu BD, Thompson L, Briggs TR, Tirabosco R, Diss TC,
Flanagan AM.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Cancer Institute, London, UK.

Chordomas are rare primary malignant bone tumours that derive from notochord
precursor cells and express brachyury, a molecule involved in notochord
development. Little is known about the genetic events responsible for driving the
growth of this tumour, but it is well established that brachyury is regulated
through fibroblastic growth factor receptors (FGFRs) through RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK and 
ETS2 in ascidian, Xenopus and zebrafish, although little is known about its
regulation in mammals. The aim of this study was to attempt to identify the
molecular genetic events that are responsible for the pathogenesis of chordomas
with particular focus on the FGFR signalling pathway on the basis of the evidence
in the ascidian and Xenopus models that the expression of brachyury requires the 
activation of this pathway. Immunohistochemistry showed that 47 of 50 chordomas
(94%) expressed at least one of the FGFRs, and western blotting showed
phosphorylation of fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2 alpha
(FRS2alpha), an adaptor signalling protein, that links FGFR to the
RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathway. Screening for mutations in brachyury (all coding exons
and promoter), FGFRs 1-4 (previously reported mutations), KRAS (codons 12, 13,
51, 61) and BRAF (exons 11 and 15) failed to show any genetic alterations in 23
chordomas. Fluorescent in situ hybridisation analysis on FGFR4, ETS2 and
brachyury failed to show either amplification of these genes, although there was 
minor allelic gain in brachyury in three tumours, or translocation for ERG and
ETS2 loci. The key genetic events responsible for the initiation and progression 
of chordomas remain to be discovered.

PMID: 19407855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005067. Epub 2009 Apr 2.

A functional screen for regulators of CKDN2A reveals MEOX2 as a transcriptional
activator of INK4a.

Irelan JT(1), Gutierrez Del Arroyo A, Gutierrez A, Peters G, Quon KC, Miraglia L,
Chanda SK.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, San Diego, CA, USA.
jirelan@gmail.com

The CDKN2A locus encodes two important tumor suppressors, INK4a and ARF, which
respond to oncogenic stresses by inducing cellular senescence. We conducted a
genome-scale cDNA overexpression screen using a reporter containing INK4a
regulatory sequences to identify novel transcriptional activators of this locus. 
This screen revealed 285 cDNAs that putatively regulate the transcriptional
activation of INK4a. Of these, 56 are annotated as transcription factors,
including two previously reported activators of the locus, ETS2 and JUNB.
Fourteen genes were further validated for activity and specificity, including
several homeodomain proteins. We found that the transcription of one of these,
the homeodomain protein MEOX2 (GAX) is enhanced in primary cells during the
induction of senescence, and forced expression of this protein results in the
induction of premature senescence. We further demonstrate that MEOX2-induced
senescence is dependent upon INK4a activity, and chromatin immunoprecipitation
studies indicate that MEOX2 directly binds the INK4a promoter. These results
support a role for this homeodomain protein as a direct regulator of INK4a
transcription and senescence in human cells.

PMCID: PMC2659797
PMID: 19340300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2009 Jul;37(5):263-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2009.01.007. 
Epub 2009 Mar 21.

Effect of different biomaterials on the expression pattern of the transcription
factor Ets2 in bone-like constructs.

Sutter W(1), Stein E, Koehn J, Schmidl C, Lezaic V, Ewers R, Turhani D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cranio-Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Tissue engineering offers an exciting prospect for reconstructive surgery by
replacing missing natural scaffolds with artificial ones. For optimal success the
artificial scaffold should provide an environment closely resembling the natural 
tissue. Little is known about the direct influence of the scaffold on the
expression of regulators of bone development, such as transcription factors. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the influence of the scaffold material on
the expression of V-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 (avian)
(Ets2), a key transcription factor in bone biology. Human primary bone precursor 
cells were seeded in three-dimensional constructs consisting of hydroxyapatite
(HA) or poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA). Cells grown on tissue culture
polystyrene dishes served as controls. After cultivation for up to 21 days the
expression of Ets2 and other important bone-specific genes was assessed by
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western Blotting.
Ets2 mRNA showed significantly higher expression in controls than in bone-like
constructs, and more Ets2 mRNA was expressed in cells grown in HA than in PLGA
constructs. At protein level however, Ets2 expression was higher in constructs
than in controls after prolonged culture. Our study showed for the first time a
differential expression of Ets2 in tissue engineered bone constructs in vitro,
demonstrating that scaffold chemistry has an influence on the expression of genes
regulating osteogenesis.

PMID: 19318269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Blood. 2009 Apr 2;113(14):3337-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-08-174813. Epub 2009
Jan 23.

ETS2 and ERG promote megakaryopoiesis and synergize with alterations in GATA-1 to
immortalize hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Stankiewicz MJ(1), Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Oct 22;114(17):3717-8.

ETS2 and ERG are transcription factors, encoded on human chromosome 21 (Hsa21),
that have been implicated in human cancer. People with Down syndrome (DS), who
are trisomic for Hsa21, are predisposed to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
(AMKL). DS-AMKL blasts harbor a mutation in GATA1, which leads to loss of
full-length protein but expression of the GATA-1s isoform. To assess the
consequences of ETS protein misexpression on megakaryopoiesis, we expressed ETS2,
ERG, and the related protein FLI-1 in wild-type and Gata1 mutant murine fetal
liver progenitors. These studies revealed that ETS2, ERG, and FLI-1 facilitated
the expansion of megakaryocytes from wild-type, Gata1-knockdown, and Gata1s
knockin progenitors, but none of the genes could overcome the differentiation
block characteristic of the Gata1-knockdown megakaryocytes. Although
overexpression of ETS proteins increased the proportion of CD41(+) cells
generated from Gata1s-knockin progenitors, their expression led to a significant 
reduction in the more mature CD42 fraction. Serial replating assays revealed that
overexpression of ERG or FLI-1 immortalized Gata1-knockdown and Gata1s knockin,
but not wild-type, fetal liver progenitors. Immortalization was accompanied by
activation of the JAK/STAT pathway, commonly seen in megakaryocytic malignancies.
These findings provide evidence for synergy between alterations in GATA-1 and
overexpression of ETS proteins in aberrant megakaryopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2665899
PMID: 19168790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Mar;1791(3):173-82. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2008.12.016.
Epub 2009 Jan 10.

Identification of nuclear localization and nuclear export signals in Ets2, and
the transcriptional regulation of Ets2 and CTP:phosphocholine
cytidylyltransferase alpha in tetradecanoyl-13-acetate or macrophage-colony
stimulating factor stimulated RAW264 cells.

Okamura K(1), Yamashita S, Ando H, Horibata Y, Aoyama C, Takagishi K, Izumi T,
Vance DE, Sugimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine, Mibu
321-0293, Japan.

PC is made via the CDP-choline pathway, in which CTP:phosphocholine
cytidylyltransferase alpha (CTalpha), encoded by Pcyt1a, is the rate-limiting
enzyme whose mRNA expression is strictly regulated. Previously, we reported that 
Ets1 enhanced and Net repressed CTalpha transcription by binding at the Ets
binding site (-49/-47) in the Pcyt1a promoter. In this study, we asked if an Ets1
analogue, Ets2, also regulates CTalpha transcription and investigated the
importance of its nuclear localization signal (NLS) and nuclear export signal
(NES). Ets2 is primarily detected in the nucleus. Various mutated Ets2 proteins
fused with enhanced green fluorescent protein were constructed to identify the
NLS and NES in Ets2. Mutation of Ets2 at amino acids 404-410 results in a protein
that is evenly distributed in the cell. Interestingly, an Ets2 protein deleted at
the C-terminus (amino acids 1-392 present) was localized to the cytoplasm and
site-specific mutation in the region 364-372 of this construct resulted in
cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution. These results suggest that the NLS in Ets2 
is between amino acids 404 and 410, and that the NES is between amino acids 364
and 372. Ets2 enhanced, but the mutant forms of Ets2 had little effects on the
transcription of a CTalpha-reporter construct. When RAW264 cells, murine
macrophage cell-line, were stimulated with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA) or macrophage-colony stimulating factor, the transcription of CTalpha was
enhanced accompanied by increased mRNA of Ets2. These results suggest that the
induction of Ets2 is important for CTalpha transcription by TPA and
macrophage-colony stimulating factor.

PMID: 19168148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;10(9):1083-9. doi: 10.1038/ncb1768.

The adaptor protein of the anaphase promoting complex Cdh1 is essential in
maintaining replicative lifespan and in learning and memory.

Li M(1), Shin YH, Hou L, Huang X, Wei Z, Klann E, Zhang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;10(9):1017-9.

The anaphase promoting complex (APC) or cyclosome is a multisubunit E3 ubiquitin 
ligase. Cdc20 (fizzy (fzy)) or p55CDC, and Cdh1 (Hct1, srw1 or fizzy-related 1
(fzr1)) encode two adaptor proteins that bring substrates to the APC. Both
APC-Cdc20 and APC-Cdh1 have been implicated in the control of mitosis through
mediating ubiquitination of mitotic regulators, such as cyclin B1 and securin.
However, the importance of Cdh1 function in vivo and whether its function is
redundant with that of Cdc20 are unclear. Here we have analysed mice lacking
Cdh1. We show that Cdh1 is essential for placental development and that its
deficiency causes early lethality. Cdhl-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) entered replicative senescence prematurely because of stabilization of
Ets2 and subsequent activation of p6(Ink4a) expression. These results have
uncovered an unexpected role of the APC in maintaining replicative lifespan of
MEFs. Further, Cdh1 heterozygous mice show defects in late-phase long-term
potentiation (L-LTP) in the hippocampus and are deficient in contextual
fear-conditioning, suggesting that Cdh1 has a role in learning and memory.

PMCID: PMC2914158
PMID: 19160489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2009 Feb;61(2):95-106. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0897.2008.00673.x.

Control of interferon-tau expression during early pregnancy in ruminants.

Ealy AD(1), Yang QE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences; University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32611-0910, USA. ealy@ufl.edu

PROBLEM: A type I interferon (IFN), termed IFN-tau (tau), is responsible for the 
establishment and maintenance of early pregnancy in cattle and sheep. The control
of IFNtau gene (IFNT) expression is not completely understood.
METHOD OF STUDY: This article will provide an overview of recent progress made in
understanding the dynamic expression pattern of IFNT during pre- and
peri-attachment conceptus development.
RESULTS: Several ubiquitous transcriptional regulators (Ets2 and AP1) and at
least two trophectoderm factors (Cdx2 and Dlx3) control IFNT transcription during
early pregnancy. Co-activators (CBP/p300) are also involved in this process. At
least two uterine-derived factors (GM-CSF and FGF2) stimulate IFN-tau production 
in bovine trophectoderm, and multiple signaling pathways are functionally linked 
with IFNT expression.
CONCLUSION: Although understanding the regulation of IFNT expression is far from 
complete, considerable progress has been made in uncovering how uterine-derived
factors and key placental-specific transcriptional regulators control IFNT
expression.

PMID: 19143673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Xue Bao. 2009 Jan;7(1):41-7.

[Regulatory mechanism of malignant behavior of endometriosis mediated by
puerarin].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu CQ(1), Yu J, Han J, Zhou QL, Shen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China. chqyu81@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the inhibitory effects of puerarin on angiopoiesis of
endometriotic tissue, and to explore the regulatory effects of puerarin on
tumor-related gene expression of endometriosis.
METHODS: The regulatory effects of puerarin on endometriotic angiopoiesis and
tumor-related gene expression were observed by using a chicken chorioallantoic
membrane model and gene array method.
RESULTS: Chicken chorioallantoic membrane experiment indicated that puerarin
obviously inhibited endometriotic vesiculation and angiopoiesis. The area of
blood vessels was significantly reduced as compared with the untreated group
(P<0.05). The expressions of oncogenes and genes related to adhesion, invasion,
and apoptosis, including ERBB2, ETS2, FOS, S100A4, TEK, TERT, NFKBIA, CDH1, CD44,
ITGA6, NCAM1, MMP1, FLT1, AKT1, BCL2L and BIRC5 genes, were obviously higher,
while the expressions of the anti-oncogenes, anti-apoptosis genes and
anti-invasion genes, including KAI1, KISS1, SERPINB5, TNFRSF25, TNFRSF1A, TNFRSF6
and SERPINB2, were significantly lower in eutopic endometrial tissue from
patients with endometriosis than those from endometriosis-free women. The
expressions of oncogenes (ERBB2, ETS2, FOS), apoptosis gene (BCL2L1),
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK4, CDC25A), and growth factor and receptors (HGF,
FGFR2, TGFBR) were significantly enhanced, while the expressions of the
anti-oncogenes (KAI1, SERPINB5), apoptosis genes (BAD and TNF) and
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibiting factor (CDKN2A) were obviously reduced in
ectopic tissue as compared with those in eutopic tissue from patients with
endometriosis. Puerarin significantly enhanced the gene expressions in
endometriotic stromal cells, including BAD, BAX, CASP8, CASP9, TNFRSF6, CDKN1B,
CDKN2A, IFNA1 and IFNB1, and reduced the gene expressions of FOS, CHEK2, SRC,
ITGB5, MMP9, PDGFA and NFKBIA.
CONCLUSIONS: The tumor-related gene expression has significant differences in
eutopic endometrial tissue between patients with endometriosis and
endometriosis-free women, and between ectopic and eutopic tissues from patients
with endometriosis. Puerarin can reduce angiopoiesis, regulate tumor-related gene
expression and facilitate apoptosis in endometriotic tissue.

PMID: 19134456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Exp Med. 2008 Dec 22;205(13):3119-31. doi: 10.1084/jem.20082292. Epub 2008 Dec 
1.

Yellow fever vaccine induces integrated multilineage and polyfunctional immune
responses.

Gaucher D(1), Therrien R, Kettaf N, Angermann BR, Boucher G, Filali-Mouhim A,
Moser JM, Mehta RS, Drake DR 3rd, Castro E, Akondy R, Rinfret A, Yassine-Diab B, 
Said EA, Chouikh Y, Cameron MJ, Clum R, Kelvin D, Somogyi R, Greller LD, Balderas
RS, Wilkinson P, Pantaleo G, Tartaglia J, Haddad EK, Sékaly RP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université de Montréal (CR-CHUM) Saint-Luc, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Correlates of immune-mediated protection to most viral and cancer vaccines are
still unknown. This impedes the development of novel vaccines to incurable
diseases such as HIV and cancer. In this study, we have used functional genomics 
and polychromatic flow cytometry to define the signature of the immune response
to the yellow fever (YF) vaccine 17D (YF17D) in a cohort of 40 volunteers
followed for up to 1 yr after vaccination. We show that immunization with YF17D
leads to an integrated immune response that includes several effector arms of
innate immunity, including complement, the inflammasome, and interferons, as well
as adaptive immunity as shown by an early T cell response followed by a brisk and
variable B cell response. Development of these responses is preceded, as
demonstrated in three independent vaccination trials and in a novel in vitro
system of primary immune responses (modular immune in vitro construct [MIMIC]
system), by the coordinated up-regulation of transcripts for specific
transcription factors, including STAT1, IRF7, and ETS2, which are upstream of the
different effector arms of the immune response. These results clearly show that
the immune response to a strong vaccine is preceded by coordinated induction of
master transcription factors that lead to the development of a broad,
polyfunctional, and persistent immune response that integrates all effector cells
of the immune system.

PMCID: PMC2605227
PMID: 19047440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cancer Sci. 2008 Oct;99(10):1950-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00912.x.

Ets regulates peroxiredoxin1 and 5 expressions through their interaction with the
high-mobility group protein B1.

Shiota M(1), Izumi H, Miyamoto N, Onitsuka T, Kashiwagi E, Kidani A, Hirano G,
Takahashi M, Ono M, Kuwano M, Naito S, Sasaguri Y, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan.

Peroxiredoxins (Prdxs) are thiol-specific antioxidant proteins that are highly
expressed in human cancer cells. Prdxs have been shown to be involved in tumor
cell proliferation under conditions of microenvironmental stress such as hypoxia.
We hypothesized that Prdxs could be categorized into two groups, stress-inducible
and non-inducible ones. In this study, we analyzed the promoter activity and
expression levels of five Prdx family members in human cancer cells. We found
that both Prdx1 and Prdx5 are inducible after treatment with hydrogen peroxide or
hypoxia, but that Prdx2, Prdx3, and Prdx4 are not or are only marginally
inducible. We also found that Ets transcription factors are the key activators
for stress-inducible expression. High-mobility group protein HMGB1 was shown to
function as a coactivator through direct interactions with Ets transcription
factors. The DNA binding of Ets transcription factors was significantly enhanced 
by HMGB1. Silencing of Ets1, Ets2, Prdx1, and Prdx5 expression sensitized cells
to oxidative stress. These data indicate that transcription of Prdx genes
mediated by Ets/HMG proteins might protect cells from oxidative stress.

PMID: 19016754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Vis. 2008;14:1912-28. Epub 2008 Oct 29.

ETS-1 and ETS-2 are upregulated in a transgenic mouse model of pigmented ocular
neoplasm.

De la Houssaye G(1), Vieira V, Masson C, Beermann F, Dufier JL, Menasche M,
Abitbol M.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris-Descartes, Centre de Recherches Théapeutiques en
Ophtalmologie de la Facultéde Méecine Paris-Descartes-site Necker (CERTO), AP-HP,
Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France.

PURPOSE: Choroidal melanoma is the most common primary malignant ocular tumor in 
human adults. Relevant mouse models of human uveal melanoma still remain to be
developed. We have studied the transgenic mouse strain, Tyrp-1-TAg, to try to
gain insight into possible molecular mechanisms common to pigmented ocular
neoplasms occurring spontaneously in the eyes of these mice and human choroidal
melanoma. The role of two members of the ETS (E26 avian leukemia oncogene) family
of transcription factors, ETS-1 and ETS-2, has been investigated in many cancers 
but has not yet been studied in ocular tumors.
METHODS: This is the first study describing the production and distribution of
ETS-1 and ETS-2 mRNAs and proteins using in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry in murine ocular tissue sections of normal control eyes and 
tumoral eyes from mice of the same age. Using semi-quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blots
experiments, we compared changes in ETS-1 and ETS-2 expression, their protein
levels, and the regulation of some of their target gene expressions at different 
stages of the ocular tumoral progression in the transgenic mouse model,
Tyrp-1-TAg, with those in normal eyes from control mice of the same age.
RESULTS: In normal control adult mouse eyes, ETS-1 was mostly present in the
nuclei of all neuroretinal layers whereas ETS-2 was mostly localized in the
cytosol of the cell bodies of these layers with a smaller amount present in the
nuclei. Both were found in the retinal pigmentary epithelium (RPE). ETS-1 and
ETS-2 mRNA and protein levels were much higher in the ocular tissues of
Tyrp-1-TAg mice than in control ocular tissues from wild-type mice. This
upregulation was correlated with tumor progression. We also demonstrated
upregulation of ETS-1 and ETS-2 target expressions in Tyrp-1-TAg mice when
comparing with the same target expressions in control mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that ETS-1 and ETS-2 are upregulated in ocular 
tumors derived from the retinal epithelium and may be involved in one or several 
signaling pathways that activate the expression of a set of genes involved in
ocular tumor progression such as those encoding ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion
molecule-1), PAI-1 (Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1), MCP-1 (monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1) and p16 (Cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A).

PMCID: PMC2573735
PMID: 18958307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2009 Feb;15(2):224-35. doi: 10.1002/ibd.20747.

Acute experimental colitis and human chronic inflammatory diseases share
expression of inflammation-related genes with conserved Ets2 binding sites.

van der Pouw Kraan TC(1), Zwiers A, Mulder CJ, Kraal G, Bouma G.

Author information: 
(1)VU University Medical Center, Department of Molecular Cell Biology &
Immunology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) are characterized by
chronic inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract, with overlapping clinical
characteristics and unknown etiology. We reasoned that in intestinal inflammation
the initial activation of the innate immune response fails to resolve, finally
resulting in uncontrolled chronic inflammatory bowel disease.
METHODS: To identify the early inflammatory events in colitis that remain active 
in human chronic colitis, we analyzed the changes of the colonic transcriptome
during acute experimental colitis and compared the outcome with previously
published profiles of affected tissues from patients with UC and CD, and as a
control for intestinal inflammation in general, tissues from celiac disease
patients. Rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissues were included as a nonintestinal 
inflammatory disease. The expression profiles of each disease were analyzed
separately, in which diseased tissues were compared to unaffected tissues from
the same anatomical location.
RESULTS: Gene ontology analysis of significantly regulated genes revealed a
marked activation of immunity and defense processes in all diseases, except
celiac disease, where immune activation is less prominent. The control region of 
upregulated genes contained an increase in Ets2 binding sites in experimental
colitis, UC, and rheumatoid arthritis, and were associated with upregulated
immune activity. In contrast, upregulated genes in celiac disease harbored the
transcription factor binding site GLI, which binds to the Gli family of
transcription factors involved in hedgehog signaling, affecting development and
morphogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Ets2 may be an important transcription factor driving inflammation in
acute as well as chronic inflammatory disease

PMID: 18942749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 5;377(1):317-20. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.003. Epub 2008 Oct 9.

Feedback regulation of DUSP6 transcription responding to MAPK1 via ETS2 in human 
cells.

Furukawa T(1), Tanji E, Xu S, Horii A.

Author information: 
(1)International Research and Educational Institute for Integrated Medical
Sciences, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
furukawa@imcir.twmu.ac.jp

DUSP6/MKP-3 is a dual specificity phosphatase exclusively specific to MAPK1/ERK2 
for its substrate recognition and dephosphorylating activity. DUSP6 is
demonstrated to play a negative regulatory role in MAPK1 in a feedback loop
manner; however, the regulation mechanisms of its expression in human cells have 
been largely unknown. We previously found that human pancreatic cancer cells
frequently lost DUSP6 expression, which could induce constitutively active MAPK1,
and the loss was associated with hypermethylation of the CpG cluster region of
intron 1 of DUSP6. In this study, we investigated the promoter activity of intron
1 of DUSP6 in human cells. We demonstrated that the intron indeed had promoter
activity and this activity was associated with MAPK1 activity. Moreover, promoter
activity depended on a consensus binding sequence of ETS transcription factors
and ETS2 was specifically associated with the intron. Because ETS2 is a direct
target of MAPK, these results indicate that intron 1 of DUSP6 plays a crucial
role in transcriptional regulation of DUSP6 in a feedback loop manner responding 
to MAPK1 via ETS2 in human cells.

PMID: 18848526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Dev Biol (Basel). 2008;132:153-9.

Unique co-expression of immune cell-related genes in IBDV resistant chickens
indicates the activation of specific cellular host-response mechanisms.

Koren E(1), Zhou H, Cahaner A, Heller ED, Pitcovski J, Lamont SJ.

Author information: 
(1)MIGAL, Kiryat Shmona, Israel.

Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) causes highly contagious,
immunosuppressive disease that leads to high mortality in young chickens. The
purpose of this study was to look for the genetic regulation of the immune acute 
immune response to IBDV in our selected lines. Chicks of a F2 generation of two
lines divergently selected for early high (HH) or low (LL) antibody (Ab) response
to Escherichia coLi vaccination were challenged with virulent IBDV. Viral load in
infected bursae was used to determine resistant (R) and susceptible (S) birds. By
using a 13K chicken cDNA microarray, and pooled spleen mRNA of R, S and
non-challenged, control (C) chicks, several genes were identified with
differential expression associated with host resistance to IBDV. These genes were
also subjected to RT-PCR on individual samples to verify the results obtained
from microarrays. The major finding was the co-upregulation of seven genes--ETS2,
H963, RGS1, ABIN-2, CREM/ICER, DUSP1 and CXCR4- in several R, but not S or C
individuals, and characterized by a high correlation of expression levels.
Resistance also generally coincided with reduced transcript levels of acute-phase
serum amyloid A (A-SAA) and increased levels of IL-8. Based on reported functions
of these genes, these findings suggest that resistance was mediated by the
activation of specific cellular mechanisms, indicated by increased activity of
splenic macrophages and T-lymphocytes 3 days post-challenge.

PMID: 18817297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 21;283(47):32715-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806769200. Epub 2008
Sep 18.

Hepatitis B virus-induced hFGL2 transcription is dependent on c-Ets-2 and MAPK
signal pathway.

Han M(1), Yan W, Guo W, Xi D, Zhou Y, Li W, Gao S, Liu M, Levy G, Luo X, Ning Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

Fibrinogen-like protein 2 (FGL2)/fibroleukin plays a pivotal role in the
pathogenesis of experimental and human fulminant and chronic viral hepatitis. To 
define the transcription factor(s) and upstream signal transduction pathways
involved in the transcription of human FGL2 (hFGL2) in response to hepatitis B
(HB) virus, hepatitis B core (HBc), hepatitis B virus S protein (HBs), or
hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) protein, expression plasmids were cotransfected
with an hFGL2 promoter luciferase reporter construct into Chinese hamster ovary
and HepG2 cells, respectively. HBc and HBx proteins, but not HBs protein,
enhanced hFGL2 transcription in both cell lines. A strong regulatory region from 
-712 to -568 (relative to the transcriptional starting site) was shown to be
responsible for hFGL2 gene transcription in response to both HBc and HBx
proteins. c-Ets-2 was shown to be translocated to the nucleus in association with
hFGL2 expression in response to both HBc and HBx proteins. Short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) interference of c-Ets-2 expression inhibited hFGL2 gene transcription by 
64.8 and 60.0% in response to HBc and HBx, respectively. c-Ets-2 protein was
highly expressed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with severe 
chronic hepatitis B (CHB) in contrast to patients with mild CHB. Increased
phosphorylation of ERK and JNK was detected in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
from patients with severe CHB. ERK inhibitor PD098059 or ERK shRNA abolished the 
nuclear c-Ets-2 DNA binding activity and hFGL2 induction in response to HBc,
whereas JNK inhibitor SP600125 or JNK shRNA abolished the nuclear c-Ets-2 DNA
binding activity and hFGL2 induction in response to HBx. In conclusion, HBc and
HBx proteins enhance transcription of hFGL2 through c-Ets-2 dependent on MAPK
signal pathways.

PMID: 18801734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Acta Otolaryngol. 2009 May;129(5):569-74. doi: 10.1080/00016480802294351.

Expression profiling of supraglottic carcinoma: PTEN and thrombospondin 2 are
associated with inhibition of lymphatic metastasis.

Bai W(1), Wang L, Ji W, Gao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Shenjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, China. bweiliang@yahoo.com.cn

CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of metastasis inhibitor genes PTEN and thrombospondin
2 may play a role in the lymphatic metastasis of supraglottic carcinoma.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate differentially expressed genes in supraglottic
squamous cell carcinoma with and without lymphatic metastasis using cDNA
microarray.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: cDNA microarray was used to detect the expression profiles
of supraglottic carcinoma and the results were validated with real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Compared with normal laryngeal tissues, the expression of 15.6% (15/96) 
genes including cathepsin B, cathepsin D, cathepsin L, Ets1, c-Ets2, and PEA3
were up-regulated in both cases of supraglottic carcinoma. Compared with the
supraglottic carcinoma with no lymph node metastasis, the expression of
metastasis inhibitor genes PTEN and thrombospondin 2 was down-regulated in the
supraglottic carcinoma tissue with lymph node metastasis.

PMID: 18720079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Semin Oncol. 2008 Aug;35(4):365-77. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2008.04.007.

Cytogenetic, molecular genetic, and clinical characteristics of acute myeloid
leukemia with a complex karyotype.

Mrózek K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210-1228, 
USA. krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu <krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu>

Patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) harboring three or more acquired
chromosome aberrations in the absence of the prognostically favorable
t(8;21)(q22;q22), inv(16)(p13q22)/t(6;16)(p13;q22), and t(15;17)(q22;q21)
aberrations form a separate category - AML with a complex karyotype. They
constitute 10% to 12% of all AML patents, with the incidence of complex
karyotypes increasing with the more advanced age. Recent studies using
molecular-cytogenetic techniques (spectral karyotyping [SKY], multiplex
fluorescence in situ hybridization [M-FISH]) and array comparative genomic
hybridization (a-CGH) considerably improved characterization of previously
unidentified, partially identified, or cryptic chromosome aberrations, and
allowed precise delineation of genomic imbalances. The emerging nonrandom pattern
of abnormalities includes relative paucity, but not absence, of balanced
rearrangements (translocations, insertions, or inversions), predominance of
aberrations leading to loss of chromosome material (monosomies, deletions, and
unbalanced translocations) that involve, in decreasing order, chromosome arms 5q,
17p, 7q, 18q, 16q, 17q, 12p, 20q, 18p, and 3p, and the presence of recurrent,
albeit less frequent and often hidden (in marker chromosomes and unbalanced
translocations) aberrations leading to overrepresentation of segments from 8q,
11q, 21q, 22q, 1p, 9p, and 13q. Several candidate genes have been identified as
targets of genomic losses, for example, TP53, CTNNA1, NF1, ETV6, and TCF4, and
amplifications, for example, ERG, ETS2, APP, ETS1, FLI1, MLL, DDX6, GAB2, MYC,
TRIB1, and CDX2. Treatment outcomes of complex karyotype patients receiving
chemotherapy are very poor. They can be improved to some extent by allogeneic
stem cell transplantation in younger patients. It is hoped that better
understanding of genomic alterations will result in identification of novel
therapeutic targets and improved prognosis in patients with complex karyotypes.

PMCID: PMC3640813
PMID: 18692687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 29;283(35):23567-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800790200. Epub 2008
Jun 27.

Ets2 maintains hTERT gene expression and breast cancer cell proliferation by
interacting with c-Myc.

Xu D(1), Dwyer J, Li H, Duan W, Liu JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Central and Eastern Clinical School, Monash
University, AMREP, Prahran, Victoria 3181, Australia. Dakang.xu@med.monash.edu.au

Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) underlies cancer cell
immortalization, and the expression of hTERT is regulated strictly at the gene
transcription. Here, we report that transcription factor Ets2 is required for
hTERT gene expression and breast cancer cell proliferation. Silencing Ets2
induces a decrease of hTERT gene expression and increase in human breast cancer
cell death. Reconstitution with recombinant hTERT rescues the apoptosis induced
by Ets2 depression. In vitro and in vivo analyses show that Ets2 binds to the
EtsA and EtsB DNA motifs on the hTERT gene promoter. Mutation of either Ets2
binding site reduces the hTERT promoter transcriptional activity. Moreover, Ets2 
forms a complex with c-Myc as demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation and
glutathione S-transferase pulldown assays. Immunological depletion of Ets2, or
mutation of the EtsA DNA motif, disables c-Myc binding to the E-box, whereas
removal of c-Myc or mutation of the E-box also compromises Ets2 binding to EtsA. 
Thus, hTERT gene expression is maintained by a mechanism involving Ets2
interactions with the c-Myc transcription factor and the hTERT gene promoter, a
protein-DNA complex critical for hTERT gene expression and breast cancer cell
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3259778
PMID: 18586674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Surgery. 2008 Jun;143(6):784-9. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2008.01.007. Epub 2008 Mar
20.

T4 sympathectomy for palmar hyperhidrosis: looking for the right operation.

Mahdy T(1), Youssef T, Elmonem HA, Omar W, Elateef AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Mansoura Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University,
Mansoura, Egypt. tmahdy@yahoo.com

Most surgeons still perform T2 or T2-3 sympathectomy for palmar hyperhidrosis
(PH), but both of these treatments can cause severe side effects. Some recent
articles advocating T4 sympathectomy have obtained satisfactory results. The aim 
of this study was to compare the outcomes of 3 different levels of sympathectomy.
Between July 2003 and July 2006, we treated 60 patients (20 men and 40 women,
mean age 26 years) who suffer from palmar hyperhidrosis by endoscopic thoracic
sympathectomy (ETS). Patients were divided into 3 groups according to the level
of sympathectomy: ETS2, ETS3, and ETS4 (20 patients in each group). Data were
collected by review of medical charts, outpatient clinic notes, and telephone
interviews. Patients were asked whether they considered their symptoms to be
"cured" or "unchanged." The degree of hand dryness was assessed subjectively.
Postoperative complications (wound infection, chest pain, and Horner's syndrome) 
were assessed. Any occurrence of gustatory sweating, rhinitis, presence and
region of reflex compensatory sweating, and recurrence was noted. Patient
satisfaction was assessed. Treatment success at follow-up was 90% for the ETS2,
95% for ETS3 patients, and 100% for the ETS4 patients. In the ETS2 and ETS3
groups, a higher rate of overdryness of limbs was observed (35% and 20%,
respectively). The compensatory sweating was mild in the ETS4 group, whereas
moderate-to-severe reflex sweating was more common in the ETS2 and ETS3 groups.
About 40% of ETS2 groups and 25% of ETS3 group patients were unsatisfied with
their operation. All patients of the ETS4 group were satisfied with the outcome. 
In conclusion, ETS4 sympathectomy is an effective method for treating PH and it
decreases the rate of compensatory hydrosis (CH).

PMID: 18549895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Exp Hematol. 2008 Jul;36(7):786-98. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2008.02.008. Epub 2008 
Apr 8.

Socs3 maintains the specificity of biological responses to cytokine signals
during granulocyte and macrophage differentiation.

Croker BA(1), Mielke LA, Wormald S, Metcalf D, Kiu H, Alexander WS, Hilton DJ,
Roberts AW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Haematology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) play key
roles in regulating emergency granulopoiesis and inflammation, and are both
negatively regulated by the inducible intracellular protein suppressor of
cytokine signaling-3 (Socs3). Mice with Socs3 deleted specifically in
hematopoietic cells succumb to severe neutrophil and macrophage-driven
inflammation by 1 year of age, and responses to G-CSF are grossly exacerbated. In
order to determine which elements of cellular responses to cytokines require
Socs3, we have examined the differentiative and proliferative capacity of
hematopoietic progenitor cells stimulated by G-CSF and IL-6. The differentiation 
of Socs3-deficient progenitor cells is skewed toward macrophage production in
response to G-CSF or IL-6, whereas wild-type progenitor cells produce mainly
neutrophils. The proliferative capacity of Socs3-deficient progenitor cells is
greatly enhanced in response to G-CSF at all concentrations, but only at low
concentrations for IL-6. Strikingly, synergistic responses to costimulation with 
stem cell factor and IL-6 (but not G-CSF) are lost at higher concentrations in
Socs3-deficient progenitor cells. Cytokine-induced expression of transcriptional 
regulators including cebpb, Ets2, Bcl3, c-Myc, Jun, and Fosl2 are differentially 
regulated in Socs3-deficient cells. The tight regulation by Socs3 of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 phosphorylation and gene
transcription after cytokine receptor ligation significantly influences the fate 
of myeloid progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2556307
PMID: 18400361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Nov;1(5):578-91. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.10.003.

Hematopoietic fingerprints: an expression database of stem cells and their
progeny.

Chambers SM(1), Boles NC, Lin KY, Tierney MP, Bowman TV, Bradfute SB, Chen AJ,
Merchant AA, Sirin O, Weksberg DC, Merchant MG, Fisk CJ, Shaw CA, Goodell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program of Cell and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) continuously regenerate the hematologic system,
yet few genes regulating this process have been defined. To identify candidate
factors involved in differentiation and self-renewal, we have generated an
expression database of hematopoietic stem cells and their differentiated progeny,
including erythrocytes, granulocytes, monocytes, NK cells, activated and naive T 
cells, and B cells. Bioinformatic analysis revealed HSCs were more
transcriptionally active than their progeny and shared a common activation
mechanism with T cells. Each cell type also displayed unique biases in the
regulation of particular genetic pathways, with Wnt signaling particularly
enhanced in HSCs. We identified approximately 100-400 genes uniquely expressed in
each cell type, termed lineage "fingerprints." In overexpression studies, two of 
these genes, Zfp 105 from the NK cell lineage, and Ets2 from the monocyte
lineage, were able to significantly influence differentiation toward their
respective lineages, demonstrating the utility of the fingerprints for
identifying genes that regulate differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2475548
PMID: 18371395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2008 Mar 1;64(Pt 3):171-4. doi:
10.1107/S1744309108002662. Epub 2008 Feb 23.

Preparation, crystallization and preliminary X-ray diffraction analysis of the
DNA-binding domain of the Ets transcription factor in complex with target DNA.

Suwa Y(1), Nakamura T, Toma S, Ikemizu S, Kai H, Yamagata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto
862-0973, Japan.

The Ets2 transcription factor is a member of the Ets transcription-factor family.
Ets2 plays a role in the malignancy of cancer and in Down's syndrome by
regulating the transcription of various genes. The DNA-binding domain of Ets2
(Ets domain; ETSD), which contains residues that are highly conserved among Ets
transcription-factor family members, was expressed as a GST-fusion protein. The
aggregation of ETSD produced after thrombin cleavage could be prevented by
treatment with NDSB-195 (nondetergent sulfobetaine 195). ETSD was crystallized in
complex with DNA containing the Ets2 target sequence (GGAA) by the hanging-drop
vapour-diffusion method. The best crystals were grown using 25% PEG 3350, 80 mM
magnesium acetate, 50 mM sodium cacodylate pH 5.0/5.5 as the reservoir at 293 K. 
The crystals belonged to space group C2, with unit-cell parameters a = 85.89, b =
95.52, c = 71.89 A, beta = 101.7 degrees and a V(M) value of 3.56 A(3) Da(-1).
Diffraction data were collected to a resolution of 3.0 A.

PMCID: PMC2374153
PMID: 18323600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biol Reprod. 2008 Jul;79(1):115-24. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.107.066647. Epub 2008
Mar 5.

The role of homeobox protein distal-less 3 and its interaction with ETS2 in
regulating bovine interferon-tau gene expression-synergistic transcriptional
activation with ETS2.

Ezashi T(1), Das P, Gupta R, Walker A, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri
65211, USA. ezashit@missouri.edu

Distal-less 3 (DLX3), a homeodomain transcription factor required for placental
development in the mouse, modestly transactivates hCG-alpha subunit gene (hCGA)
expression in human choriocarcinoma cells. Because hCG and interferon-tau (IFNT) 
are expressed in trophectoderm of primates and ruminants, respectively, we have
tested the hypothesis that DLX3 regulates the genes for IFNT (IFNT). A bovine
IFNT1 promoter (-457 to +66), linked to a luciferase (luc) reporter, was
transactivated approximately 20-fold by overexpressing DLX3 in human JAr cells.
Elimination of a potential DLX3-binding site (-54 GATAATGAG -46) by either
truncation or mutagenesis abolished this effect. A sequence (-59 to -44)
encompassing this site bound DLX3 specifically. Coexpression of DLX3 and ETS2,
which is known to be a key regulator of IFNT expression, increased reporter
activity by more than 250-fold, whereas deletion of the established ETS2 site
(-79 to -70) eliminated the ability of DLX3 to transactivate the gene.
Conversely, mutation of the DLX3 site significantly reduced the transactivational
effects of ETS2. Both DLX3 and ETS2 are coexpressed in JAr cells and in an
IFNT-producing, bovine trophoblast cell line, CT-1. The two can be
immunoprecipitated together as a complex from CT-1 cells, and RNAi-mediated,
partial knockdown of DLX3 expression reduced the production of IFNT by
approximately 50+. Together, these results suggest that DLX3 has a central role
in controlling IFNT gene expression by associating with ETS2 on the IFNT
promoter.

PMID: 18322277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biochem J. 2008 Jun 1;412(2):287-98. doi: 10.1042/BJ20071512.

Negative-feedback regulation of FGF signalling by DUSP6/MKP-3 is driven by ERK1/2
and mediated by Ets factor binding to a conserved site within the DUSP6/MKP-3
gene promoter.

Ekerot M(1), Stavridis MP, Delavaine L, Mitchell MP, Staples C, Owens DM, Keenan 
ID, Dickinson RJ, Storey KG, Keyse SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Stress Response Laboratory, Biomedical Research Centre,
Level 5, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK.

DUSP6 (dual-specificity phosphatase 6), also known as MKP-3 [MAPK
(mitogen-activated protein kinase) phosphatase-3] specifically inactivates ERK1/2
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2) in vitro and in vivo. DUSP6/MKP-3 is 
inducible by FGF (fibroblast growth factor) signalling and acts as a negative
regulator of ERK activity in key and discrete signalling centres that direct
outgrowth and patterning in early vertebrate embryos. However, the molecular
mechanism by which FGFs induce DUSP6/MKP-3 expression and hence help to set
ERK1/2 signalling levels is unknown. In the present study, we demonstrate, using 
pharmacological inhibitors and analysis of the murine DUSP6/MKP-3 gene promoter, 
that the ERK pathway is critical for FGF-induced DUSP6/MKP-3 transcription.
Furthermore, we show that this response is mediated by a conserved binding site
for the Ets (E twenty-six) family of transcriptional regulators and that the Ets2
protein, a known target of ERK signalling, binds to the endogenous DUSP6/MKP-3
promoter. Finally, the murine DUSP6/MKP-3 promoter coupled to EGFP (enhanced
green fluorescent protein) recapitulates the specific pattern of endogenous
DUSP6/MKP-3 mRNA expression in the chicken neural plate, where its activity
depends on FGFR (FGF receptor) and MAPK signalling and an intact Ets-binding
site. These findings identify a conserved Ets-factor-dependent mechanism by which
ERK signalling activates DUSP6/MKP-3 transcription to deliver ERK1/2-specific
negative-feedback control of FGF signalling.

PMCID: PMC2474557
PMID: 18321244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Cancer Cell. 2008 Feb;13(2):91-104. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.01.001.

Identification of CDK10 as an important determinant of resistance to endocrine
therapy for breast cancer.

Iorns E(1), Turner NC, Elliott R, Syed N, Garrone O, Gasco M, Tutt AN, Crook T,
Lord CJ, Ashworth A.

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer
Research, Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.

Therapies that target estrogen signaling have transformed the treatment of breast
cancer. However, the effectiveness of these agents is limited by the development 
of resistance. Here, an RNAi screen was used to identify modifiers of tamoxifen
sensitivity. We demonstrate that CDK10 is an important determinant of resistance 
to endocrine therapies and show that CDK10 silencing increases ETS2-driven
transcription of c-RAF, resulting in MAPK pathway activation and loss of tumor
cell reliance upon estrogen signaling. Patients with ER alpha-positive tumors
that express low levels of CDK10 relapse early on tamoxifen, demonstrating the
clinical significance of these observations. The association of low levels of
CDK10 with methylation of the CDK10 promoter suggests a mechanism by which CDK10 
expression is reduced in tumors.

PMID: 18242510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Cancer Cell. 2008 Feb;13(2):83-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.01.021.

Unraveling the complexity of endocrine resistance in breast cancer by functional 
genomics.

Swanton C(1), Downward J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, Signal Transduction Laboratory, 
44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK. swanton@cancer.org.uk
<swanton@cancer.org.uk>

Despite the proven benefit of antiestrogen drugs in breast cancer treatment,
resistant disease ultimately develops in advanced breast cancer. In this issue of
Cancer Cell, Iorns et al. find that loss of CDK10 expression promotes resistance 
of cells to tamoxifen and is associated with poor outcome in breast cancer
patients treated with the drug. CDK10 loss increases the activity of the
transcription factor ETS2 on the promoter of the RAF1 gene, elevating ERK/MAPK
kinase pathway activity and relieving tamoxifen-induced G1 arrest. CDK10 is thus 
a potential biomarker for sensitivity in prospective clinical trials of patients 
treated with endocrine therapies.

PMID: 18242507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Nature. 2008 Jan 3;451(7174):73-5. doi: 10.1038/nature06446.

Trisomy represses Apc(Min)-mediated tumours in mouse models of Down's syndrome.

Sussan TE(1), Yang A, Li F, Ostrowski MC, Reeves RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and The Institute for Genetic Medicine, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2008 Jan 3;451(7174):21-2.

Epidemiological studies spanning more than 50 yr reach conflicting conclusions as
to whether there is a lower incidence of solid tumours in people with trisomy 21 
(Down's syndrome). We used mouse models of Down's syndrome and of cancer in a
biological approach to investigate the relationship between trisomy and the
incidence of intestinal tumours. Apc(Min)-mediated tumour number was determined
in aneuploid mouse models Ts65Dn, Ts1Rhr and Ms1Rhr. Trisomy for orthologues of
about half of the genes on chromosome 21 (Hsa21) in Ts65Dn mice or just 33 of
these genes in Ts1Rhr mice resulted in a significant reduction in the number of
intestinal tumours. In Ms1Rhr, segmental monosomy for the same 33 genes that are 
triplicated in Ts1Rhr resulted in an increased number of tumours. Further studies
demonstrated that the Ets2 gene contributed most of the dosage-sensitive effect
on intestinal tumour number. The action of Ets2 as a repressor when it is
overexpressed differs from tumour suppression, which requires normal gene
function to prevent cellular transformation. Upregulation of Ets2 and,
potentially, other genes involved in this kind of protective effect may provide a
prophylactic effect in all individuals, regardless of ploidy.

PMID: 18172498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nature. 2008 Jan 3;451(7174):21-2. doi: 10.1038/451021a.

Down's syndrome: paradox of a tumour repressor.

Threadgill DW.

Comment on
    Nature. 2008 Jan 3;451(7174):73-5.

PMID: 18172483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 Jan;6(1):53-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2007.10.022.

Microarray-based prediction of tumor response to neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy of
patients with locally advanced rectal cancer.

Rimkus C(1), Friederichs J, Boulesteix AL, Theisen J, Mages J, Becker K, Nekarda 
H, Rosenberg R, Janssen KP, Siewert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Immunology and Hygiene, Klinikum rechts der Isar der
Technischen Universität München, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy has become a standard treatment 
of locally advanced rectal carcinomas, even though the responsiveness varies from
complete response to resistance. The aim of the study was to evaluate the
capacity of gene expression signatures to identify responders and nonresponders
pretherapeutically.
METHODS: By using microarray technology we generated gene expression profiles of 
43 biopsy specimens of locally advanced rectal carcinomas. The transcription
profile then was compared with histopathologic response and used to identify a
set of genes discriminating responders from nonresponders.
RESULTS: We identified a gene expression signature of 42 genes, mostly encoding
proteins that either play a role in the nucleus, such as the transcription factor
ETS2, or are associated with transport function, such as the solute carrier
SLC35E1, or the regulation of apoptosis, such as caspase-1. In leave-one-out
cross-validation the correct classification of a responder was 71%, the
specificity of the analysis for a correct classification of a nonresponder was
86%. By applying an additional statistical method of 200 successive splittings
into training and test data sets we generated an individual prediction accuracy
measure for each predicted response.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that pretherapeutic prediction of response of rectal
carcinomas to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy is feasible, and may represent a new 
valuable and practical tool of therapeutic stratification.

PMID: 18166477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 Dec 20;8:117.

Differential regulation of NAB corepressor genes in Schwann cells.

Srinivasan R(1), Jang SW, Ward RM, Sachdev S, Ezashi T, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI, USA. rsrinivasan@wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Myelination of peripheral nerves by Schwann cells requires not only
the Egr2/Krox-20 transactivator, but also the NGFI-A/Egr-binding (NAB)
corepressors, which modulate activity of Egr2. Previous work has shown that
axon-dependent expression of Egr2 is mediated by neuregulin stimulation, and NAB 
corepressors are co-regulated with Egr2 expression in peripheral nerve
development. NAB corepressors have also been implicated in macrophage
development, cardiac hypertrophy, prostate carcinogenesis, and feedback
regulation involved in hindbrain development.
RESULTS: To test the mechanism of NAB regulation in Schwann cells, transfection
assays revealed that both Nab1 and Nab2 promoters are activated by Egr2
expression. Furthermore, direct binding of Egr2 at these promoters was
demonstrated in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of myelinating
sciatic nerve, and binding of Egr2 to the Nab2 promoter was stimulated by
neuregulin in primary Schwann cells. Although Egr2 expression activates the Nab2 
promoter more highly than Nab1, we surprisingly found that only Nab1 - but not
Nab2 - expression levels were reduced in sciatic nerve from Egr2 null mice.
Analysis of the Nab2 promoter showed that it is also activated by ETS proteins
(Ets2 and Etv1/ER81) and is bound by Ets2 in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Overall, these results indicate that induction of Nab2 expression in 
Schwann cells involves not only Egr2, but also ETS proteins that are activated by
neuregulin stimulation. Although Nab1 and Nab2 play partially redundant roles,
regulation of Nab2 expression by ETS factors explains several observations
regarding regulation of NAB genes. Finally, these data suggest that NAB proteins 
are not only feedback inhibitors of Egr2, but rather that co-induction of Egr2
and NAB genes is involved in forming an Egr2/NAB complex that is crucial for
regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2235890
PMID: 18096076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Leukemia. 2008 Mar;22(3):521-9. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

The role of the proto-oncogene ETS2 in acute megakaryocytic leukemia biology and 
therapy.

Ge Y(1), LaFiura KM, Dombkowski AA, Chen Q, Payton SG, Buck SA, Salagrama S,
Diakiw AE, Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in Down syndrome (DS) children has several unique
features including a predominance of the acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL)
phenotype, higher event-free survivals compared to non-DS children using cytosine
arabinoside (ara-C)/anthracycline-based protocols and a uniform presence of
somatic mutations in the X-linked transcription factor gene, GATA1. Several
chromosome 21-localized transcription factor oncogenes including ETS2 may
contribute to the unique features of DS AMkL. ETS2 transcripts measured by
real-time RT-PCR were 1.8- and 4.1-fold, respectively, higher in DS and non-DS
megakaryoblasts than those in non-DS myeloblasts. In a doxycycline-inducible
erythroleukemia cell line, K562pTet-on/ETS2, induction of ETS2 resulted in an
erythroid to megakaryocytic phenotypic switch independent of GATA1 levels.
Microarray analysis of doxycycline-induced and doxycycline-uninduced cells
revealed an upregulation by ETS2 of cytokines (for example, interleukin 1 and
CSF2) and transcription factors (for example, TAL1), which are key regulators of 
megakaryocytic differentiation. In the K562pTet-on/ETS2 cells, ETS2 induction
conferred differences in sensitivities to ara-C and daunorubicin, depending on
GATA1 levels. These results suggest that ETS2 expression is linked to the biology
of AMkL in both DS and non-DS children, and that ETS2 acts by regulating
expression of hematopoietic lineage and transcription factor genes involved in
erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis, and in chemotherapy sensitivities.

PMCID: PMC3809919
PMID: 18094719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Oct;1114:36-47.

Transcriptional regulation of telomerase activity: roles of the the Ets
transcription factor family.

Dwyer J(1), Li H, Xu D, Liu JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Telomerase maintains telomeres to preclude cell senescence. It remains elusive
how telomerase activity is repressed in differentiated cells, but retained at
high levels in stem cells and cancer. Recent studies suggest that the Ets
transcription factor family, downstream of the mitogen signaling pathways of MAP 
kinase, regulates telomerase activity at the gene transcription level of human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT). Several Ets transcription factors are
involved in regulating hTERT gene expression, both directly and indirectly
through the proto-oncogene c-myc. ER81 may mediate telomerase activation in
telomerase-negative fibroblasts stimulated by oncogenes Her2/Neu, Ras, and Raf.
Ets2 may also play an important role in regulating the hTERT gene; but further
studies are required to decipher the mechanisms in the regulation of telomerase
activity.

PMID: 17986575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2007 Jun;7(4):355-67.

Transcription factors: molecular targets for prostate cancer intervention by
phytochemicals.

Kaur M(1), Agarwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

With increasing incidence of cancer at most of the sites, and growing economic
burden and associated psychological and emotional trauma, it is becoming clearer 
that more efforts are needed for cancer cure. Since most of the chemotherapeutic 
drugs are non-selective because they are also toxic to the normal cells, new and 
improved strategies are needed that selectively target the killing of cancer
cells. Since aberrant activation of numerous signaling pathways is a key element 
of cancer cell survival and growth, blocking all of them is not that practical,
which leads to the step where most of them commonly converge; the transcription
factors. Recent research efforts, therefore, are also directed on targeting the
activity and activation of transcription factors, which ultimately control the
expression of genes that are involved in almost all aspects of cell biology. One 
class of agents that is becoming increasingly successful, not only in targeting
signaling cascades, but also transcription factors is phytochemicals present in
diet and those consumed as supplement. The added advantage with these agents is
that they are mostly non-toxic when compared to chemotherapeutic agents. This
review focuses on the efficacy of various phytochemicals in targeting
transcription factors such as AR, Sp1, STATs, E2F, Egr1, c-Myc, HIF-1 alpha,
NF-kappaB, AP-1, ETS2, GLI and p53 in the context of prostate cancer
intervention.

PMID: 17979630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Dev Biol. 2007 Dec 1;312(1):284-99. Epub 2007 Sep 22.

Ets2 is required for trophoblast stem cell self-renewal.

Wen F(1), Tynan JA, Cecena G, Williams R, Múnera J, Mavrothalassitis G, Oshima
RG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, University of California, San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive 0612, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

The Ets2 transcription factor is essential for the development of the mouse
placenta and for generating signals for embryonic mesoderm and axis formation.
Using a conditional targeted Ets2 allele, we show that Ets2 is essential for
trophoblast stem (TS) cells self-renewal. Inactivation of Ets2 results in TS cell
slower growth, increased expression of a subset of differentiation-associated
genes and decreased expression of several genes implicated in TS self-renewal.
Among the direct TS targets of Ets2 is Cdx2, a key master regulator of TS cell
state. Thus Ets2 contributes to the regulation of multiple genes important for
maintaining the undifferentiated state of TS cells and as candidate signals for
embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2211385
PMID: 17977525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Feb;22(2):331-43. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Combinatorial roles of protein kinase A, Ets2, and 3',5'-cyclic-adenosine
monophosphate response element-binding protein-binding protein/p300 in the
transcriptional control of interferon-tau expression in a trophoblast cell line.

Das P(1), Ezashi T, Gupta R, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center, University of Missouri-Columbia,
1201 East Rollins Street, Columbia, MO 65211-7310, USA.

In ruminants, conceptus interferon-tau (IFNT) production is necessary for
maintenance of pregnancy. We examined the role of protein kinase A (PKA) in
regulating IFNT expression through the activation of Ets2 in JAr choriocarcinoma 
cells. Although overexpression of the catalytic subunit of PKA or the addition of
8-bromo-cAMP had little ability to up-regulate boIFNT1 reporter constructs on
their own, coexpression with Ets2 led to a large increase in gene expression.
Progressive truncation of reporter constructs indicated that the site of PKA/Ets2
responsiveness lay in a region of the promoter between -126 and -67, which lacks 
a cAMP response element but contains the functional Ets2-binding site and an
activator protein 1 (AP1) site. Specific mutation of the former reduced the
PKA/Ets2 effects by more than 98%, whereas mutation of an AP1-binding site
adjacent to the Ets2 site or pharmacological inhibition of MAPK kinase 2 led to a
doubling of the combined Ets2/PKA effects, suggesting there is antagonism between
the Ras/MAPK pathway and the PKA signal transduction pathway. Although Ets2 is
not a substrate for PKA, lowering the effective concentrations of the
coactivators, cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP)/p300,
known PKA targets, reduced the ability of PKA to synergize with Ets2, suggesting 
that PKA effects on IFNT regulation might be mediated through CBP/p300
coactivation, particularly as CBP and Ets2 occupy the proximal promoter region of
IFNT in bovine trophoblast CT-1 cells. The up-regulation of IFNT in the
elongating bovine conceptus is likely due to the combinatorial effects of PKA,
Ets2, and CBP/p300 and triggered via growth factors released from maternal
endometrium.

PMCID: PMC2234587
PMID: 17975022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Clin Chem. 2007 Dec;53(12):2070-7. Epub 2007 Oct 5.

Detailed technical analysis of urine RNA-based tumor diagnostics reveals
ETS2/urokinase plasminogen activator to be a novel marker for bladder cancer.

Hanke M(1), Kausch I, Dahmen G, Jocham D, Warnecke JM.

Author information: 
(1)Kompetenzzentrum fuer Drug Design und Target Monitoring, Luebeck, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The noninvasive detection of RNA tumor markers in body fluids
represents an attractive diagnostic option, but diagnostic performance of
tissue-derived markers is often poorer when measured in body fluids rather than
in tumors. We aimed to develop a procedure for measurement of tumor RNA in urine 
that would minimize donor-dependent influences on the results.
METHODS: RNA isolated from urinary cell pellet, cell-depleted fraction, and whole
urine was quantified by reverse transcription quantitative-PCR. The
donor-dependent influence of urine background on individual steps of the
standardized procedure was analyzed using an external RNA standard. Using a test 
set of samples from 61 patients with bladder cancer and 37 healthy donors, we
compared 4 putative RNA tumor markers identified in whole urine with 5
established, tissue-derived RNA tumor markers for the detection of bladder
cancer.
RESULTS: Of the markers analyzed by this system, the RNA ratio of v-ets
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 (avian; ETS2) to urokinase
plasminogen activator (uPA) enabled the most specific (100%) and sensitive
(75.4%) detection of bladder cancer from whole urine, with an area under the
curve of 0.929 (95% CI 0.882-0.976).
CONCLUSIONS: The described methodology for RNA marker detection in urine appears 
to be clinically applicable. The ratio of ETS2 mRNA to uPA mRNA in urine is a
potential marker for bladder cancer.

PMID: 17921261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Gene. 2007 Nov 15;403(1-2):178-87. Epub 2007 Aug 25.

CD13/APN transcription is regulated by the proto-oncogene c-Maf via an atypical
response element.

Mahoney KM(1), Petrovic N, Schacke W, Shapiro LH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vascular Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut, United States.

Angiogenic growth factors induce the transcription of the cell surface peptidase 
CD13/APN in activated endothelial cells of the tumor vasculature. Inhibition of
CD13/APN abrogates endothelial invasion and morphogenesis in vitro and tumor
growth in vivo suggesting a critical functional role for CD13 in angiogenesis.
Experiments to identify the transcription factors responsible for this regulation
demonstrated that exogenous expression of the proto-oncogene c-Maf, but not other
bZip family members tested, potently activates transcription from a critical
regulatory region of the CD13 proximal promoter between -115 and -70 bp which is 
highly conserved among mammalian species. Using promoter mutation, EMSA and ChIP 
analyses we established that both endogenous and recombinant c-Maf directly
interact with an atypical Maf response element contained within this active
promoter region via its basic DNA/leucine zipper domain. However full activity of
c-Maf requires the amino-terminal transactivation domain, and site-directed
mutation of putative phosphorylation sites within the transactivation domain
(serines 15 and 70) shows that these sites behave in a dramatic cell
type-specific manner. Therefore, this atypical response element predicts a
broader range of c-Maf target genes than previously appreciated and thus impacts 
its regulation of multiple myeloma as well as endothelial cell function and
angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2045687
PMID: 17897790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cells Tissues Organs. 2007;186(4):213-20. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Expression patterns of Ets2 protein correlate with bone-specific proteins in
cell-seeded three-dimensional bone constructs.

Wanschitz F(1), Stein E, Sutter W, Kneidinger D, Smolik K, Watzinger F, Turhani
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cranio-Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery, General Hospital of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

The transcription factor Ets2 and its transcriptional targets osteopontin (OPN)
and osteocalcin (OC) are expressed in tissue-engineered bone constructs in vitro.
Up to now little is known about the role of Ets2 in tissue-engineering
applications. This study was intended to investigate the hypothesis that protein 
expression of Ets2 is correlated with the expression of bone-specific proteinsin 
tissue-engineeredbone constructs. Cell-seeded three-dimensional bone constructs
manufactured with osteoblastic cells and poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) polymer
fleeces over a period of 21 days were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. 
The protein expression of OPN, OC, osteonectin and collagen type I was analyzed. 
Cellularity, alkaline phosphatase-specific activity and histology confirmed the
osteoblastic phenotype of the constructs. Correlations between Ets2 expression
and OPN and Ets2 and collagen type I expression could be detected during the
phase of late osteoblastic differentiation between days 9 and 21. The correlation
between OC and collagen type I was significant in this late stage of osteoblastic
differentiation. These results suggest that there is a strong interplay of Ets2
with bone-specific proteins in cell-seeded three-dimensional bone constructs.
This study is a crucial step to elucidate the complex interplay of bone-related
proteins in the application of bone tissue engineering.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17703088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2007 Oct-Dec;18(5-6):403-8. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Interferon-tau, a Type 1 interferon involved in maternal recognition of
pregnancy.

Roberts RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, 240B CS Bond
Life Sciences Center, 1201 Rollins Street, Columbia, MO 65211, United States.
robertsrm@missouri.edu

Interferon-tau is a major product of ovine and bovine conceptuses during the
period before the trophoblast makes firm attachment to the uterine wall and
begins to form a placenta. Its primary function is in preventing a return to
ovarian cyclicity and hence ensuring the pregnancy continues, although it
undoubtedly has other roles in ensuring receptivity of the maternal endometrium. 
Despite having properties similar to those of other Type 1, IFN-tau is not
virally inducible and functions in a constitutive process unrelated to
pathogenesis. The genes for IFN-tau (IFNT), which are confined to ruminant
ungulate species, would appear to be the most recently evolved mammalian Type 1
gene family and are primarily under the transcriptional control of Ets2 and
signal transduction pathways that target that transcription factor. The IFNT
provide an illustration of how a gene control region can be commandeered and then
refined to provide a radically changed pattern of expression.

PMCID: PMC2000448
PMID: 17662642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Hum Mutat. 2007 Aug;28(8):824-9.

Functional profiling of uncommon VCAM1 promoter polymorphisms prevalent in
African American populations.

Idelman G(1), Taylor JG, Tongbai R, Chen RA, Haggerty CM, Bilke S, Chanock SJ,
Gardner K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5065, USA.

Multiple variants of the vascular adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM1) promoter show
increased nucleotide heterozygosity in the African American population. Using a
novel transfection-based transcriptional pathway profiling method, we show that
select uncommon variants are functionally hyperactive. Eight candidate VCAM1
promoter haplotypes comprising 13 previously identified SNPs were assessed for
response to known mitogens. Activity was correlated with bioinformatic analysis
of hyper- and hyporesponsive variants to identify the gain or loss of
haplotype-specific transcription factor binding site (TFBS). Using this approach,
a low frequency regulatory allele (c.-540A>G; dbSNP rs3783605:A>G), found in a
hyperactive VCAM1 promoter haplotype, was shown to create a candidate binding
site for ETS2 that was confirmed in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation. This
report provides the first functional evaluation of VCAM1 promoter polymorphisms
and establishes a hypothetical foundation for investigation of their role in the 
pathogenesis of VCAM1-associated diseases that disproportionately afflict African
Americans, including thromboembolic diseases, asthma, and multiple myeloma.

PMID: 17431880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Pathol. 2007 May;212(1):102-11.

Transcriptional upregulation and unmethylation of the promoter region of p16 in
invasive basal cell carcinoma cells and partial co-localization with the gamma 2 
chain of laminin-332.

Svensson Månsson S(1), Reis-Filho J, Landberg G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University,
UMAS, SE-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

Basal cell carcinoma cells show low proliferation rates at the invasive front and
a concordant upregulation of the cdk-inhibitor p16, limiting proliferative
capacity. Little is known about the mechanisms of p16 regulation in normal and
malignant cells apart from that many transcription factors such as Ets1, Ets2,
SP1, SP3, JunB and the polycomb protein Bmi1 have the potential to induce or
repress p16 expression. Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine how p16
is regulated in basal cell carcinoma with special focus on its upregulation in
invasive cells. By analysing various microdissected areas of basal cell carcinoma
using real-time quantitative PCR we observed upregulation of p16 mRNA in invasive
tumour cells compared to centrally localized tumour cells. The methylation status
of the p16 promoter, analysed by methylation-specific PCR, also showed diminished
methylation in tumour cells at the invasive front, supporting the hypothesis that
promoter methylation can affect the transcriptional activation of p16 in vivo.
There was only sporadic co-localization of Ets, or ERK1/2 phosphorylation with
p16 upregulation at the invasive front, suggesting that these factors were not
directly involved in the regulation of p16. Furthermore, the gamma 2 chain of
laminin-332 has been reported to be increased at the invasive front compared to
the central areas of many tumours. Interestingly, in basal cell carcinoma we
observed partial co-localization between p16 and the gamma 2 chain of laminin-332
in tumour cells towards areas of ulceration and in the majority of clearly
infiltrative tumour cells but not in p16 positive tumour cells with a more
pushing invasive growth pattern. These data suggest that concurrent p16
upregulation and decreased proliferation are more general phenomena in different 
types of invasive growth patterns in basal cell carcinomas and that these only
partially overlap with the gamma 2 chain of laminin-332 associated invasion
patterns.

Copyright (c) 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17370299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 1;67(5):1988-96.

Curcumin, a dietary component, has anticancer, chemosensitization, and
radiosensitization effects by down-regulating the MDM2 oncogene through the
PI3K/mTOR/ETS2 pathway.

Li M(1), Zhang Z, Hill DL, Wang H, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1670 University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL
32594, USA.

The oncoprotein MDM2, a major ubiquitin E3 ligase of tumor suppressor p53, has
been suggested as a novel target for human cancer therapy based on its
p53-dependent and p53-independent activities. We have identified curcumin, which 
has previously been shown to have anticancer activity, as an inhibitor of MDM2
expression. Curcumin down-regulates MDM2, independent of p53. In a human prostate
cancer cell lines PC3 (p53(null)), curcumin reduced MDM2 protein and mRNA in a
dose- and time-dependent manner, and enhanced the expression of the tumor
suppressor p21(Waf1/CIP1). The inhibitory effects occur at the transcriptional
level and seem to involve the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/mammalian target of
rapamycin/erythroblastosis virus transcription factor 2 pathway. Curcumin induced
apoptosis and inhibited proliferation of PC3 cells in culture, but both MDM2
overexpression and knockdown reduced these effects. Curcumin also inhibited the
growth of these cells and enhanced the cytotoxic effects of gemcitabine. When it 
was administered to tumor-bearing nude mice, curcumin inhibited growth of PC3
xenografts and enhanced the antitumor effects of gemcitabine and radiation. In
these tumors, curcumin reduced the expression of MDM2. Down-regulation of the
MDM2 oncogene by curcumin is a novel mechanism of action that may be essential
for its chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic effects. Our observations help to
elucidate the process by which mitogens up-regulate MDM2, independent of p53, and
identify a mechanism by which curcumin functions as an anticancer agent.

PMID: 17332326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Nat Biotechnol. 2007 Feb;25(2):233-7. Epub 2007 Jan 14.

Complementation of placental defects and embryonic lethality by
trophoblast-specific lentiviral gene transfer.

Okada Y(1), Ueshin Y, Isotani A, Saito-Fujita T, Nakashima H, Kimura K, Mizoguchi
A, Oh-Hora M, Mori Y, Ogata M, Oshima RG, Okabe M, Ikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2007 Feb;25(2):190-1.

Placental dysfunction underlies many complications during pregnancy, and better
understanding of gene function during placentation could have considerable
clinical relevance. However, the lack of a facile method for placenta-specific
gene manipulation has hampered investigation of placental organogenesis and the
treatment of placental dysfunction. We showed previously that transduction of
fertilized mouse eggs with lentiviral vectors leads to transgene expression in
both the fetus and the placenta. Here we report placenta-specific gene
incorporation by lentiviral transduction of mouse blastocysts after removal of
the zona pellucida. All of the placentas analyzed, but none of the fetuses, were 
transgenic. Application of this method substantially rescued mice deficient in
Ets2, Mapk14 (also known as p38alpha) and Mapk1 (also known as Erk2) from
embryonic lethality caused by placental defects. Ectopic expression of Mapk11
also complemented Mapk14 deficiency during placentation.

PMID: 17220877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Int J Oncol. 2007 Jan;30(1):19-32.

ERG upregulation and related ETS transcription factors in prostate cancer.

Rostad K(1), Mannelqvist M, Halvorsen OJ, Oyan AM, Bø TH, Stordrange L, Olsen S, 
Haukaas SA, Lin B, Hood L, Jonassen I, Akslen LA, Kalland KH.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Microbiology and Immunology, The Gade Institute, Bergen, Norway.

The aim of this study was to identify and validate differentially expressed genes
in matched pairs of benign and malignant prostate tissue. Samples included 29
histologically verified primary tumors and 23 benign controls. Microarray
analysis was initially performed using a sequence verified set of 40,000 human
cDNA clones. Among the genes most consistently and highly upregulated in prostate
cancer was the ETS family transcription factor ERG (ETS related gene). This
finding was validated in an expanded patient series (37 tumors and 38 benign
samples) using DNA oligonucleotide microarray and real-time quantitative PCR
assays. ERG was 20- to more than 100-fold overexpressed in prostate cancer
compared with benign prostate tissue in more than 50% of patients according to
quantitative PCR. Surprisingly, ERG mRNA levels were found to be significantly
higher in the endothelial cell line, HUVEC, than in the prostate cell lines PC3, 
DU145 and LNCaP. In situ hybridization of prostate cancer tissue revealed that
ERG was abundantly expressed in both prostate cancer cells and associated
endothelial cells. The consistency and magnitude of ERG overexpression in
prostate cancer appeared unique, but several related ETS transcription factors
were also overexpressed in matched pairs of tumor and benign samples, whereas
ETS2 was significantly underexpressed. Our findings support the hypothesis that
ERG overexpression and related ETS transcription factors are important for early 
prostate carcinogenesis.

PMID: 17143509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Brain Res. 2007 Jan 12;1128(1):21-32. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Analysis of transcriptional modulation of the presenilin 1 gene promoter by
ZNF237, a candidate binding partner of the Ets transcription factor ERM.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107,
USA.

DNA sequences required for the expression of the human presenilin 1 (PS1) gene
have been identified between -118 and +178 flanking the major initiation site
(+1) mapped in SK-N-SH cells. Several Ets sites are located both upstream as well
as downstream from the +1 site, including an Ets motif present at -10 that
controls 90% of transcription in SK-N-SH cells. However, in SH-SY5Y cells,
transcription initiates further downstream and requires an alternative set of
promoter elements including a +90 Ets motif. Ets2, ER81, ERM and Elk1 were
identified by yeast one-hybrid selection in a human brain cDNA library using the 
-10 Ets motif as a bait. We have shown that ERM recognizes specifically Ets
motifs on the PS1 promoter located at -10 as well as downstream at +90, +129 and 
+165 and activates PS1 transcription with promoter fragments whether or not they 
contain the -10 Ets site. We have now searched for ERM interacting proteins by
yeast two-hybrid selection in a human brain cDNA library using the C-terminal 415
amino acid of ERM as a bait. One of the interacting proteins was ZNF237, a member
of the MYM gene family. It is widely expressed in different tissues in eukaryotes
under several forms derived by alternative splicing, including a large 382 amino 
acid form containing a single MYM domain, and 2 shorter forms of 208 and 213
amino acids respectively that do not. We show that both the 382 as well as the
208 amino acid forms are expressed in SK-N-SH cells but not in SH-SY5Y cells.
Both forms interact with ERM and repress the transcription of PS1 in SH-SY5Y
cells. The effect of both C-terminal and N-terminal deletions indicates that the 
N-terminal 120 amino acid region is required for interaction with ERM in yeast,
and furthermore single amino acid mutations show that residues 112 and 114 play
an important role. The repression of transcription in SH-SY5Y cells also appears 
to require the N-terminal potion of ZNF237 and was affected by mutation of the
amino acid 112. Data from electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicate that ERM
and possibly ZNF237 interact with a fragment of the PS1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC1876729
PMID: 17126306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cell Res. 2006 Sep;16(9):780-96.

Transcription of the putative tumor suppressor gene HCCS1 requires binding of
ETS-2 to its consensus near the transcription start site.

Zhu JD(1), Fei Q, Wang P, Lan F, Mao da Q, Zhang HY, Yao XB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Epigenetics and Gene Therapy, The State-Key Laboratory
for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China. zhujingde@yahoo.com

The hepatocellular carcinoma suppressor 1 (HCCS1) gene was identified by both
positional cloning from a predominant region of loss of heterozygosity (17p13.3) 
in liver cancer and by functional screening for genes affecting cell
proliferation in large-scale transfection assays. Its overexpression results in
inhibition of cell proliferation in cell culture and tumor growth in nude mice.
To understand its transcription regulation, the promoter architecture has been
dissected in detail. The major start of transcription was mapped by primer
extension to a C residue, 177 nucleotides upstream of the ATG codon. By assessing
the promoter activity of a set of linker-scanning mutants of the minimal promoter
(-60 to +148 region) in a transient transfection assay, we found that the +1 to +
40 region is critical to HCCS1 gene transcription, containing binding sites for
transcription factors NF-kappaB (-21 to +7 and +40 to +26), p53 (+29 to +9) and
ETS (+4 to +20 and +23 to +39). Biochemical and molecular analyses revealed that 
the ETS transcription factors ETS-2 and Elf-1 bind to the two ETS sites in situ
and contribute significantly to the transcriptionally active state of the HCCS1
gene, while NF-kappaB, p53 and two other members of the ETS family (ETS-1 and
NERF2) appear to play little role. Our observations provide insight into the
mechanistic aspects of HCCS1 transcription regulation.

PMID: 16953216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 1;281(35):25259-69. Epub 2006 Jul 6.

Fli1 and Ets1 have distinct roles in connective tissue growth factor/CCN2 gene
regulation and induction of the profibrotic gene program.

Nakerakanti SS(1), Kapanadze B, Yamasaki M, Markiewicz M, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

CCN2 (connective tissue growth factor), an important regulator of angiogenesis,
chondrogenesis, and wound healing, is overexpressed in a majority of fibrotic
diseases and in various tumors. This study investigated regulation of CCN2 gene
expression by Ets family of transcription factors, focusing on two members, Fli1 
and Ets1, with deregulated expression during fibrosis and tumorigenesis. We show 
that Ets1 and Fli1 have opposite effects on CCN2 gene expression. Ets1 functions 
as an activator of CCN2 transcription, whereas Fli1 acts as a repressor. A
functional Ets binding site was mapped at -114 within the CCN2 promoter. This
site not only mediates stimulation by Ets factors, including Ets1, Ets2, and
GABPalpha/beta, but is also required for the transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta response. The contrasting functions of Ets1 and Fli1 in regulation of 
the CCN2 gene were confirmed by suppressing their endogenous levels using
adenoviral vectors expressing specific small interfering RNAs. Additional
experiments using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays have revealed that in
fibroblasts both Ets1 and Fli1 occupy the CCN2 promoter. TGF-beta stimulation
resulted in displacement of Fli1 from the CCN2 promoter and a transient
inhibition of Fli1 synthesis. Moreover, reduction of Fli1 expression resulted in 
up-regulation of COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes and down-regulation of the MMP1 gene.
Thus, inhibition of Fli1 recapitulated some of the key effects of TGF-beta,
suggesting that Fli1 suppression is involved in activation of the profibrotic
gene program in fibroblasts. On the other hand, activation of the CCN2 gene
downstream of Ets1 is consistent with its role in angiogenesis and extracellular 
matrix remodeling. This study strongly supports a critical role of Fli1 and Ets1 
in the pathological extracellular matrix regulation during fibrosis and cancer.

PMID: 16829517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 1;281(35):25601-11. Epub 2006 Jun 23.

The transcriptional ETS2 repressor factor associates with active and inactive
Erks through distinct FXF motifs.

Polychronopoulos S(1), Verykokakis M, Yazicioglu MN, Sakarellos-Daitsiotis M,
Cobb MH, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Crete
710 03, Greece.

The transcriptional ETS2 repressor factor (ERF) is phosphorylated by Erks both in
vivo and in vitro. This phosphorylation determines the subcellular localization
and biological function of ERF. Here, we show that active and inactive Erk2
proteins bind ERF with high affinity through a hydrophobic pocket formed by the
alphaF and alphaG helices and the activation loop of Erk2. We have identified two
FXF motifs on ERF that mediate the specific interaction with Erks. One of these
motifs is utilized only by active Erks, whereas the other mediates the
association with inactive Erks but also contributes to interaction with active
Erks. Mutation of the phenylalanines of these motifs to alanines resulted in
decreased association and phosphorylation of ERF by Erks both in cells and in
vitro. ERF proteins carrying these mutations exhibited increased nuclear
accumulation and increased inhibition of cellular proliferation. Expression of
ERF regions harboring these motifs could inhibit Erk activity in cells. Our data 
suggest that, in the proper context, FXF motifs can mediate a strong and specific
interaction not only with active but also inactive Erks and that these
interactions determine protein function in vivo.

PMID: 16799155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Oct 15;99(3):978-85.

Identification of murine cdk10: association with Ets2 transcription factor and
effects on the cell cycle.

Bagella L(1), Giacinti C, Simone C, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, College of
Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.
bagella@temple.edu

Cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) are the catalytic subunits of a large family of
serine/threonine protein kinases whose best-characterized members are key
regulators of eukaryotic cell cycle progression. They are activated by binding to
regulatory subunits generally termed as cyclins. Cdk10 is a cdc2-related kinase
that contains the canonical regulatory Tyr and Thr residues present in all
protein kinases and a PSTAIRE-like motif named PISSLRE. Although little is known 
about this protein, human cdk10 has been shown to encode two different isoforms, 
each having a distinct function. They differ at both the carboxy- and
amino-terminals, although most of the amino acid sequence is predicted to be
identical for the two isoforms. A role at the G2/M transition has been suggested 
for an isoform of cdk10, while the alternative splicing form interacts with the
N-terminus of the Ets2 transcription factor. Here we report the cloning and the
functional characterization of a cDNA encoding the murine homologue of cdk10.
Unlike its human counterpart, only one murine cdk10 protein has been identified, 
and this unique murine cdk10 cDNA encodes a putative protein of 360 amino acids. 
Comparison of the amino acid sequences of murine and human cdk10 shows high
homology. Murine cdk10 binds Ets2 transcription factors in vitro, does not show a
direct involvement in the G2/M transition and, therefore, does not affect the
proliferation rate of the cell lines analyzed.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16741970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Eur J Cancer. 2006 Jul;42(10):1466-74. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

Ets2 binding site single nucleotide polymorphism at the hTERT gene
promoter--effect on telomerase expression and telomere length maintenance in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Hsu CP(1), Hsu NY, Lee LW, Ko JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Taichung Veterans General
Hospital, 160, sec.3, Taichung-Kang Rd., Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.
cliff@vghtc.gov.tw

The aim of this study was to elucidate the occurrence of DNA sequence changes in 
the promoter region of hTERT gene, and its effect on telomerase expression and
telomere length maintenance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Between
January 2002 and December 2003, 66 NSCLC patients were studied. The expression of
hTERT, telomerase activity (TA), and c-Myc were examined, and the terminal
restriction fragment length (TRFL) was measured. A t/n-TRFLR was obtained by
dividing the TRFL of the tumour tissue by TRFL of the paired normal tissue. PCR
products were sequenced and compared with known hTERT gene promoter sequence for 
a length of 716 bp upstream of the transcription starting code. The changes of
any known sequence and/or c-Myc expression with their impact on telomerase
activity and TRFL maintenance were measured. Positive hTERT, TA and c-Myc
expression was observed in 43 (65.2%), 39 (59.1%) and 59 (89.4%) of the tumour
tissue samples, respectively. Except for one patient who had C/C (in normal
tissue) homozygotes to T/C (in tumour tissue) heterozygotes point mutation, a
novel single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) -245 kb upstream (Ets2 binding site)
of the hTERT gene was observed in all normal and tumour tissues, including C/C in
9, T/C in 35, and T/T in 22 of the tumour tissues. The TA of C/C homozygotes was 
lower than that of T/T homozygotes (P=0.0331), while the t/n-TRFLR of C/C
homozygotes was higher than that of T/T homozygotes (P=0.0621). The latter was
even more obvious when c-Myc were positive (P=0.0185). Our data shows that T/T
homozygotes have a lower t/n-TRFLR, but a stronger TA expression, suggesting that
the studied Ets2 binding site is a positive regulator of hTERT gene. SNP may
interfere with Ets2 binding and lower TA expression in T/C heterozygotes and C/C 
homozygotes.

PMID: 16737810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2006 May-Jun;54(3):149-63. Epub 2006 May 2.

ETS transcription factors and regulation of immunity.

Gallant S(1), Gilkeson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatolog, Medical University of South
Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas St. Suite 912, PO Box 250637, Charleston, SC 29425,
USA. gallant@musc.edu

The ETS family is a diverse group of transcription factors that control the
expressions of genes that participate in an array of cellular activities, ranging
from mitosis to apoptosis. As a consequence of regulating these processes, most
ETS factors are oncogenic. However, there is growing evidence that ETS factors
are also essential to regulation of the immune system. Of the 29 recognized ETS
factors, nine are known to regulate genes involved in immunity, including Ets1,
Ets2, GABP, Fli1, Elf1, MEF, ESE1, PU.1, and SpiB. These ETS factors typically
activate the transcription of genes associated with pathogen and tumor defense,
but several also demonstrate ability to repress transcription. Ets1 and PU.1
appear to have the greatest impact on immunity, primarily through their control
of immune cell development. Alterations of Fli1 and Elf1 expression are
associated with autoimmunity, emphasizing the role of ETS factors as not only
positive, but also negative regulators of immunity. This review summarizes the
roles of ETS factors in development of the immune system, defense against
pathogens and malignancies, and self-tolerance.

PMID: 16652219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Dev Biol. 2006 Jun 15;294(2):445-56. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Post-implantation mouse conceptuses produce paracrine signals that regulate the
uterine endometrium undergoing decidualization.

Bany BM(1), Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Canada. bbany@siumed.edu

The uterus undergoes a series of dramatic changes in response to an implanting
conceptus that, in some mammalian species, includes differentiation of the
endometrial stroma into decidual tissue. This process, called decidualization,
can be induced artificially in rodents indicating that the conceptus may not be
essential for a proper maternal response in early pregnancy. In order to test
this hypothesis, we determined if and how the conceptus affects uterine gene
expression. We identified 5 genes (Angpt1, Angpt2, Dtprp, G1p2 and Prlpa) whose
steady-state levels in the uterus undergoing decidualization depends on the
presence of a conceptus. In situ hybridization revealed region-specific effects
which suggested that various components of the conceptus and more than one signal
from the conceptus are likely responsible for altering decidual cell function.
Using cell culture models we found that trophoblast giant cells secrete a type I 
interferon-like molecule which can induce G1p2 expression in endometrial stromal 
cells. Finally, decidual Prlpa expression was reduced in the uterus adjacent to
Hand1- and Ets2-deficient embryos, suggesting that normal trophoblast giant cells
in the placenta are required for the conceptus-dependent effects on Prlpa
expression in the mesometrial decidua. Overall, these results provide support for
the hypothesis that molecular signals from the mouse conceptus have local effects
on uterine gene expression during decidualization.

PMID: 16616120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Arch Dermatol Res. 2006 Apr;297(10):459-67. Epub 2006 Mar 22.

Expression of genes involved in the regulation of p16 in psoriatic involved skin.

Mark EB(1), Jonsson M, Asp J, Wennberg AM, Mölne L, Lindahl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg
University, 413 45, Göteborg, Sweden. elisabeth.bjorntorp@medic.gu.se

It has been suggested that the up-regulation of the tumour suppressor p16 gene
and induction of senescence protect the phenotype of psoriatic involved skin from
malignant transformation. On the other hand, Id1, which is inversely correlated
with p16 has been shown to be up-regulated in psoriatic involved skin. To test
the hypothesis that there may be an altered regulation of p16 in psoriatic
involved skin, we have measured genes involved in the Igf-1 receptor signalling
through the Ras/MAPK cascade. Igf-1R, IGFBP3, hRas, Ets2, JunB, Egr-1, Id1, MIDA1
and p16 gene expressions were measured using quantitative real-time PCR in total 
RNA isolated from punch biopsies from psoriatic involved (n = 9) and uninvolved
skin (n = 9) and from cutaneous squamous cell cancer (SCC) involved (n = 8) and
uninvolved skin (n = 8). The IGFBP3, hRas, JunB, Egr-1, Id1 and MIDA1 genes were 
up-regulated in psoriatic involved skin compared with uninvolved skin. The p16,
JunB and MIDA1 genes were up-regulated in SCC involved skin compared with
uninvolved skin. Our results indicate that there may be a balance between the
proliferation and induction of senescence in psoriasis. This balance may vary and
the psoriatic involved skin represented in this study appears to be in a
proliferative state rather than senescence. Furthermore, we suggest that the
noted up-regulation of JunB, which has been shown to up-regulate p16, in
combination with the previously reported elevation of p16 expression in psoriatic
involved skin, may indicate activation of a pathway by which JunB may protect the
psoriatic plaque by inducing p16 in an event of malignant stress.

PMID: 16552541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 10;25(35):4831-9. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

AURKA is one of the downstream targets of MAPK1/ERK2 in pancreatic cancer.

Furukawa T(1), Kanai N, Shiwaku HO, Soga N, Uehara A, Horii A.

Author information: 
(1)International Research and Educational Institute for Integrated Medical
Sciences, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
furukawa@imcir.twmu.ac.jp

DUSP6/MKP-3, a specific inhibitor of MAPK1/ERK2, frequently loses its expression 
in primary pancreatic cancer tissues. This evidence suggests that constitutive
activation of MAPK1 synergistically induced by frequent mutation of KRAS2 and the
loss of function of DUSP6 plays key roles in pancreatic carcinogenesis and
progression. By profiling of gene expressions associated with downregulation of
MAPK1 induced by exogenous overexpression of DUSP6 in pancreatic cancer cells, we
found that AURKA/STK15, the gene encoding Aurora-A kinase, which plays key roles 
in cellular mitosis, was among the downregulated genes along with its related
genes, which included AURKB, TPX2 and CENPA. An association of expression and
promoter activity of AURKA with MAPK activity was verified. Knockdown of ETS2
resulted in a reduction of AURKA expression. These results indicate that AURKA is
a direct target of the MAPK pathway and that its overexpression in pancreatic
cancer is induced by hyperactivation of the pathway, at least via ETS2.

PMID: 16532023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Behav Genet. 2006 May;36(3):387-404. Epub 2006 Mar 8.

Mouse models of cognitive disorders in trisomy 21: a review.

Sérégaza Z(1), Roubertoux PL, Jamon M, Soumireu-Mourat B.

Author information: 
(1)Génomique Fonctionnelle, Pathologies, Comportements, P3M, UMR 6196,
CNRS-Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France.

Trisomy 21 (TRS21) is the most frequent genetic cause of mental retardation.
Although the presence of an extra copy of HSA21 is known to be at the origin of
the syndrome, we do not know which 225 HSA21 genes have an effect on cognitive
processes. Mouse models of TRS21 have been developed using syntenies between
HSA21 and MMU16, MMU10 and MMU17. Available mouse models carry extra fragments of
MMU16 or of HSA21 that cover all of HSA21 (chimeric HSA21) or MMU16 (Ts16); some 
carry large parts of MMU16 (Ts65Dn, Ts1Cje, Ms1Cje), while others have reduced
contiguous fragments covering the D21S17-ETS2 region or single transfected genes.
This offers a nest design strategy for deciphering cognitive (learning, memory
and exploration) and associated brain abnormalities involving each of these
chromosomal regions. This review confirms the crucial but not exclusive
contribution of the D21S17-ETS2 region encompassing 16 genes to cognitive
disorders.

PMID: 16523244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2006 Mar;38(3):194-200.

Transcription factors Ets2 and Sp1 act synergistically with histone
acetyltransferase p300 in activating human interleukin-12 p40 promoter.

Sun HJ(1), Xu X, Wang XL, Wei L, Li F, Lu J, Huang BQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun
130024, China.

There has been considerable interest in researching the regulatory mechanisms
that control the synthesis of interleukin (IL)-12, which plays a central role in 
the differentiation of T-helper-1 cells. In this study, we performed a series of 
transient transfection experiments designed to elucidate the functional
relationship between the IL-12 promoter-specific transcription factors (Ets2 and 
Sp1) and histone acetylation modification in IL-12 regulation mediated by p300
and various histone deacetylases (HDACs). Results presented in this report
demonstrated that the transcription factors Ets2 and Sp1 acted synergistically
with p300 to activate the human IL-12 promoter. The histone acetyltransferase
(HAT) activity of p300 was required for this synergic effect, because the
adenovirus E1A protein inhibited the synergy. Conversely, HDACs repressed the
synergic effect of transcription factors and histone acetylation on the
activation of IL-12, while p300 was able to rectify it. These data indicated that
Ets2 and Sp1 worked concertedly and synergistically with p300 in the regulation
of human IL-12 expression.

PMID: 16518544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Behav Genet. 2006 May;36(3):377-86. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

Pre-weaning sensorial and motor development in mice transpolygenic for the
critical region of trisomy 21.

Roubertoux PL(1), Bichler Z, Pinoteau W, Jamon M, Sérégaza Z, Smith DJ, Rubin E, 
Migliore-Samour D.

Author information: 
(1)P3M, UMR CNRS - Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France.

Trisomy 21 occurs every 1/800 births and is the most frequent genetic cause of
mental retardation. Children with trisomy 21 show delayed sensorial and motor
development as well as cognitive disorders. We selected a mouse model of trisomy 
21 (TRS21): transgenic mice carrying extra copies of a HSA21 region corresponding
to the D21S17-ETS2 region (previously referred to as "Down syndrome critical
region 1"). Sensorial and motor development was measured in these partially
transgenic mice, from birth to weaning. The four HSA21 regions contributed
unequally to sensorial and motor development delay. The more centromeric region
(230E8) modified 4 of the development indicators plus the size of the effect,
indicated by partial eta(2)(eta(p)(2), reached a median value of 14.5%. The
neighboring 141G6 region contributed to 5 developmental differences (eta(p)(2)
median value 14%). The most telomeric region (285E6) only modified one
development indicator. An extra copy of an HSA21 fragment (referred to here as
the 152F7 region) induced modifications to 14 of the 18 indicators measured with 
a eta(2) median value reaching 20%. The results indicate a noticeable
contribution of the 152F7 region to sensorial and motor development. The
contribution of this region to cognitive functioning and its neurobiological
basis has been already reported. This set of result suggests the location in the 
D21S17-ETS2 region of several genes playing crucial role in cognitive and
developmental impairment observed in TRS21.

PMID: 16514474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Development. 2006 Mar;133(6):1059-68. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

Ets2 is necessary in trophoblast for normal embryonic anteroposterior axis
development.

Georgiades P(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.

Although the trophoblast is necessary for the growth, viability and patterning of
the mammalian embryo, understanding of its patterning role is still rudimentary. 
Expression of the transcription factor Ets2 is restricted to the trophoblast in
early postimplantation stages and Ets2 mutants have been previously shown to have
defects in trophoblast development. We show here that Ets2 is necessary in the
trophoblast for fundamental aspects of anteroposterior (AP) epiblast axis
initiation, including mesoderm initiation at the primitive streak, establishment 
of posterior character in the epiblast and appropriate spatial restriction of the
anterior visceral endoderm (AVE). Most homozygous Ets2 mutants also show highly
reduced development of the trophoblast with an absence of extraembryonic ectoderm
(EXE) markers. Embryos in which the EXE has been physically removed before
culture in vitro phenocopy the patterning defects of Ets2 mutants. These defects 
cannot be rescued by providing Ets2 mutants with wild-type epiblast in tetraploid
aggregations. Thus, EXE-derived signals are necessary for normal embryonic
patterning. Ets2 is likely to be required in the EXE downstream of epiblast
signals, such as Fgf, and, in turn, helps to regulate signals from the EXE that
signal back to the epiblast to promote proper primitive streak and AVE
development. This study provides new insights about the genetic and cellular
basis of the patterning role and development of the early trophoblast.

PMID: 16481355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2005;15(3):217-28.

Increased dosage of the RUNX1/AML1 gene: a third mode of RUNX leukemia?

Osato M(1), Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Oncology Research Institute, National
University of Singapore. motomi@imcb.a-star.edu.sg

RUNX1/AML1, located on chromosome 21, is a key factor in the generation and
maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells and the gene most frequently implicated
in human leukemias. Chromosome translocations and point mutations are
well-documented genetic alterations in RUNX leukemia (also known as CBF
leukemia). In addition, overdosage or overexpression of RUNX1 is suspected to be 
a third mode of RUNX1 involvement in leukemogenesis. The possibility that this
mode might underlie Down syndrome-related leukemias caused by trisomy of
chromosome 21 is discussed.

PMID: 16390318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Eur J Cancer. 2006 Mar;42(4):485-91. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Ets2 transcription factor in normal and neoplastic human breast tissue.

Buggy Y(1), Maguire TM, McDermott E, Hill AD, O'Higgins N, Duffy MJ.

Author information: 
(1)UCD School of Medicine and Medical Science, Conway Institute of Biomolecular
and Biomedical Research, Dublin 4, Dublin, Ireland.

The Ets family of transcription factors regulate the expression of multiple genes
involved in tumour formation and progression. The aim of this work was to test
the hypothesis that the expression of Ets2 in breast cancers was associated with 
parameters of tumour progression and metastasis. Using reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Ets2 mRNA was detected in 69% of 181 breast
carcinomas, 63% of 43 fibroadenomas and 47% of 43 specimens of normal breast
tissue. Levels were significantly higher in carcinomas compared with normal
breast tissue (P = 0.006). Using Western blotting, Ets2 protein was found to
migrate as two bands with molecular masses of 52 kDa (p52) and 54kDa (p54).
Levels of both proteins were significantly higher in the carcinomas compared with
both fibroadenomas (P = 0.0001) and normal breast tissue (P = 0.0001). In the
carcinomas, a significant relationship was found between the p52 and p54 form of 
Ets2 (r = 0.51, P < 0.0001; Spearman correlation). Also, in the carcinomas, a
significant correlation was found between both forms of Ets2 protein and
urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) (for p52, r = 0.43, P = 0.0005, n = 68; for
p54, r = 0.50, P = 0.0001, n = 68). As Ets2 binding sites are present on the uPA 
promoter, Ets2 may be one of the transcription factors regulating uPA expression 
in human breast cancer.

PMID: 16380248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 15;288(2):448-60. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Molecular evidence for a critical period in mural trophoblast development in
bovine blastocysts.

Degrelle SA(1), Campion E, Cabau C, Piumi F, Reinaud P, Richard C, Renard JP, Hue
I.

Author information: 
(1)UMR INRA/ENVA/CNRS Biologie du Développement et de la Reproduction, 78352
Jouy-en-Josas cedex, France.

Embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages are separated at the blastocyst stage in
the mouse at the onset of implantation but well ahead of implantation in most
mammals. To provide information on the development of the trophoblast lineage in 
late-implanting bovine embryos, we combined the use of molecular markers defining
embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages in the mouse with a transcriptomic
approach dedicated to the early steps of the elongation process, a characteristic
feature of blastocyst development in ruminants. In this study, we present
molecular evidence for differences between the cow and the mouse in the
programming of trophoblast differentiation. This different programming
encompasses: (i) the expression of epiblast specifying genes (Oct-4, Nanog) in
bovine trophoblast cells at the onset of elongation, (ii) the transcription of
proliferation markers in early elongating blastocysts, (iii) the early detection 
of trophoblast-specific transcripts related to extra-embryonic tissue's
differentiation (Hand1, Ets2, IFN-tau) and (iv) the identification of a new
transcript (c12) which displays a reciprocal pattern to that of Oct-4 and Nanog
genes in the embryonic cells and for which no equivalent has thus far been found 
in the mouse. Altogether, these results tended to show that early elongation is a
critical transition in bovine trophoblast development.

PMID: 16289134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Mar;206(3):718-27.

Platelet derived growth factor induced tenascin-C transcription is
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt-dependent and mediated by Ets family transcription 
factors.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Asano Y, Yamane K, Trojanowska M, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

Previous studies have identified several cytokines as inducers of tenascin-C
(TN-C) expression in various tissue culture systems. However, the signaling
pathways of the regulation of TN-C expression are almost unknown. In this study, 
we clarified the molecular mechanism(s) underlying the regulation of the TN-C
gene by platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) in cultured human dermal
fibroblasts. PDGF induced the expression of TN-C protein as well as mRNA in a
dose-dependent manner. Actinomycin D, an RNA synthesis inhibitor, significantly
blocked the PDGF-mediated upregulation of TN-C mRNA expression, whereas
cycloheximide, a protein synthesis inhibitor, did not. The PDGF-mediated
induction of TN-C expression was inhibited by the treatment of fibroblasts with a
selective phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, wortmannin, or LY294002.
These results suggest that PDGF induced the expression of TN-C at a
transcriptional level via phosphoinositide3-kinase/Akt signaling pathways. We
performed serial 5' deletions and a transient transfection analysis to define the
region in the TN-C promoter mediating the responsiveness to PDGF. Overexpression 
of Sp1, Ets1, or Ets2 activated the TN-C promoter and superinduced TN-C promoter 
activity stimulated by PDGF, whereas overexpression of Fli1 inhibited the effects
of PDGF on TN-C expression. Mutation of the Sp1/3 binding sites or Ets binding
sites in the TN-C promoter region responsible to PDGF abrogated the
PDGF-inducible promoter activity. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that Sp1,
Ets1, and Ets2 form a transcriptionally active complex. On the other hand, the
interaction of Fli1 with Sp1 decreased after PDGF treatment. These results
suggest that the upregulation of TN-C expression by PDGF involves Ets family
transcription factors, co-operating with Sp1.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16245312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Cancer Ther. 2005 Sep;4(9):1338-48.

Modulation of cell cycle and gene expression in pancreatic tumor cell lines by
methionine deprivation (methionine stress): implications to the therapy of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Kokkinakis DM(1), Liu X, Neuner RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15213-1863, USA.
kokkinakisdm@upmc.edu

The effect of methionine deprivation (methionine stress) on the proliferation,
survival, resistance to chemotherapy, and regulation of gene and protein
expression in pancreatic tumor lines is examined. Methionine stress prevents
successful mitosis and promotes cell cycle arrest and accumulation of cells with 
multiple micronuclei with decondensed chromatin. Inhibition of mitosis correlates
with CDK1 down-regulation and/or inhibition of its function by Tyr(15)
phosphorylation or Thr(161) dephosphorylation. Inhibition of cell cycle
progression correlates with loss of hyperphosphorylated Rb and up-regulation of
p21 via p53 and/or transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) activation
depending on p53 status. Although methionine stress-induced toxicity is not
solely dependent on p53, the gain in p21 and loss in CDK1 transcription are more 
enhanced in wild-type p53 tumors. Up-regulation of SMAD7, a TGF-beta signaling
inhibitor, suggests that SMAD7 does not restrict the TGF-beta-mediated induction 
of p21, although it may prevent up-regulation of p27. cDNA oligoarray analysis
indicated a pleiotropic response to methionine stress. Cell cycle and mitotic
arrest is in agreement with up-regulation of NF2, ETS2, CLU, GADD45alpha,
GADD45beta, and GADD45gamma and down-regulation of AURKB, TOP2A, CCNA, CCNB,
PRC1, BUB1, NuSAP, IFI16, and BRCA1. Down-regulation of AREG, AGTR1, M-CSF, and
EGF, IGF, and VEGF receptors and up-regulation of GNA11 and IGFBP4 signify loss
of growth factor support. PIN1, FEN1, and cABL up-regulation and LMNB1, AREG,
RhoB, CCNG, TYMS, F3, and MGMT down-regulation suggest that methionine stress
sensitizes the tumor cells to DNA-alkylating drugs, 5-fluorouracil, and
radiation. Increased sensitivity of pancreatic tumor cell lines to temozolomide
is shown under methionine stress conditions and is attributed in part to
diminished O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase and possibly to inhibition of
the cell cycle progression.

PMID: 16170025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7596-602.

The proto-oncogene ERG in megakaryoblastic leukemias.

Rainis L(1), Toki T, Pimanda JE, Rosenthal E, Machol K, Strehl S, Göttgens B, Ito
E, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Safra Children's Hospital and
Hematology Institute, Sheba Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer, Israel.

Aneuploidy is one of the hallmarks of cancer. Acquired additions of chromosome 21
are a common finding in leukemias, suggesting a contributory role to
leukemogenesis. About 10% of patients with a germ line trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
are born with transient megakaryoblastic leukemia. We and others have shown
acquired mutations in the X chromosome gene GATA1 in all these cases. The gene or
genes on chromosome 21 whose overexpression promote the megakaryoblastic
phenotype are presently unknown. We propose that ERG, an Ets transcription factor
situated on chromosome 21, is one such candidate. We show that ERG is expressed
in hematopoietic stem cells, megakaryoblastic cell lines, and in primary leukemic
cells from Down syndrome patients. ERG expression is induced upon megakaryocytic 
differentiation of the erythroleukemia cell lines K562 and UT-7, and forced
expression of ERG in K562 cells induces erythroid to megakaryoblastic phenotypic 
switch. We also show that ERG activates the gpIb megakaryocytic promoter and
binds the gpIIb promoter in vivo. Furthermore, both ERG and ETS2 bind in vivo the
hematopoietic enhancer of SCL/TAL1, a key regulator of hematopoietic stem cell
and megakaryocytic development. We propose that trisomy 21 facilitates the
occurrence of megakaryoblastic leukemias through a shift toward the
megakaryoblastic lineage caused by the excess expression of ERG, and possibly by 
other chromosome 21 genes, such as RUNX1 and ETS2, in hematopoietic progenitor
cells, coupled with a differentiation arrest caused by the acquisition of
mutations in GATA1.

PMID: 16140924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Gynecol Oncol. 2005 Dec;99(3):545-51. Epub 2005 Aug 24.

Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis of uterine leiomyosarcoma.

Cho YL(1), Bae S, Koo MS, Kim KM, Chun HJ, Kim CK, Ro DY, Kim JH, Lee CH, Kim YW,
Ahn WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu,
Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: Using a genome-wide array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(array-CGH), DNA copy number changes in uterine leiomyosarcoma were analyzed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed 4 cases of uterine leiomyoma and 7 cases of
uterine leiomyosarcoma. The paraffin-fixed tissue samples were microdissected
under microscope and DNA was extracted. Array-based CGH and fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) were carried out with Genome database (Gene Ontology).
RESULTS: Uterine leiomyoma showed no genetic alterations, while all of 7 cases of
uterine leiomyosarcoma showed specific gains and losses. The percentage of
average gains and losses were 4.86% and 15.1%, respectively. The regions of high 
level of gain were 7q36.3, 7q33-q35, 12q13-12q15, and 12q23.3. And the regions of
homozygous loss were 1p21.1, 2p22.2, 6p11.2, 9p21.1, 9p21.3, 9p22.1, 14q32.33,
and 14q32.33 qter. There were no recurrent regions of gain, but recurrent regions
of loss were 1p21.1-p21.2, 1p22.3-p31.1, 9p21.2-p22.2, 10q25-q25.2, 11q24.2-q25, 
13q12-q12.13, 14q31.1-q31.3, 14q32.32-q32.33, 15q11-q12, 15q13-q14,
18q12.1-q12.2, 18q22.1-q22.3, 20p12.1, and 21q22.12-q22.13. In the high level of 
gain regions, BAC clones encoded HMGIC, SAS, MDM2, TIM1 genes. Frequently gained 
BAC clone-encoded genes were TIM1, PDGFR-beta, REC Q4, VAV2, FGF4, KLK2, PNUTL1, 
GDNF, FLG, EXT1, WISP1, HER-2, and SOX18. The genes encoded by frequently lost
BAC clones were LEU1, ERCC5, THBS1, DCC, MBD2, SCCA1, FVT1, CYB5, and ETS2/E2. A 
subset of cellular processes from each gene was clustered by Gene Ontology
database.
CONCLUSION: Using array-CGH, chromosomal aberrations related to uterine
leiomyosarcoma were identified. The high resolution of array-CGH combined with
human genome database would give a chance to find out possible target genes
present in the gained or lost clones.

PMID: 16125217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):35904-13. Epub 2005 Aug 24.

Characterizing sterol defect suppressors uncovers a novel transcriptional
signaling pathway regulating zymosterol biosynthesis.

Germann M(1), Gallo C, Donahue T, Shirzadi R, Stukey J, Lang S, Ruckenstuhl C,
Oliaro-Bosso S, McDonough V, Turnowsky F, Balliano G, Nickels JT Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

erg26-1ts cells harbor defects in the 4alpha-carboxysterol-C3 dehydrogenase
activity necessary for conversion of 4,4-dimethylzymosterol to zymosterol. Mutant
cells accumulate toxic 4-carboxysterols and are inviable at high temperature. A
genetic screen aimed at cloning recessive mutations remediating the temperature
sensitive growth defect has resulted in the isolation of four complementation
groups, ets1-4 (erg26-1ts temperature sensitive suppressor). We describe the
characterization of ets1-1 and ets2-1. Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry
analyses demonstrate that erg26-1ts ets1-1 and erg26-1ts ets2-1 cells do not
accumulate 4-carboxysterols, rather these cells have increased levels of squalene
and squalene epoxide, respectively. ets1-1 and ets2-1 cells accumulate these same
sterol intermediates. Chromosomal integration of ERG1 ERG7 at their loci in
erg26-1ts ets1-1 and erg26-1ts and ets2-1 mutants, respectively, results in the
loss of accumulation of squalene and squalene epoxide, re-accumulation of
4-carboxysterols and cell inviability at high temperature. Enzymatic assays
demonstrate that mutants harboring the ets1-1 allele have decreased squalene
epoxidase activity, while those containing the ets2-1 allele show weakened
oxidosqualene cyclase activity. Thus, ETS1 and ETS2 are allelic to ERG1 and ERG7,
respectively. We have mapped mutations within the erg1-1/ets1-1 (G247D) and
erg7-1/ets2-1 (D530N, V615E) alleles that suppress the inviability of erg26-1ts
at high temperature, and cause accumulation of sterol intermediates and decreased
enzymatic activities. Finally using erg1-1 and erg7-1 mutant strains, we
demonstrate that the expression of the ERG25/26/27 genes required for zymosterol 
biosynthesis are coordinately transcriptionally regulated, along with ERG1 and
ERG7, in response to blocks in sterol biosynthesis. Transcriptional regulation
requires the transcription factors, Upc2p and Ecm22p.

PMID: 16120615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Contact Dermatitis. 2005 Aug;53(2):100-6.

Gene transcripts as potential diagnostic markers for allergic contact dermatitis.

Hansen MB(1), Skov L, Menné T, Olsen J.

Author information: 
(1)The National Allergy Research Centre for Consumer Products, Gentofte Hospital,
Gentofte, Denmark. malha@gentofetehosp.kbhamt.dk

The standard procedure for diagnosing allergic contact dermatitis is to perform a
patch test. Because this has several disadvantages, the development of a new in
vitro test system would be of immense value. Gene transcripts that distinguish
allergics from non-allergics may have the potential to serve as the molecular
basis for such a diagnostic tool. In this study, we use the microarray technology
in the identification of differentially expressed genes in allergen-stimulated
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 3 chromium-allergic patients
versus 3 healthy controls. Using an Affymetrix GeneChip, the gene expression was 
analysed in PBMC cultures grown with 100 microg/ml CrCl3 or in media alone for 24
hr. A total of 26 genes were differentially expressed by more than twofold (P <
0.01) in allergen-activated PBMCs from patients compared with controls. 18 of
these were upregulated, whereas 8 were downregulated. The expression of 1
downregulated gene, CASP8, was also found specifically and significantly reduced 
in an expanded population including 4 additional chromium allergic patients and 1
additional control subject by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. The expression of 2 upregulated genes, ETS2 and CISH,
correlated with a high-proliferative response following CrCl3 exposure.
Additionally, real-time RT-PCR analysis indicated that the same gene expression
changes are valid for nickel allergics, potentially making the expression profile
more widely available. The 26 differentially expressed genes identified in this
study may potentially function as diagnostic markers for contact sensitivity.

PMID: 16033404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Oncogene. 2005 Oct 20;24(46):6870-6.

Ets2-dependent microenvironmental support of mouse mammary tumors.

Tynan JA(1), Wen F, Muller WJ, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Molecular Pathology, University of California, San Diego, 
9500 Gilman Drive 0612, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Decreasing the amount of active mouse Ets2 transcription factor by half in mice
or use of a MAP kinase insensitive hypomorphic targeted Ets2 allele restricts the
appearance of transgenic mammary tumors caused by either Polyoma middle T antigen
(PyMT) or activated Neu/ErbB2. In addition, the early growth of transplanted
mammary tumors is limited by restricted Ets2 activity of the host. Here we have
tested genetically, with the use of a conditional Ets2flox allele and tissue
specific Cre recombinase expression, whether Ets2 also functions within tumor
cells by inactivating Ets2 within mammary luminal epithelial cells from which
transgenic PyMTY315/322F tumors arise. We find that inactivation of Ets2 within
tumor cells has no effect on tumor appearance or growth. By contrast, complete
inactivation of Ets2 in both epithelial and stromal cells moderates the early
hyperplastic phase of tumor development and the time of tumor appearance but does
not prevent tumor occurrence and has no detectable effect on tumor growth. Thus, 
Ets2 supports mammary tumors exclusively through their microenvironment.

PMID: 16007139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jul;25(14):5869-79.

Transcriptional repression of the Neurofibromatosis-1 tumor suppressor by the
t(8;21) fusion protein.

Yang G(1), Khalaf W, van de Locht L, Jansen JH, Gao M, Thompson MA, van der
Reijden BA, Gutmann DH, Delwel R, Clapp DW, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, PRB 512,
23rd and Pierce, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Von Recklinghausen's disease is a relatively common familial genetic disorder
characterized by inactivating mutations of the Neurofibromatosis-1 (NF1) gene
that predisposes these patients to malignancies, including an increased risk for 
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. However, NF1 mutations are not common in acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML). Given that the RUNX1 transcription factor is the most
common target for chromosomal translocations in acute leukemia, we asked if NF1
might be regulated by RUNX1. In reporter assays, RUNX1 activated the NF1 promoter
and cooperated with C/EBPalpha and ETS2 to activate the NF1 promoter over
80-fold. Moreover, the t(8;21) fusion protein RUNX1-MTG8 (R/M), which represses
RUNX1-regulated genes, actively repressed the NF1 promoter. R/M associated with
the NF1 promoter in vivo and repressed endogenous NF1 gene expression. In
addition, similar to loss of NF1, R/M expression enhanced the sensitivity of
primary myeloid progenitor cells to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor. Our results indicate that the NF1 tumor suppressor gene is a direct
transcriptional target of RUNX1 and the t(8;21) fusion protein, suggesting that
suppression of NF1 expression contributes to the molecular pathogenesis of AML.

PMCID: PMC1168824
PMID: 15988004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Reprod Dev. 2005 Sep;72(1):7-15.

Different levels of ovine interferon-tau gene expressions are regulated through
the short promoter region including Ets-2 binding site.

Matsuda-Minehata F(1), Katsumura M, Kijima S, Christenson RK, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Implantation Research Group, Graduate School of
Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Regulation of interferon-tau (IFNtau) production, a conceptus secretory protein
implicated in the process of maternal recognition of pregnancy, has not been
fully elucidated. Among more than 10 ovine IFNtau (oIFNtau) gene sequences
characterized, approximately 75% of oIFNtau transcripts expressed in utero is
derived from oIFNtau-o10 gene and amounts of transcripts from other oIFNtau genes
such as oIFNtau-o8 or oIFNtau-o2 are minimal. It was hypothesized that the
variation in expression levels exhibited by oIFNtau-o10 and oIFNtau-o8/-o2 genes 
was due to differences in the proximal promoter regions of these oIFNtau genes.
To test this hypothesis, transient transfection experiments with human
choriocarcinoma JEG3 cells were executed with deleted and/or mutated 5'-upstream 
regions of these oIFNtau genes attached to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase 
(CAT) reporter gene. Because only the Ets-2 binding site located in the
oIFNtau-o10 gene appeared to differentiate the expression levels of these
constructs, the 6 base pair (bp) Ets-2 sequence from the oIFNtau-o10 gene
inserted into the oIFNtau-o8/-o2 gene-reporter construct was examined. The
insertion of this Ets-2 binding site into the oIFNtau-o8/o2-reporter construct
failed to increase the degree of transactivation. Rather than this 6 bp sequence,
a 22 bp sequence of the proximal promoter region, including the Ets-2 binding
site, of the oIFNtau-o10 gene was required for oIFNtau-o8/-o2-reporter
transactivation. By electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), nuclear
protein(s) bound to this 22 bp from the oIFNtau-o10 and oIFNtau-o8/o2 genes
differed. These results suggest that the short promoter region including the
Ets-2 binding site, not the Ets-2 binding region itself, may determine different 
levels of oIFNtau gene expressions seen in utero.

PMID: 15971268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2005 Jun 15;73(4):445-55.

Expression pattern of the chromosome 21 transcription factor Ets2 in cell-seeded 
three-dimensional bone constructs.

Turhani D(1), Watzinger E, Weissenböck M, Yerit K, Cvikl B, Ewers R, Thurnher D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cranio-Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. dritan.turhani@meduniwien.ac.at

The ability to generate new bone for reconstructive surgery use is a major
clinical need. Tissue engineering with osteoprogenitor cells isolated from the
patient's periosteum and seeded into bioresorbable scaffolds offers a promising
approach to the generation of skeletal tissue. To our knowledge, there is no
description about the expression of Ets2 in tissue engineered "bone neotissue."
The aim of our study was to manufacture cell-seeded three-dimensional bone
constructs with human periosteal cells on poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) polymer 
fleeces to describe the expression pattern of Ets2 and its target genes
osteocalcin and osteopontin; expression analysis of type I collagen, core-binding
factor-1, alkaline phosphatase, and osteonectin; the ability of matrix
mineralization and ALP enzymatic activity showed the osteogenic character of the 
constructs. A significant correlation between the expression of Ets2 and
osteopontin mRNA (r = -0.70; p < 0.05) could be shown. A 1.35-fold increase of
Ets2 expression from days 1 to 9 was detected, followed by a slight decrease from
days 11 to 15. Until the end of the culture period, the expression of Ets2
reached a comparable high level as detected on day 9. In contrast, the expression
level of osteopontin mRNA reached a maximum at day 7, followed by a progressive
3.04-fold decrease until day 21. This study shows for the first time that Ets2
gene and its transcriptional target genes are expressed in tissue-engineered bone
constructs. These findings have the potential to provide much-needed information 
about the role and function of Ets2 in human osteogenesis processes and creation 
of "bone neotissue."

(c) 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 15900611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Hered. 2005 Jul-Aug;96(4):356-62. Epub 2005 Apr 27.

Genome size evolution in New Zealand triplefin fishes.

Hickey AJ(1), Clements KD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019,
Auckland, New Zealand. a.hickey@auckland.ac.nz

The genome sizes of 18 species of New Zealand triplefin fishes (family
Tripterygiidae) were determined by flow cytometry of erythrocytes. The
evolutionary relationships of these species were examined with a molecular
phylogeny derived from DNA sequence data based on 1771 base pairs from fragments 
of three mitochondrial loci (12S and 16S ribosomal RNA, and the control region)
and one nuclear locus (ETS2). Haploid genome sizes ranged from .85 pg (1C) to
1.28 pg with a mean of 1.15 +/- .01pg. Genome size appeared to be highly plastic,
with up to 20% variation occurring within genera and a 50% difference in size
between the smallest and the largest genome. No evidence was found to indicate
polyploidy as a mechanism for speciation in New Zealand triplefins. Factors
suggested to influence genome sizes of other organisms, such as morphological
complexity, neoteny, and longevity, do not appear to be associated with shifts in
the genome sizes of New Zealand triplefins.

PMID: 15858158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2005;15(1):15-28.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein in prostate cancer.

Asadi F(1), Kukreja S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Chicago Health Care System, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago IL 60612, USA.

Although originally discovered as the peptide responsible for humoral
hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM), parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP)
has been shown to play a major role in fetal development. In the adult, it is
widely distributed in normal and various cancer tissues. In spite of the rarity
of HHM in prostate cancer, PTHrP is widely distributed in prostate cancer cells. 
PTHrP is a precursor molecule with generation of various fragments with distinct 
biological activities. More recent studies have shown that there is intranuclear 
localization of PTHrP and that intracrine effects of the peptide are involved in 
promoting processes that result in tumor progression (nall proliferation,
apoptosis, cell attachment and angiogenesis) in prostate cancer. PTHrP expression
is controlled by three distinct promoters, with P3 being used most often in
cancer cells. The factors that control PTHrP production via interaction with the 
promoters are growth factors, androgens, vitamin D analogs, and adenoviral
proteins. TGF-beta and its effector Smad3 activate the P3 promoter through an
AGAC box and an Ets binding site involving Ets1 and to some extent Ets2 proteins.
In addition, TGF-beta stimulates P3 promoter activity via Smad-independent
pathways that involve the p38 MAP kinase. Although the addition of PTHrP or
transfection with the PTHrP gene in prostate cells results in effects that
promote tumor development, studies that employ inhibition of PTHrP activity in
vitro and in vivo are needed to establish a definitive role of this peptide in
the pathogenesis of prostate cancer.

PMID: 15831076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 23;24(27):4370-9.

ERK phosphorylation is linked to VEGFR2 expression and Ets-2 phosphorylation in
breast cancer and is associated with tamoxifen treatment resistance and small
tumours with good prognosis.

Svensson S(1), Jirström K, Rydén L, Roos G, Emdin S, Ostrowski MC, Landberg G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University,
Malmö University Hospital, SE-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 signalling mediates communication 
between growth factor receptors and the cell nucleus and has been linked to
several key events in the transformation process such as proliferation and
invasion. We therefore sought to delineate the degree of phosphorylated ERK1/2 in
breast cancer and potential links to upstream receptors such as VEGFR2, ErbB2,
downstream targets, such as Ets-2, as well as clinico-pathological parameters,
clinical outcome and response to tamoxifen. ERK1/2 phosphorylation was assessed
by immunohistochemistry using a phospho-specific ERK1/2 antibody in three breast 
cancer cohorts including a total of 886 tumours arranged in tissue arrays. Cohort
I consisted of 114 patients, cohort II of 248 postmenopausal patients randomized 
to either 2 years of tamoxifen or no adjuvant treatment and cohort III of 524
patients. Surprisingly, ERK1/2 phosphorylation correlated inversely with tumour
size. Phosphorylated ERK1/2 was further associated with the presence of VEGFR2
(cohorts II and III) and the degree of phosphorylated Ets-2, indicating in vivo, 
a signalling cascade from VEGFR2 via ERK1/2 to Ets-2 phosphorylation.
Interestingly, ERK1/2 phosphorylation correlated with better survival in
untreated patients independently of lymph-node status and tumour size indicating 
that ERK1/2 signalling might be associated with a less aggressive phenotype.
Finally, patients with oestrogen receptor positive and ERK1/2 phosphorylated
tumours also had an impaired tamoxifen response.

PMID: 15806151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 15;11(6):2111-22.

Associations and interactions between Ets-1 and Ets-2 and coregulatory proteins, 
SRC-1, AIB1, and NCoR in breast cancer.

Myers E(1), Hill AD, Kelly G, McDermott EW, O'Higgins NJ, Buggy Y, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Saint Vincent's University Hospital University College 
Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Erratum in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 1;21(9):2190-1.

PURPOSE: Associations between p160 coactivator proteins and the development of
resistance to endocrine treatment have been described. We hypothesized that
nuclear receptor coregulatory proteins may interact with nonsteroid receptors. We
investigated the mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated transcription
factors, Ets, as possible interaction proteins for the coactivators SRC-1 and
AIB1 and the corepressor NCoR in human breast cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression and coexpression of Ets and the coregulatory
proteins was investigated using immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence in a 
cohort of breast tumor patients (N = 134). Protein expression, protein-DNA
interactions and protein-protein interactions were assessed using Western blot,
electromobility shift, and coimmunoprecipitation analysis, respectively.
RESULTS: Ets-1 and Ets-2 associated with reduced disease-free survival (P <
0.0292, P < 0.0001, respectively), whereas NCoR was a positive prognostic
indicator (P < 0.0297). Up-regulation of Ets-1 protein expression in cell
cultures derived from patient tumors in the presence of growth factors associated
with tumor grade (P < 0.0013; n = 28). In primary breast tumor cell cultures and 
in the SKBR3 breast cell line, growth factors induced interaction between Ets and
their DNA response element, induced recruitment of coactivators to the
transcription factor-DNA complex, and up-regulated protein expression of HER2.
Ets-1 and Ets-2 interacted with the coregulators under basal conditions, and
growth factors up-regulated Ets-2 interaction with SRC-1 and AIB1. Coexpression
of Ets-2 and SRC-1 significantly associated with the rate of recurrence and HER
expression, compared with patients who expressed Ets-2 but not SRC-1 (P < 0.0001 
and P < 0.0001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These data describe associations and interactions between nonsteroid
transcription factors and coregulatory proteins in human breast cancer.

PMID: 15788656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Oncogene. 2005 Mar 10;24(11):1809-19.

Epidermal growth factor-induced hepatocellular carcinoma: gene expression
profiles in precursor lesions, early stage and solitary tumours.

Borlak J(1), Meier T, Halter R, Spanel R, Spanel-Borowski K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Medicine, Fraunhofer Institute of
Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Nikolai-Fuchsstr. 1, 30625 Hannover,
Germany. Borlak@item.fraunhofer.de

Epidermal growth factor is an important mitogen for hepatocytes. Its
overexpression promotes hepatocellular carcinogenesis. To identify the network of
genes regulated through EGF, we investigated the liver transcriptome during
various stages of hepatocarcinogenesis in EGF2B transgenic mice. Targeted
overexpression of IgEGF induced distinct hepatocellular lesions and eventually
solid tumours at the age of 6-8 months, as evidenced by histopathology. We used
the murine MG U74Av2 oligonucleotide microarrays to identify transcript
signatures in 12 tumours of small (n=5, pooled), medium (n=4) and large sizes
(n=3), and compared the findings with three nontumorous transgenic livers and
four control livers. Global gene expression analysis at successive stages of
carcinogenesis revealed hallmarks linked to tumour size. A comparison of gene
expression profiles of nontumorous transgenic liver versus control liver provided
insight into the initial events predisposing liver cells to malignant
transformation, and we found overexpression of c-fos, eps-15, TGIF, IGFBP1,
Alcam, ets-2 and repression of Gas-1 as distinct events. Further, when gene
expression profiles of small manifested tumours were compared with nontumorous
transgenic liver, additional changes were obvious and included overexpression of 
junB, Id-1, minopontin, villin, claudin-7, RR M2, p34cdc2, cyclinD1 and cyclinB1 
among others. These genes are therefore strongly associated with tumour
formation. Our study provided new information on the tumour stage-dependent
network of EGF-regulated genes, and we identified candidate genes linked to
tumorigenes and progression of disease.

PMID: 15674348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Aging Cell. 2005 Feb;4(1):21-30.

Telomere-independent cellular senescence in human fetal cardiomyocytes.

Ball AJ(1), Levine F.

Author information: 
(1)UCSD Cancer Center, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0816, USA.
ajball@ucsd.edu

Fetal cardiomyocytes have been proposed as a potential source of cell-based
therapy for heart failure. This study examined cellular senescence in cultured
human fetal ventricular cardiomyocytes (HFCs). HFCs were isolated and identified 
by immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR. Cells were found to senesce after 20-25
population doublings, as determined by growth arrest, morphological changes and
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity. Using the telomeric repeat
amplification protocol assay, telomerase activity was undetectable in primary
HFCs. Cells were transduced to express the human reverse transcriptase subunit
(hTERT) of telomerase. This resulted in greatly increased telomerase activity,
but no significant lifespan extension. Analysis of telomere length in primary
HFCs revealed that the senescent phenotype was not accompanied by telomere
shortening. Telomeres in hTERT-positive cells were elongated in comparison with
primary cells, and elongation was retained in senescent cells. Levels of the
tumor suppressor protein p16INK4A increased in all senescent cells whether
telomerase-positive or -negative. Senescence was accompanied by a decline in
transcript levels of the polycomb gene Bmi-1, Ets1 and Ets2 transcription
factors, and Id1, Id2 and Id3 helix-loop-helix proteins, suggesting roles for
these genes in maintenance of cardiomyocyte proliferative capacity. In addition
to offering novel insights into the behavior of human fetal cardiomyocytes in
culture, these findings have implications for the development of a cell-based
therapy for cardiac injury using primary fetal heart tissue.

PMID: 15659210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Apr;19(4):1049-66. Epub 2005 Jan 6.

Coordinate regulation of basal and cyclic 5'-adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP)-activated expression of human chorionic gonadotropin-alpha by Ets-2 and
cAMP-responsive element binding protein.

Ghosh D(1), Sachdev S, Hannink M, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri
65211-7310, USA.

Ets-2 controls the activities of many genes characteristically up-regulated in
trophoblast. One apparent exception has been the gene for the human chorionic
gonadotropin subunit alpha (hCGalpha). Here, we show that the hCGalpha gene
contains two overlapping Ets binding sites adjacent to an activator
protein-1-like site in its proximal promoter. Transactivation by Ets-2 is
susceptible to truncation and mutation of these sites, which bind Ets-2 during in
vitro mobility shift assays, as well as in vivo as determined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation in choriocarcinoma cells. Knockdown of Ets-2 with short
interfering RNA decreases both promoter activity and synthesis of hCGalpha. Ets-2
acts in combination with the protein kinase A (PKA) signal transduction pathway
to activate the hCGalpha promoter expression. Mutation of the Ets-2 binding sites
dramatically reduces up-regulation by PKA, whereas mutations within the two
cAMP-responsive elements abolish responsiveness of the promoter to Ets-2.
cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) and Ets-2 form a complex that can 
be coimmunoprecipitated from choriocarcinoma cells, and association of CREB and
Ets-2 is increased by activation of PKA. Regulation of hCGalpha subunit gene
activity by cAMP involves the binding of CREB and Ets-2 to discrete elements in
the promoter as well as a physical interaction between the two proteins. We
propose that regulation of hCGalpha by Ets-2 and CREB enables coordinated
expression of hCGalpha with its partner hCGbeta subunit.

PMID: 15637148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4578-84. Epub 2004 Dec 7.

Role of Ets-2 in the regulation of heme oxygenase-1 by endotoxin.

Chung SW(1), Chen YH, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02115, USA.

Ets proteins play a vital role in the regulation of mammalian immunity, and
family members Ets-1 and Ets-2 regulate a variety of genes that participate in
the propagation of an inflammatory response. Heme oxygenase (HO)-1, although
acutely induced by inflammatory stimuli, has cytoprotective properties and
prevents an exaggerated inflammatory response. Ets-1 and Ets-2 both induce HO-1
promoter activity; however, Ets-2 was a more potent transactivator of HO-1 in
macrophages. A potent inflammatory mediator, bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
induced Ets-2 at the mRNA and protein level, and this induction preceded the
up-regulation of HO-1. To further delineate the role of Ets-2 in regulating HO-1 
transcription, we performed HO-1 promoter analysis studies in macrophages.
Deletion mutants down to -137/+74 maintained an activity analogous to that of the
largest construct, -4045/+74. Further deletion constructs (starting with
-117/+74) showed a significant reduction in promoter activity when co-transfected
with Ets-2 or exposed to LPS. Promoter sequence analysis revealed two putative
Ets binding sites (EBSs) in this region, and mutation of these sites showed that 
EBS -93, more than EBS -125, was critical for full HO-1 promoter activity.
Additional studies showed that EBS -93 binds Ets-2 and that mutation of the DNA
binding domain of Ets-2 entirely prevented transactivation of HO-1. Finally,
overexpression of a dominant negative form of Ets-2 blunted HO-1 promoter
induction by LPS, and kinase inhibitors (PI3K more than JNK) that reduced Ets-2
expression markedly decreased endogenous HO-1 expression. Our data provide
evidence that Ets-2 contributes to the up-regulation of HO-1 by the potent
inflammatory stimulus LPS in macrophages.

PMID: 15590657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(24):10954-64.

Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling activates Ets-1 and Ets-2 by
CBP/p300 recruitment.

Foulds CE(1), Nelson ML, Blaszczak AG, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, 2000 Circle of Hope, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84112-5550, USA.

Cell signaling affects gene expression by regulating the activity of
transcription factors. Here, we report that mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) phosphorylation of Ets-1 and Ets-2, at a conserved site N terminal to
their Pointed (PNT) domains, resulted in enhanced transactivation by preferential
recruitment of the coactivators CREB binding protein (CBP) and p300. We
discovered this phosphorylation-augmented interaction in an unbiased affinity
chromatography screen of HeLa nuclear extracts by using either mock-treated or
ERK2-phosphorylated ETS proteins as ligands. Binding between purified proteins
demonstrated a direct interaction. Both the phosphoacceptor site, which lies in
an unstructured region, and the PNT domain were required for the interaction.
Minimal regions that were competent for induced CBP/p300 binding in vitro also
supported MAPK-enhanced transcription in vivo. CBP coexpression potentiated
MEK1-stimulated Ets-2 transactivation of promoters with Ras-responsive elements. 
Furthermore, CBP and Ets-2 interacted in a phosphorylation-enhanced manner in
vivo. This study describes a distinctive interface for a transcription
factor-coactivator complex and demonstrates a functional role for inducible
CBP/p300 binding. In addition, our findings decipher the mechanistic link between
Ras/MAPK signaling and two specific transcription factors that are relevant to
both normal development and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC533975
PMID: 15572696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Dec 15;131(3):265-72.

Mild phenotype in two unrelated patients with a partial deletion of 21q22.2-q22.3
defined by FISH and molecular studies.

Ehling D(1), Kennerknecht I, Junge A, Prager B, Exeler R, Behre B, Horst J,
Schmitt-John T, Bartsch O, Wirth J.

Author information: 
(1)Praenadia GmbH, Muenster, Germany.

We describe two unrelated patients with cytogenetically visible deletions of
21q22.2-q22.3 and mild phenotypes. Both patients presented minor dysmorphic
features including thin marfanoid build, facial asymmetry, downward-slanting
palpebral fissures, depressed nasal bridge, small nose with bulbous tip, and mild
mental retardation (MR). FISH and molecular studies indicated common deleted
areas but different breakpoints. In patient 1, the breakpoint was fine mapped to 
a 5.2 kb interval between exon 5 and exon 8 of the ETS2 gene. The subtelomeric
FISH probe was absent on one homologue 21 indicating a terminal deletion spanning
approximately 7.9 Mb in size. In patient 2, the proximal breakpoint was
determined to be 300-700 kb distal to ETS2, and the distal breakpoint 2.5-0.3 Mb 
from the 21q telomere, indicating an interstitial deletion sized approximately
4.7-7.3 Mb. The 21q- syndrome is rare and typically associated with a severe
phenotype, but different outcomes depending on the size and location of the
deleted area have been reported. Our data show that monosomy 21q of the area
distal to the ETS2 gene, representing the terminal 7.9 Mb of 21q, may result in
mild phenotypes comprising facial anomalies, thin marfanoid build, and mild MR,
with or without signs of holoprosencephaly.

PMID: 15534873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. In Vivo. 2004 Sep-Oct;18(5):517-24.

Ets2 transcription factor inhibits mineralization and affects target gene
expression during osteoblast maturation.

Li V(1), Raouf A, Kitching R, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology and CIHR Group in Matrix
Dynamics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Our goal is to understand how Ets family transcription factors affect the genetic
programs that control bone development. Modest overexpression of Ets2 in
transgenic mice leads to Down's syndrome-like bone abnormalities. We observed
that in the MC3T3-E1 in vitro model of osteoblast development, mature osteoblasts
have very high levels of Ets2 relative to the immature preosteoblasts. We
hypothesized that overexpression of Ets2 could have noticeable effects on gene
expression, and found that exogenous Ets2 expression results in a complete lack
of mineralized matrix in stable Ets2 transfected cells. Our cDNA microarray-based
expression profiling of preosteoblasts vs. differentiated osteoblasts revealed
several genes previously unrecognized as having roles in osteoblast maturation
and up-regulated only in the mature osteoblasts. The promoters of these genes and
known osteoblast marker genes were examined for Ets transcription factor binding 
sites (EBSs). Interactions of these sites with Ets2 protein were tested by EMSA. 
In vitro expressed Ets2 protein was able to form a protein:DNA complex with both 
known (Bsp, Opn, ON) and novel (Btg2, CysC, Lum) bone-related genes. In addition,
Cbfa1 was found to interact with Ets2, forming a complex on the Opn promoter.

PMID: 15523888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Nov;34(11):3176-86.

Expression of the SH2D1A gene is regulated by a combination of transcriptional
and post-transcriptional mechanisms.

Okamoto S(1), Ji H, Howie D, Clarke K, Gullo C, Manning S, Coyle AJ, Terhorst C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The SH2D1A gene, which is altered or deleted in patients with X-linked
lymphoproliferative disease, encodes the small protein SAP (for SLAM-associated
protein) that is expressed in T and NK cells. A 22-bp fragment in close proximity
to an initiator-like site was defined as the basal promoter of mouse SH2D1A, and 
a highly homologous 33-bp segment was defined as the human basal promoter. When
an Ets consensus site was mutated, no reporter activity was detectable. Gel
mobility supershift assays revealed that the two transcription factors Ets-1 and 
Ets-2 bind to the human and mouse sequences. The involvement of Ets-1 and Ets-2
in expression of SH2D1A was functionally confirmed by overexpression studies of
their dominant-negative forms. We also found that SH2D1A mRNA decays very rapidly
in mouse T cells, and its 3' untranslated region (UTR) has RNA-destabilizing
activity in transfection studies with reporter/3' UTR constructs. As judged by
RNA-gel mobility shift assays, this rapid degradation of SH2D1A mRNA was due to a
balance in binding of the factors AUF1 and HuR to its 3' UTR. Although the SH2D1A
mRNA level decreased upon triggering of the T cell receptor (TCR), the RNA
degradation rate itself was not altered by TCR engagement.

PMID: 15459902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2004;21(3):191-9.

The clinical role of the PEA3 transcription factor in ovarian and breast
carcinoma in effusions.

Davidson B(1), Goldberg I, Tell L, Vigdorchik S, Baekelandt M, Berner A,
Kristensen GB, Reich R, Kopolovic J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Montebello, University
of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. davidsob@mail.nih.gov

Ets transcription factors play a central role in invasion and metastasis through 
regulation of synthesis of proteolytic enzymes and angiogenic molecules. The
objective of this study was to investigate the role of PEA3 in tumor progression 
of ovarian and breast carcinoma metastatic to effusions, and to evaluate the
expression of Ets-2 and Erg in ovarian carcinoma. Ovarian (83 malignant
effusions, 102 corresponding solid lesions) and breast (33 malignant effusions,
40 corresponding solid lesions) carcinomas were evaluated for expression of PEA3 
using mRNA in situ Hybridization (ISH). Expression of Ets-2 and Erg mRNA was
analyzed in 50 ovarian carcinoma effusions using the same method. PEA3 mRNA
expression was comparable at all sites in ovarian carcinoma (44 out of 83; 53% of
effusions, 48 out of 102; 47% of solid tumors). PEA3 mRNA expression in effusions
correlated with mRNA expression of the previously studied alphav (P = 0.022),
alpha6 (P < 0.001) and beta1 (P < 0.001) integrin subunits, the matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) inducer EMMPRIN (P = 0.015) and interleukin-8 (IL-8) (P =
0.033). Erg and Ets-2 mRNA was expressed in 15 out of 50 (30%) and 18 out of 50
(36%) effusions, respectively, and co-localized with PEA3 (P = 0.017 for Erg, P =
0.004 for Ets-2). In breast carcinoma, PEA3 expression was seen in 19/40 (48%) of
solid lesions, with a significant upregulation in corresponding effusions
compared to primary tumors (24 out of 33; 73%, P = 0.038). PEA3 mRNA expression
in effusions obtained prior to the institution of chemotherapy predicted
significantly shorter overall survival in univariate analysis (24 vs 37 months, P
= 0.03), with a similar trend for Erg (13 vs 30 months, P = 0.1). In conclusion, 
PEA3 is expressed at all anatomic sites in serous ovarian cancer and co-localizes
with Erg, Ets-2 and several metastasis-associated molecules. PEA3 mRNA expression
is a novel marker for tumor progression to malignant effusion in breast
carcinoma, and predicts poor outcome in effusions sampled prior to therapeutic
intervention in ovarian carcinoma. These findings support a biological role for
Ets transcription factors in these malignancies and suggests that they may be
targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 15387369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Aug 16;32(14):4358-67. Print 2004.

Triplex DNA-mediated downregulation of Ets2 expression results in growth
inhibition and apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells.

Carbone GM(1), Napoli S, Valentini A, Cavalli F, Watson DK, Catapano CV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, Via Vela 6, 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland.
carlo.catapano@irb.unisi.ch

Ets2 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors that in humans
comprise 25 distinct members. Various Ets-domain transcription factors have been 
implicated in cancer development. Ets2 is expressed in prostate and breast cancer
cells and is thought to have a role in promoting growth and survival in these
cell types. However, a definitive role and the mechanisms whereby Ets2 acts in
cancer cells are still unclear. Structural and functional similarities as well as
overlapping DNA binding specificities complicate the identification of the
specific roles of the various Ets factors. In this study, we used a
triplex-forming oligonucleotide (TFO) to selectively inhibit Ets2 transcription
in prostate cancer cells. We had previously shown that the Ets2-targeting TFO,
which was directed to a unique purine-rich sequence critical for Ets2 promoter
activity, acted with a high degree of sequence-specificity and target
selectivity. TFO-mediated downregulation of Ets2 in prostate cancer cells induced
important phenotypic changes, including inhibition of anchorage-dependent and
anchorage -independent growth, cell cycle alterations and induction of apoptotic 
cell death. Expression of Ets2 under the control of a heterologous promoter
abolished the anti-proliferative effects of the TFO in both short- and long-term 
assays, suggesting that these effects were a direct result of downregulation of
Ets2 transcription and confirming target selectivity of the TFO. Furthermore,
normal human fibroblasts, which expressed low levels of Ets2, were not affected
by the Ets2-targeting TFO. Downregulation of Ets2 in prostate cancer cells was
associated with reduced levels of the anti-apoptotic protein bcl-x(L) and growth 
regulatory factors cyclin D1 and c-myc. These data revealed a specific role of
this transcription factor in promoting growth and survival of prostate cancer
cells. Furthermore, the activity and selectivity of the Ets2-targeting TFO
suggest that it might represent a valid approach to prostate cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC514370
PMID: 15314206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 15;173(4):2552-61.

Transcriptional regulation of the human TLR9 gene.

Takeshita F(1), Suzuki K, Sasaki S, Ishii N, Klinman DM, Ishii KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Retroviral Immunology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
takesita@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

To clarify the molecular basis of human TLR9 (hTLR9) gene expression, the
activity of the hTLR9 gene promoter was characterized using the human myeloma
cell line RPMI 8226. Reporter gene analysis and EMSA demonstrated that hTLR9 gene
transcription was regulated via four cis-acting elements, cAMP response element, 
5'-PU box, 3'-PU box, and a C/EBP site, that interacted with the CREB1, Ets2,
Elf1, Elk1, and C/EBPalpha transcription factors. Other members of the C/EBP
family, such as C/EBPbeta, C/EBPdelta, and C/EBPepsilon, were also important for 
TLR9 gene transcription. CpG DNA-mediated suppression of TLR9 gene transcription 
led to decreased binding of the trans-acting factors to their corresponding
cis-acting elements. It appeared that suppression was mediated via c-Jun and
NF-kappaB p65 and that cooperation among CREB1, Ets2, Elf1, Elk1, and C/EBPalpha 
culminated in maximal transcription of the TLR9 gene. These findings will help to
elucidate the mechanism of TLR9 gene regulation and to provide insight into the
process by which TLR9 evolved in the mammalian immune system.

PMID: 15294971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Immunol. 2004 Jul 15;173(2):1374-9.

Activated Ets2 is required for persistent inflammatory responses in the motheaten
viable model.

Wei G(1), Guo J, Doseff AI, Kusewitt DF, Man AK, Oshima RG, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA.

The Ets2 transcription factor is constitutively phosphorylated on residue Thr(72)
in macrophages derived from mice homozygous for the motheaten viable (me-v)
allele of the hemopoietic cell phosphatase (Hcph) gene. To genetically test the
importance of signaling through residue Thr(72) of Ets2 during inflammation, the 
Ets2(A72) mutant allele, which cannot be phosphorylated on Thr(72), was combined 
with the Hcph(me-v) allele in mice. Ets2(A72/A72) moderated the
inflammation-related pathology of Hcph(me-v/me-v) mice, as demonstrated by the
increased life span and the decreased macrophage infiltration in skin and lungs
of these mice. Macrophage apoptosis induced by cytokine withdrawal was also
increased in the double-mutant mice. Importantly, the Ets2(A72/A72) allele
resulted in decreased expression of inflammatory response genes, including
TNF-alpha, CCL3, matrix metalloprotease 9, integrin alpha(M), and Bcl-X in
alveolar macrophage. Ets2 phosphorylation was required for persistent activation 
of TNF-alpha following LPS stimulation of bone marrow-derived macrophages. The
phosphorylation of Ets2 functions in the severe inflammatory phenotype of the
me-v model by mediating both macrophage survival and inflammatory gene
expression.

PMID: 15240733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Endocrinology. 2004 Oct;145(10):4452-60. Epub 2004 Jun 24.

Regulation of interferon-tau (IFN-tau) gene promoters by growth factors that
target the Ets-2 composite enhancer: a possible model for maternal control of
IFN-tau production by the conceptus during early pregnancy.

Ezashi T(1), Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, 920 East
Campus Drive, Columbia, Missouri 65211-5300, USA.

Expression of interferon-tau gene (IFNT) by conceptuses of cattle and sheep must 
be in phase with the physiological state of the mother if the pregnancy is to be 
successful. IFNT has a close-to-consensus AP1 site (-71 to -64), overlapping a
binding site for Ets-2 (-79 to -70), the key transcription factor controlling
IFNT expression. When a bovine IFNT gene control region-luciferase (luc)
construct was transfected into mouse 3T3 fibroblasts in the presence of Ets-2 and
oncogenic Ras, luc expression was activated (50- to 100-fold). Mutations in
either the activator protein 1 (AP1) site or the Ets-2 site of this construct
abolished this effect. Similarly, a mutation of Thr72 of the Ets-2 or the
addition of a specific inhibitor for the MAPK signal transduction pathway also
markedly reduced expression. IFNT promoter activity was up-regulated in response 
to colony-stimulating factor-1 in 3T3 cells expressing the colony-stimulating
factor-1 receptor c-fms. This response did not occur when the AP1 site or the
Ets-2 binding sites were mutated. Nor was the response observed in 3T3 cells
expressing an inactive form of c-fms. The experiments indicate that IFNT can be
activated by growth factors operating through the Ras/MAPK pathway. The Ets-2 and
AP1 binding sites are essential for such effects. The AP1 site, however, is
noncanonical and unable to bind either cJun or cFos. These data emphasize the
importance of a complex Ets-2 enhancer for expression of IFNT and suggest a means
whereby the mother can exert control over conceptus IFN-tau production.

PMID: 15217985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2004 Jul;32(1):221-35.

Patterns of lineage diversification in the genus Naso (Acanthuridae).

Klanten SO(1), Herwerden Lv Lv, Choat JH, Blair D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Ecology and Evolution Laboratory, School of Marine Biology and
Aquaculture, James Cook University, Townsville, Qld 4811, Australia.
Selma.Klanten@jcu.edu.au

The evolutionary history of the reef fish genus Naso (F. Acanthuridae) was
examined using a complete species-level molecular phylogeny of all recognized
(19) species based on three loci (one nuclear ETS2 and two mitochondrial 16S, cyt
b). This study demonstrates that distinct foraging modes and specialized body
shapes arose independently at different times in the evolutionary history of the 
genus. Members of the subgenus Axinurus, characterized by a scombriform
morphology, caudal fin structure and pelagic foraging mode, were consistently
placed basal to the remaining Naso species, suggesting that pelagic foraging is
plesiomorphic and benthic foraging derived in this genus. We used a genus-level
phylogeny (nuclear marker, ETS2), which included several taxa from all other
acanthurid genera, to obtain a range of age estimates for the most recent common 
ancestor of the genus Naso. These age estimates (range of 52-43.3 MY) were then
used to estimate divergence times (by nonparametric rate smoothing method) of the
node giving rise to extant Naso species using the combined sequence data (from
all loci). The reconstruction of the pattern of divergence of extant species
indicates two sequences of events. The basal species characterized by pelagic
foraging modes arose during the Eocene and Oligocene. Most of the remaining Naso 
species, including those characterized by benthic foraging, arose over a period
of 20 MY during the Miocene. Diversification during this period was associated
with major plate tectonic and glaciation events, resulting in changes in sea
level, ocean temperature and productivity regimes. Regardless of the foraging
mode exhibited, all species of Naso have a caudal propulsive unit similar to that
observed in pelagic scombriform fishes, a legacy of the basal position of the
subgenus Axinurus in the phylogeny of the genus.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15186809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Oncogene. 2004 May 20;23(23):4177-81.

Differential modulation of Myb family genes by Ets-2.

Kang AD(1), Park G, Kim YH, Oh IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Medicine and Biology, Cell and Gene Therapy Institute, 
Catholic University of Korea, 505, Banpo-dong, Seo-cho Ku, Seoul 137-701, South
Korea.

The myb family of genes encodes highly homologous nuclear transcription factors
that play distinct roles in the development of breast, germ cells and hematoid
organs. While the mechanisms associated with the regulation of these genes remain
unknown, the transactivation of c-Myb was previously shown to be upregulated by
transcriptional cooperation with Ets-2. The present study examines the
transactivation potential of the myb gene family in cooperation with Ets-2. A-Myb
and c-Myb showed similar transcriptional cooperation with Ets-2, but not with
Ets-1. Interestingly, B-Myb showed no cooperative activity with Ets-2 or Ets-1.
Additionally, deletion mutants of A-Myb or c-Myb, where the C-terminal negative
regulatory domain was deleted, did not abrogate their ability to cooperate with
Ets-2. However, the deletion mutant of B-Myb, where the C-terminal positive
regulatory domain was deleted, restored its ability to cooperate with Ets-2.
Furthermore, studies using a series of 'domain-swapped' mutants between c-Myb and
B-Myb revealed that the C-terminus of B-Myb, which is responsible for the
protein's transactivation potential, blocks transcriptional cooperation with
Ets-2. These results suggest that the myb gene family can be differentially
modulated by Ets-2, and that the C-terminus is the domain that regulates this
activity.

PMID: 15064740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 30;317(2):491-9.

Human chromosome 21q22.2-qter carries a gene(s) responsible for downregulation of
mlc2a and PEBP in Down syndrome model mice.

Kazuki Y(1), Kimura M, Nishigaki R, Kai Y, Abe S, Okita C, Shirayoshi Y, Schulz
TC, Tomizuka K, Hanaoka K, Inoue T, Oshimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Genetics, Graduate School of Medical Science,
Tottori University, 86 Nishimachi, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is a major clinical manifestation of Down syndrome
(DS). We recently showed that chimeric mice containing a human chromosome 21 (Chr
21) exhibited phenotypic traits of DS, including CHD. Our previous study showed
that myosin light chain-2a (mlc2a) expression was reduced in the hearts of
chimeric mice and DS patients. We found that phosphatidylethanolamine binding
protein (PEBP) was also downregulated in Chr 21 chimeras in this study. As mlc2a 
is involved in heart morphogenesis, and PEBP controls the proliferation and
differentiation of different cell types, these genes are candidates for
involvement in DS-CHD. The DS-CHD candidate region has been suggested to span
between PFKL and D21S3, which is the STS marker near the ETS2 loci. To identify
gene(s) or a gene cluster on Chr 21 responsible for the downregulation of mlc2a
and PEBP, we fragmented Chr 21 at the EST2 loci, by telomere-directed chromosome 
truncation in homologous recombination-proficient chicken DT40 cells. The
modified Chr 21 was transferred to mouse ES cells by microcell-mediated
chromosome transfer (MMCT), via CHO cells. We used ES cell lines retaining the
Chr 21 truncated at the ETS2 locus (Chr 21E) to produce chimeric mice and
compared overall protein expression patterns in hearts of the chimeras containing
the intact and the fragmented Chr 21 by two-dimensional electrophoresis. While
mouse mlc2a and PEBP expression was downregulated in the chimeras containing the 
intact Chr 21, the expression was not affected in the Chr 21E chimeras.
Therefore, we suggest that Chr 21 gene(s) distal from the ETS2 locus reduce mouse
mlc2a and PEBP expression in DS model mice and DS. Thus, this chromosome
engineering technology is a useful tool for identification or mapping of genes
that contribute to the DS phenotypes.

PMID: 15063784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Apr 1;91(5):896-903.

Ets proteins in biological control and cancer.

Hsu T(1), Trojanowska M, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, South Carolina, USA.

The Ets family consists of a large number of evolutionarily conserved
transcription factors, many of which have been implicated in tumor progression.
Extensive studies on this family of proteins have focused so far mainly on the
biochemical properties and cellular functions of individual factors. Since most
of the Ets factors can bind to the core consensus DNA sequence GGAA/T in vitro,
it has been a challenge to differentiate redundant from specific functions of
various Ets proteins in vivo. Recent findings, however, suggest that such
apparent redundancy may in fact be a central component of a network of
differentially regulated specific Ets factors, resulting in distinct biological
and pathological consequences. The programmed "Ets conversion" appears to play a 
critical role during tumor progression, especially in control of cellular changes
during epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis. Coordination of multiple
Ets gene functions also mediates interactions between tumor and stromal cells. As
such, these new insights may provide a novel view of the Ets gene family as well 
as a focal point for studying the complex biological control involved in tumor
progression.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2265084
PMID: 15034925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 16;101(11):3915-20. Epub 2004 Mar 8.

Acute myeloid leukemia with complex karyotypes and abnormal chromosome 21:
Amplification discloses overexpression of APP, ETS2, and ERG genes.

Baldus CD(1), Liyanarachchi S, Mrózek K, Auer H, Tanner SM, Guimond M, Ruppert
AS, Mohamed N, Davuluri RV, Caligiuri MA, Bloomfield CD, de la Chapelle A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Molecular mechanisms of leukemogenesis have been successfully unraveled by
studying genes involved in simple rearrangements including balanced
translocations and inversions. In contrast, little is known about genes altered
in complex karyotypic abnormalities. We studied acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
patients with complex karyotypes and abnormal chromosome 21. High-resolution
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array-based comparative genomic
hybridization disclosed amplification predominantly in the 25- to 30-megabase
(MB) region that harbors the APP gene (26.3 MB) and at position 38.7-39.1 MB that
harbors the transcription factors ERG and ETS2. Using oligonucleotide arrays, APP
was by far the most overexpressed gene (mean fold change 19.74, P = 0.0003)
compared to a control group of AML with normal cytogenetics; ERG and ETS2 also
ranked among the most highly expressed chromosome 21 genes. Overexpression of APP
and ETS2 correlated with genomic amplification, but high APP expression occurred 
even in a subset of AML patients with normal cytogenetics (10 of 64, 16%). APP
encodes a glycoprotein of unknown function previously implicated in Alzheimer's
disease, but not in AML. We hypothesize that APP and the transcription factors
ERG and ETS2 are altered by yet unknown molecular mechanisms involved in
leukemogenesis. Our results highlight the value of molecularly dissecting
leukemic cells with complex karyotypes.

PMCID: PMC374344
PMID: 15007164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 7;279(19):19407-20. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

Unique and selective effects of five Ets family members, Elf3, Ets1, Ets2, PEA3, 
and PU.1, on the promoter of the type II transforming growth factor-beta receptor
gene.

Kopp JL(1), Wilder PJ, Desler M, Kim JH, Hou J, Nowling T, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, 986805 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-6805,
USA.

Previous studies have shown that the promoter of the type II TGF-beta receptor
gene (TbetaR-II) is strongly stimulated by Elf3, a member of the Ets
transcription factor family. The TbetaR-II gene behaves as a tumor suppressor and
it is expressed in nearly all cell types, whereas Elf3 is expressed primarily in 
epithelial cells. Hence, the TbetaR-II gene is likely to be regulated by other
Ets proteins in nonepithelial cells. In this study, we examined the effects of
four other Ets family members (Ets1, Ets2, PEA3, and PU.1) on TbetaR-II
promoter/reporter constructs that contain the two essential ets sites of this
gene. These studies employed F9 embryonal carcinoma cells and their
differentiated cells, because transcription of the TbetaR-II gene increases after
F9 cells differentiate. Here we demonstrate that Ets2, which is expressed in
F9-differentiated cells along with Elf3, does not stimulate or bind to the
TbetaR-II promoter in these cells. In contrast, PEA3 stimulates the TbetaR-II
promoter in F9-differentiated cells, but it inhibits this promoter in F9 cells.
Thus, the effects of PEA3 on the TbetaR-II promoter are cell context-dependent.
We also show that the effects of Elf3 are cell context-dependent. Elf3 strongly
stimulates the TbetaR-II promoter in F9-differentiated cells, but not in F9
cells. In contrast to Elf3 and PEA3, Ets1 strongly stimulates this promoter in
both F9 cells and F9-differentiated cells. Finally, we show that PU.1 exerts
little or no effect on the activity of the TbetaR-II promoter. Together, our
findings indicate that Elf3 is not the only Ets protein capable of stimulating
the TbetaR-II promoter. Importantly, our findings also indicate that each of the 
five Ets proteins influences the TbetaR-II promoter in a unique manner because of
important differences in their biochemical properties or their patterns of
cellular expression.

PMID: 14976186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Oncogene. 2004 Mar 4;23(9):1766-79.

ESX induces transformation and functional epithelial to mesenchymal transition in
MCF-12A mammary epithelial cells.

Schedin PJ(1), Eckel-Mahan KL, McDaniel SM, Prescott JD, Brodsky KS, Tentler JJ, 
Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver,
CO 80262, USA. schedinp@amc.org

ESX is an epithelial-restricted member of a large family of transcription factors
known as the Ets family. ESX expression has been shown to be correlated with
Her2/neu proto-oncogene amplification in highly aggressive breast cancers and
induced by Her2/neu in breast cell lines, but its role in tumorigenesis is
unknown. Previously, we have shown that ESX enhances breast cell survival in
colony-formation assays. In order to determine whether ESX can act as a
transforming gene, we stably transfected MCF-12A human mammary epithelial cells
with the ESX expression vector, pCGN2-HA-ESX. The MCF-12A cell line is
immortalized, but nontransformed, and importantly, these cells fail to express
endogenous ESX protein. We used pCGN2-HA-Ets-2 and pSVRas expression vectors as
positive controls for transformation. Like HA-Ets-2 and V12-Ras, stable
expression of ESX induced EGF-independent proliferation, serum-independent MAPK
phosphorylation and growth in soft agar. Additionally, stable ESX expression
conferred increased cell adhesion, motility and invasion in two-dimensional and
transwell filter assays, and an epithelial to mesenchymal morphological
transition. In three-dimensional cultures, parental and vector control (pCGN2)
cells formed highly organized duct-like structures with evidence of cell
polarity, ECM adhesion-dependent proliferation and cell survival, and lack of
cellular invasion into surrounding matrix. Remarkably, the ESX stable cells
formed solid, disorganized structures, with lack of cell polarity, loss of
adhesion junctions and cytokeratin staining and loss of dependence on ECM
adhesion for cell proliferation and survival. In addition, ESX cells invaded the 
surrounding matrix, indicative of a transformed and metastatic phenotype. Taken
together, these data show that ESX expression alone confers a transformed and in 
vitro metastatic phenotype to otherwise normal MCF-12A cells.

PMID: 14767472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(3):1206-18.

ERF nuclear shuttling, a continuous monitor of Erk activity that links it to cell
cycle progression.

Le Gallic L(1), Virgilio L, Cohen P, Biteau B, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)IMBB, FORTH, Heraklion, Crete 711 10, Greece.

The ets domain transcriptional repressor ERF is an effector of the receptor
tyrosine kinase/Ras/Erk pathway, which, it has been suggested, is regulated by
subcellular localization as a result of Erk-dependent phosphorylation and is
capable of suppressing cell proliferation and ras-induced tumorigenicity. Here,
we analyze the effect of ERF phosphorylation on nuclear import and export, the
timing of its phosphorylation and dephosphorylation in relation to its
subcellular location, Erk activity, and the requirements for ERF-induced cell
cycle arrest. Our findings indicate that ERF continuously shuttles between the
nucleus and the cytoplasm and that both phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of 
ERF occur within the nucleus. While nuclear import is not affected by
phosphorylation, ERF nuclear export and cytoplasmic release require multisite
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. ERF export is CRM1 dependent, although ERF
does not have a detectable nuclear export signal. ERF phosphorylation and export 
correlate with the levels of nuclear Erk activity. The cell cycle arrest induced 
by nonphosphorylated ERF requires the wild-type retinoblastoma protein and can be
suppressed by overexpression of cyclin. These data suggest that ERF may be a very
sensitive and constant sensor of Erk activity that can affect cell cycle
progression through G(1), providing another link between the Ras/Erk pathway and 
cellular proliferation.

PMCID: PMC321421
PMID: 14729966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 2;279(14):14055-64. Epub 2004 Jan 13.

A Conserved alpha-helical motif mediates the binding of diverse nuclear proteins 
to the SRC1 interaction domain of CBP.

Matsuda S(1), Harries JC, Viskaduraki M, Troke PJ, Kindle KB, Ryan C, Heery DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, University Road Leicester
LE1 7RH, United Kingdom.

CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 contain modular domains that mediate
protein-protein interactions with a wide variety of nuclear factors. A C-terminal
domain of CBP (referred to as the SID) is responsible for interaction with the
alpha-helical AD1 domain of p160 coactivators such as the steroid receptor
coactivator (SRC1), and also other transcriptional regulators such as E1A, Ets-2,
IRF3, and p53. Here we show that the pointed (PNT) domain of Ets-2 mediates its
interaction with the CBP SID, and describe the effects of mutations in the SID on
binding of Ets-2, E1A, and SRC1. In vitro binding studies indicate that SRC1,
Ets-2 and E1A display mutually exclusive binding to the CBP SID. Consistent with 
this, we observed negative cross-talk between ERalpha/SRC1, Ets-2, and E1A
proteins in reporter assays in transiently transfected cells. Transcriptional
inhibition of Ets-2 or GAL4-AD1 activity by E1A was rescued by co-transfection
with a CBP expression plasmid, consistent with the hypothesis that the observed
inhibition was due to competition for CBP in vivo. Sequence comparisons revealed 
that SID-binding proteins contain a leucine-rich motif similar to the alpha-helix
Aalpha1 of the SRC1 AD1 domain. Deletion mutants of E1A and Ets-2 lacking the
conserved motif were unable to bind the CBP SID. Moreover, a peptide
corresponding to this sequence competed the binding of full-length SRC1, Ets-2,
and E1A proteins to the CBP SID. Thus, a leucine-rich amphipathic alpha-helix
mediates mutually exclusive interactions of functionally diverse nuclear proteins
with CBP.

PMID: 14722092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Gene. 2004 Jan 7;324:65-77.

Detailed mapping of the ERG-ETS2 interval of human chromosome 21 and comparison
with the region of conserved synteny on mouse chromosome 16.

Owczarek CM(1), Portbury KJ, Hardy MP, O'Leary DA, Kudoh J, Shibuya K, Shimizu N,
Kola I, Hertzog PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, 27-31 Wright Street, Clayton,
Victoria 3168, Australia. Catherine.Owczarek@med.monash.edu.au

We have carried out a detailed annotation of 550 kb of genomic DNA on human
chromosome 21 containing the ERG and ETS2 genes. Comparative genomic analysis
between this region and the interval of conserved synteny on mouse chromosome 16 
indicated that the order and orientation of the ERG and ETS2 genes were conserved
and revealed several regions containing potential conserved noncoding sequences. 
Four pseudogenes including those for small protein G, laminin receptor, human
transposase protein and meningioma-expressed antigen were identified. A
potentially novel gene (C21orf24) with alternative mRNA transcripts, consensus
splice donor and acceptor sites, but no coding potential nor murine orthologue,
was identified and found to be expressed in a range of human cell lines. We have 
identified four novel splice variants that arise from a previously undescribed 5'
exon of the human ERG gene. Comparison of the cDNA sequences enabled us to
determine the complete exon-intron structure of the ERG gene. We have also
identified the presence of noncoding RNAs in the first and second introns of the 
ETS2 gene. Our studies have important implications for Down syndrome as this
region contains multiple mRNA transcripts, both coding and potentially noncoding,
that may play as yet undescribed roles in the pathogenesis of this disorder.

PMID: 14693372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Neurobiol Dis. 2003 Dec;14(3):349-56.

Overexpression of the chromosome 21 transcription factor Ets2 induces neuronal
apoptosis.

Wolvetang EJ(1), Bradfield OM, Hatzistavrou T, Crack PJ, Busciglio J, Kola I,
Hertzog PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Monash
Medical Center, 246 Clayton Road, 3168 Clayton, Australia.
ernst.wolvetang@med.monash.edu.au

Down syndrome (trisomy 21) neurons display an increased rate of apoptosis in
vitro. The genes on chromosome 21 that mediate this increased cell death remain
to be elucidated. Here we show that the chromosome 21 transcription factor Ets2, 
a gene that is overexpressed in Down syndrome, is expressed in neurons, and that 
moderate overexpression of Ets2 leads to increased apoptosis of primary neuronal 
cultures from Ets2 tg mice that involves activation of caspase-3. Our data
therefore suggest that overexpression of ETS2 may contribute to the increased
rate of apoptosis of neurons in Down syndrome.

PMID: 14678752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11281-92. Epub 2003 Dec 8.

Changes in the expression of many Ets family transcription factors and of
potential target genes in normal mammary tissue and tumors.

Galang CK(1), Muller WJ, Foos G, Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Oncodevelopmental Biology Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Interfering with Ets transcription factor function reverses multiple aspects of
the transformed phenotype of mouse or human tumor cells. However, the unknown
number of individual Ets factors expressed in any cellular context and the
similar DNA binding specificities of Ets family members complicates the
identification of those that mediate transformation. By utilizing quantitative
PCR assays for 25 mouse Ets factors, we analyzed the expression of essentially
the entire Ets family in normal mammary tissue, mammary-related cell lines, and
mammary tumors. In normal mammary tissue, 24 Ets factors were expressed. Even
clonal derived cell lines expressed 14-20 Ets members. The most abundant Ets
factor mRNAs measured in normal mammary tissue were Elk4, Elf1, and Ets2.
Subtractive analysis of mammary tissue identified which Ets factors were
predominantly expressed in the myeloid/lymphoid or epithelial cell compartments. 
Comparison of Ets factor expression in normal mammary tissue and mammary tumors
identified significantly elevated expression of Pse/PDEF, Ese2/Elf5, Ese3/Ehf,
TEL/Etv6, and Elf2/NERF in mammary tumors and confirmed previously reported
alterations in expression of Ese1/Elf3 and the PEA3 subfamily. Expression of 13
Ets target genes, implicated in various aspects of tumor progression, was also
analyzed. Altered expression of particular Ets target genes was significantly
correlated with particular Ets factors (e.g. maspin and Ese2), suggesting
specific in vivo regulatory roles. Together, this comprehensive analysis revealed
unexpectedly diverse Ets family gene expression, characterized novel Ets factor
changes in mammary tumors, and implicated specific Ets factors in the regulation 
of multiple genes involved in mammary tumor progression.

PMID: 14662758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):6395-400. Epub 2003 Nov 17.

Myeloid ELF1-like factor is a potent activator of interleukin-8 expression in
hematopoietic cells.

Hedvat CV(1), Yao J, Sokolic RA, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Aspects of Hematopoiesis, Department of Pathology,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.
hedvatc@mskcc.org

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 31;281(13):8996.

Myeloid ELF1-like factor (MEF), also known as ELF4, is a member of the ETS family
of transcription factors which is expressed in hematopoietic cells. MEF-deficient
mice have defects in natural killer cell and natural killer T cell development,
suggesting a role for MEF in regulating innate immunity. MEF also functions in
myeloid cells, where it can transactivate target genes. To identify MEF target
genes in a "myeloid" environment, we created an inducible expression system and
used oligonucleotide microarrays to examine the transcript profile of HEL cells
after induction of MEF expression. Sixteen genes were reproducibly turned on or
off more than 2-fold, 8 h after induction of MEF expression, and we examined one 
of the genes, interleukin-8 (IL-8), in greater detail. IL-8 is a CXC chemokine
involved in neutrophil chemoattraction, angiogenesis, and stem cell mobilization.
It is expressed by several tumor types, and its expression is regulated primarily
transcriptionally. The IL-8 promoter contains three ETS binding sites, and we
identified the specific site that binds MEF and is required for MEF
responsiveness. MEF, but not the closely related ETS factors PEA3, ETS1, ETS2,
ELF1, or PU.1, strongly activates the IL-8 promoter. MEF overexpression is
sufficient to induce IL-8 protein expression, and reduction in MEF expression
(using RNA interference) results in decreased IL-8 levels. These data
demonstrates that MEF is an important regulator of IL-8 expression.

PMID: 14625302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(23):8614-25.

Ets2-dependent stromal regulation of mouse mammary tumors.

Man AK(1), Young LJ, Tynan JA, Lesperance J, Egeblad M, Werb Z, Hauser CA, Muller
WJ, Cardiff RD, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The Ets2 transcription factor is regulated by mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase phosphorylation of a single threonine residue. We generated by gene
targeting a single codon mutation in Ets2 substituting Ala for the critical
Thr-72 phosphorylation site (Ets2A72), to investigate the importance of MAP
kinase activation of Ets2 in embryo and tumor development. Ets2(A72/A72) mice are
viable and develop normally. However, combining the Ets2A72 allele with a
deletion mutant of Ets2 results in lethality at E11.5 and shows that Ets2A72 is a
hypomorphic allele. Mammary tumors caused by transgenic polyomavirus middle T
antigen, activated Neu(Erbb2), or the combination of Neu and transgenic VEGF
(Neu; VEGF-25) were all restricted in Ets2(A72/A72) females. The Ets2(A72/A72)
restriction on Neu; VEGF-25 tumor growth was associated with increased p21Cip1
expression. The size of tumors transplanted into fat pads of mice with Ets2
targeted alleles was correlated directly with Ets2 activity and fewer stromal
cells expressing matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9). Decreased MMP-3 and MMP-9
mRNAs were confirmed in Ets2(A72/A72) macrophages. Activation of Ets2 at Thr-72
acts in the stroma, downstream of vascular endothelial growth factor production, 
in part through the regulation of macrophage proteases to support the progression
of Neu- and polyomavirus middle-T-initiated mammary tumors.

PMCID: PMC262691
PMID: 14612405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Exp Mol Pathol. 2003 Dec;75(3):238-47.

Role of Ets/Id proteins for telomerase regulation in human cancer cells.

Xiao X(1), Athanasiou M, Sidorov IA, Horikawa I, Cremona G, Blair D, Barret JC,
Dimitrov DS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental and Computational Biology, NCI-Frederick, NIH,
Miller Drive, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA. xiaox@ncifcrf.gov

Most human cancers express telomerase but its activity is highly variable and
regulated by complex mechanisms. Recently, we have proposed that Ets proteins may
be important for regulation of telomerase activity in leukemic cells. Here we
provide further evidence for the role of Ets family members and related Id
proteins in telomerase regulation and characterize the underlying molecular
mechanisms. By using PCR-based and gel shift assays we demonstrated specific
binding to a core hTERT promoter of Ets2, Fli1, Id2, c-Myc, Mad1, and Sp1 in
lysates from subclones of U937 cells. Further analysis of binding of purified
proteins and various mutants of the hTERT promoter suggested the existence of a
trimolecular Ets-Id2-DNA complex, and Ets inhibitory activity mediated by c-Myc
and the Ets binding site on the core hTERT promoter at -293 bp from the
transcription initiation site as well as a positive Ets regulatory effect mediate
through another Ets binding site at -36 bp. This analysis provided evidence for
the existence of negative and positive Ets regulatory site and suggested a
complex interplay between Ets/Id family members and c-Myc that may be an
important determinant of the diversity of telomerase activity in leukemia and
other cancers.

PMID: 14611815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2004;11(1):10-9.

Regulation of the human leukemia inhibitory factor gene by ETS transcription
factors.

Bamberger AM(1), Jenatschke S, Schulte HM, Ellebrecht I, Beil FU, Bamberger CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
bamberger@uke.uni-hamburg.de

OBJECTIVES: Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is a pleiotropic cytokine mainly
produced by activated T lymphocytes. We previously demonstrated that human Jurkat
T lymphoma cells represent a valid model of LIF gene expression. This study was
designed to identify regions critical for LIF promoter activation in Jurkat
cells.
METHODS: Luciferase constructs under the control of different portions of the
human LIF promoter were transfected into Jurkat cells, and promoter activity was 
determined by luminometry. Similar experiments were performed with constructs
bearing mutations in the putative ETS binding regions in the LIF promoter.
RT-PCR, Western blot and gelshift experiments were performed to study expression 
and DNA binding of ETS factors in lymphoid cells.
RESULTS: With the exception of the shortest construct not including the putative 
ETS binding sites, all wildtype LIF promoter constructs were strongly inducible
by phorbol ester/ionomycin. In contrast, the mutant constructs were significantly
less inducible. Cotransfection of the wild-type constructs with ETS expression
vectors resulted in significant enhancement of promoter activity. ets-1 and ets-2
mRNA and protein were shown to be expressed in Jurkat cells. Gelshift experiments
revealed that proteins present in nuclear extracts from Jurkat cells specifically
bind to both artificial ETS consensus sites and ETS binding sites present in the 
LIF promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that binding of ETS transcription factors to the ETS
binding sites in the human LIF promoter is critical for its inducibility in
response to T cell activators. ETS transcription factors thus play an important
functional role within the endocrine-immune network.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14557674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Oct 15;290(1):132-43.

Ets2 is not required for Ras or Neu/ErbB-2 mediated cellular transformation in
vitro.

Hevér A(1), Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Ets2 is a widely expressed Ets family transcription factor which is activated by 
Ras signaling and has been reported to transform fibroblasts. Expression of a
dominant inhibitory Ets2 construct consisting of just the Ets2 DNA binding domain
(Ets2DBD), reverses Ras transformation of NIH3T3 cells and the transformed
characteristics of several human tumor cells. However, the Ets2DBD may interfere 
with multiple Ets family members. We have now utilized cell lines with a
disrupted ets2 gene to determine whether Ets2 is required to mediate oncogenic
signaling. Expression of the Ets2DBD in an Ets2-deficient cell line dramatically 
inhibited Ets-dependent (but not AP-1-dependent) reporter gene expression,
revealing that the Ets2DBD does inhibit additional Ets family members. The
transformation efficiency of Ets2-deficient cell lines by oncogenic Ras or
Neu/ErbB-2 was similar to that of control cells in several in vitro assays, and
was not enhanced by re-expression of Ets2. Finally, overexpression of Ets2 was
not sufficient to induce focus formation in NIH3T3 cells, nor to enhance
transformation by oncogenic Ras. Thus, Ets2 is not an essential mediator of Ras
or Neu/ErbB-2 transformation in these cells. Our results illustrate the
importance of utilizing specific approaches for analyzing the function of
individual members of large gene families.

PMID: 14516794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 5;278(49):49358-68. Epub 2003 Sep 24.

CD13/APN transcription is induced by RAS/MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of Ets-2
in activated endothelial cells.

Petrovic N(1), Bhagwat SV, Ratzan WJ, Ostrowski MC, Shapiro LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
Connecticut 06030, USA.

CD13/aminopeptidase N (CD13/APN) is a potent regulator of angiogenesis both in
vitro and in vivo and transcription of CD13/APN in endothelial cells is induced
by angiogenic growth factors via the RAS/MAPK pathway. We have explored the
nuclear effectors downstream of this pathway that are responsible for CD13/APN
induction. The response to serum/angiogenic growth factors mapped to a 38-bp
region of the CD13/APN promoter containing an Ets-core motif that specifically
binds a protein complex from nuclear lysates from activated endothelial cells.
This motif and the proteins that target it are functionally relevant because
mutation of this sequence abrogates CD13/APN transcription. Analysis of
endothelial Ets family members showed that Ets-2, and to a lesser extent Ets-1,
transactivate CD13/APN promoter activity via the Ets-core motif, whereas Fli,
Erg, and NERF are ineffective. We investigated the possibility that the induction
of CD13/APN is mediated by phosphorylation of Ets-2 via RAS/MAPK. A
phosphorylation-defective Ets-2 mutant, T72A, failed to transactivate CD13/APN,
suggesting that Ets-2 phosphorylation is obligatory for CD13/APN induction. To
confirm a role for endogenous Ets-2 in CD13/APN expression, we specifically
abrogated Ets-2 mRNA and protein by siRNA knockdown that significantly inhibited 
CD13/APN transcription. Finally, to assess the relevance of Ets-2 in endothelial 
cell function, we induced endothelial cells containing Ets-2 siRNA
oligonucleotides to form capillary networks. Cells containing the Ets-2
inhibitory small interfering RNAs were completely incapable of forming the
organized networks characteristic of endothelial morphogenesis. Thus, the
phosphorylation of Ets-2 by RAS/MAPK is a prerequisite for CD13/APN endothelial
induction and Ets-2 and its targets play essential roles in endothelial cell
function.

PMID: 14507917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cancer Res. 2003 Sep 1;63(17):5344-51.

Identification of novel gene expression targets for the Ras association domain
family 1 (RASSF1A) tumor suppressor gene in non-small cell lung cancer and
neuroblastoma.

Agathanggelou A(1), Bièche I, Ahmed-Choudhury J, Nicke B, Dammann R, Baksh S, Gao
B, Minna JD, Downward J, Maher ER, Latif F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Division of Reproductive and Child 
Health, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

RASSF1A is a recently identified 3p21.3 tumor suppressor gene. The high frequency
of epigenetic inactivation of this gene in a wide range of human sporadic cancers
including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and neuroblastoma suggests that
RASSF1A inactivation is important for tumor development. Although little is known
about the function of RASSF1A, preliminary data suggests that it may have
multiple functions. To gain insight into RASSF1A functions in an unbiased manner,
we have characterized the expression profile of a lung cancer cell line (A549)
transfected with RASSF1A. Initially we demonstrated that transient expression of 
RASSF1A into the NSCLC cell line A549 induced G(1) cell cycle arrest, as measured
by propidium iodide staining. Furthermore, annexin-V staining showed that
RASSF1A-expressing cells had an increased sensitivity to staurosporine-induced
apoptosis. We then screened a cDNA microarray containing more than 6000 probes to
identify genes differentially regulated by RASSF1A. Sixty-six genes showed at
least a 2-fold change in expression. Among these were many genes with relevance
to tumorigenesis involved in transcription, cytoskeleton, signaling, cell cycle, 
cell adhesion, and apoptosis. For 22 genes we confirmed the microarray results by
real-time RT-PCR and/or Northern blotting. In silico, we were able to confirm the
majority of these genes in other NSCLC cell lines using published data on gene
expression profiles. Furthermore, we confirmed 10 genes at the RNA level in two
neuroblastoma cell lines, indicating that these RASSF1A target genes have
relevance in non-lung cell backgrounds. Protein analysis of six genes (ETS2,
Cyclin D3, CDH2, DAPK1, TXN, and CTSL) showed that the changes induced by RASSF1A
at the RNA level correlated with changes in protein expression in both non-small 
cell lung cancer and neuroblastoma cell lines. Finally, we have used a transient 
assay to demonstrate the induction of CDH2 and TGM2 by RASSF1A in NSCLC cell
lines. We have identified several novel targets for RASSF1A tumor suppressor gene
both at the RNA and the protein levels in two different cellular backgrounds. The
identified targets are involved in diverse cellular processes; this should help
toward understanding mechanisms that contribute to RASSF1A biological activity.

PMCID: PMC3484890
PMID: 14500366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 1;261(1):25-38.

An Ets transcription factor, HrEts, is target of FGF signaling and involved in
induction of notochord, mesenchyme, and brain in ascidian embryos.

Miya T(1), Nishida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Nagatsuta,
226-8501 Yokohama, Japan.

In ascidian embryos, a fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signal induces notochord,
mesenchyme, and brain formation. Although a conserved Ras/MAPK pathway is known
to be involved in this signaling, the target transcription factor of this
signaling cascade has remained unknown. We have isolated HrEts, an ascidian
homolog of vertebrate Ets1 and Ets2, to elucidate the transcription factor
involved in the FGF signaling pathway in embryos of the ascidian Halocynthia
roretzi. Maternal mRNA of HrEts was detected throughout the entire egg cytoplasm 
and early embryos. Its zygotic expression started in several tissues, including
the notochord and neural plate. Overexpression of HrEts mRNA did not affect the
general organization of the tadpoles, but resulted in formation of excess sensory
pigment cells. In contrast, suppression of HrEts function by morpholino antisense
oligonucleotide resulted in severe abnormalities, similar to those of embryos in 
which the FGF signaling pathway was inhibited. Notochord-specific Brachyury
expression at cleavage stage and notochord differentiation at the tailbud stage
were abrogated. Formation of mesenchyme cells was also suppressed, and the
mesenchyme precursors assumed muscle fate. In addition, expression of Otx in
brain-lineage blastomeres was specifically suppressed. These results suggest that
an Ets transcription factor, HrEts, is involved in signal transduction of FGF
commonly in notochord, mesenchyme, and brain induction in ascidian embryos.

PMID: 12941619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Brain Res Brain Res Protoc. 2003 Aug;12(1):35-40.

An abbreviated procedure for the cloning and identification of Ets transcription 
factors regulating the expression of the human presenilin 1 gene.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107,
USA.

We have previously defined a crucial DNA element controlling 90% of the
expression of the presenilin 1 gene at (-35 to +6). This region contains an Ets
transcription factor binding motif, and a two-basepair alteration within the core
sequence (GGAA to TTAA) of the Ets consensus also reduced transcription by over
90%. We have shown that Ets1/2 transcription factors bind specifically to the -10
Ets element and activate PS1 transcription. The identification of other
transcription factors recognizing specifically this promoter area should provide 
insights into the regulation of PS1. We have used the -10 Ets element as a bait
in yeast one hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library using a His3 reporter
construct. We describe an abbreviated one-hybrid protocol to screen cDNA
libraries. This assay selected four factors from the Ets family: Ets2, ER81, ERM 
and Elk1. We have also shown that specific DNA binding activity to the -10 Ets
element of PS1 could easily be detected in yeast clones by EMSAs including
protein extracts from yeast cells, thus confirming specific DNA binding activity 
without further sequencing and subcloning into suitable expression vectors.
Ultimately the identity of putative clones was confirmed by DNA sequencing. We
also confirmed the specific DNA binding properties of the factors identified by
showing that the proteins produced by in vitro translation of the entire cDNAs
from Elk1 and ER81 indeed binds specifically to the -10 region of the PS1
promoter.

PMID: 12928043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Anticancer Res. 2003 May-Jun;23(3A):2173-8.

Ets-2 interacts with co-repressor BS69 to repress target gene expression.

Wei G(1), Schaffner AE, Baker KM, Mansky KC, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State
University, 484 W. 12th Ave., Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

BACKGROUND: The ETS-family of proteins consists of over 30 members that regulate 
the growth, differentiation and survival of both normal and tumor cells. How
specificity is achieved within this family remains largely unresolved. One
mechanism for attaining specificity is through the action of signaling pathways
on specific family members. For example, Ets-2 is an activator modulated by
ras-dependent phosphorylation of a single residue in the conserved pointed domain
of this factor. We hypothesized that phosphorylation of the pointed domain
regulates the proteins that can interact with ets-2 in the cell nucleus,
resulting in regulation of target genes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used a combination of biochemical assays, yeast
two-hybrid screens and transfection assays to identify and characterize proteins 
interacting with the pointed domain.
RESULTS: BS69, a known co-repressor, was identified in a yeast two hybrid screen 
as an ets-2 interacting partner. BS69 can interact with ets-2 in vivo and
phosphorylation of the ets-2 pointed domain decreased the interaction with BS69
in vitro. In transfection assays, co-expression of ets-2 and BS69 resulted in
repression of defined ets-2 target genes.
CONCLUSION: These results support a role for ets-2 as a repressor and indicate
that BS69 is required as co-repressor. Phosphorylation of ets-2 may switch its
activity from repressor to activator by interfering with formation of the BS69
complex.

PMID: 12894593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Anticancer Res. 2003 May-Jun;23(3A):2143-53.

ERF, an ETS-related transcriptional repressor, can induce erythroid
differentiation.

Athanasiou M(1), Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., NCI-Frederick, Frederick, MD
21702, USA. athanasi@ncifcrf.gov

Ets-family genes have been implicated in leukemia, as well as in normal
hematopoiesis. ERF is an ets-related gene that represses transcription and is
regulated by MAPK phosphorylation through its effect on ERF sub-cellular
localization. Using pluripotent human cell lines, we studied the effect of ERF on
erythroid differentiation. K562 and HEL cells expressing ERF expressed elevated
levels of the erythroid-specific markers CD71 and Glycophorin A, as well as
hemoglobin and GATA1. Treatment with the Erk kinase inhibitor PD98058 further
enhanced the erythroid phenotype in ERF-expressing cells and cells expressing a
non-phosphorylatable ERF mutant exhibited an even more enhanced phenotype. These 
results are consistent with the fact that ERF function is regulated by MAPK, and 
suggest that the effect of the MAPK pathway in erythroid differentiation is
partially mediated by ERF. The effect of ERF is similar to the one shown for ETS1
and opposite to the FLI1 function in these cells, suggesting that several ets
genes may play key roles in hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 12894589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Jul 28;1628(2):105-10.

The chromosome 21 transcription factor ETS2 transactivates the beta-APP promoter:
implications for Down syndrome.

Wolvetang EW(1), Bradfield OM, Tymms M, Zavarsek S, Hatzistavrou T, Kola I,
Hertzog PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Monash Medical Center, 246
Clayton Road, 3168, Clayton, Australia. ernst.wolvetang@med.monash.edu.au

The gene that codes for beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP), a protein
centrally involved in senile plaque formation in Down syndrome (DS) and
Alzheimer's disease (AD), is located on chromosome 21. In DS beta-APP expression 
is three- to fourfold higher than what is expected from the 1.5-fold increased
gene load, suggesting that other genes on chromosome 21 directly or indirectly
can further up-regulate beta-APP. Here we show that the chromosome 21
transcription factor ETS2 transactivates the beta-APP gene via specific Ets
binding sites in the beta-APP promoter and, in this respect, cooperates with the 
transcription factor complex AP1. We further show that brains and primary
neuronal cultures from Ets2 transgenic mice, as well as 3T3 fibroblasts that
overexpress ETS2, display molecular abnormalities also seen in DS, such as
elevated expression of beta-APP protein, an increase in presenilin-1 and
increased beta-amyloid production. We conclude that ETS2 is a transcriptional
regulator of beta-APP and that overexpression of ETS2 in DS may play a role in
the pathogenesis of the brain abnormalities in DS and possibly AD.

PMID: 12890557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Cell Biol. 2003 Jul 21;162(2):173-83. Epub 2003 Jul 14.

Epstein-Barr virus LMP1 blocks p16INK4a-RB pathway by promoting nuclear export of
E2F4/5.

Ohtani N(1), Brennan P, Gaubatz S, Sanij E, Hertzog P, Wolvetang E, Ghysdael J,
Rowe M, Hara E.

Author information: 
(1)Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie Hospital NHS Trust,
Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

The p16INK4a-RB pathway plays a critical role in preventing inappropriate cell
proliferation and is often targeted by viral oncoproteins during immortalization.
Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is often present in 
EBV-associated proliferative diseases and is critical for the immortalizing and
transforming activity of EBV. Unlike other DNA tumor virus oncoproteins, which
possess immortalizing activity, LMP1 does not bind to retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor protein, but instead blocks the expression of p16INK4a tumor
suppressor gene. However, it has been unclear how LMP1 represses the p16INK4a
gene expression. Here, we report that LMP1 promotes the CRM1-dependent nuclear
export of Ets2, which is an important transcription factor for p16INK4a gene
expression, thereby reducing the level of p16INK4a expression. We further
demonstrate that LMP1 also blocks the function of E2F4 and E2F5 (E2F4/5)
transcription factors through promoting their nuclear export in a CRM1-dependent 
manner. As E2F4/5 are essential downstream mediators for a p16INK4a-induced cell 
cycle arrest, these results indicate that the action of LMP1 on nuclear export
has two effects on the p16INK4a-RB pathway: (1) repression of p16INK4a expression
and (2) blocking the downstream mediator of the p16INK4a-RB pathway. These
results reveal a novel activity of LMP1 and increase an understanding of how
viral oncoproteins perturb the p16INK4a-RB pathway.

PMCID: PMC2172795
PMID: 12860972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cancer Res. 2003 May 15;63(10):2616-23.

p53-independent activation of the hdm2-P2 promoter through multiple transcription
factor response elements results in elevated hdm2 expression in estrogen receptor
alpha-positive breast cancer cells.

Phelps M(1), Darley M, Primrose JN, Blaydes JP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Sciences Division, School of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton General Hospital, Southampton SO16 6YD, United Kingdom.

The negative-regulatory feedback loop between p53 and hdm2 forms part of a finely
balanced regulatory network of proteins that controls cell cycle progression and 
commitment to apoptosis. Expression of hdm2, and its mouse orthologue mdm2, is
known to be induced by p53, but recent evidence has demonstrated mdm2 expression 
can also be regulated via p53-independent pathways. However the p53 independent
mechanisms that control transcription of the human hdm2 gene have not been
studied. Differential levels of hdm2 mRNA and protein expression have been
reported in several types of human malignancy, including breast cancers in which 
hdm2 expression correlates with positive estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)
status. Experimental models have demonstrated that hdm2 overexpression can
promote breast cancer development. Here, we show that the elevated level of hdm2 
protein in ERalpha(+ve) breast cancer cell lines such as MCF-7 and T47D is
because of transcription from the p53-inducible P2 promoter of hdm2. The P2
promoter is inactive in ERalpha(-ve) cell lines such as SKBr3. Hdm2-P2 promoter
activity in T47D cells is independent of p53, as well as of known regulators of
the mouse mdm2-P2 promoter, including ERalpha and ras-raf-mitogen-activated
protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK) mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) signaling. We show that hdm2-P2 activity in T47D cells is dependent
on the integrity of both an evolutionarily conserved composite binding site for
AP1 and ETS family transcription factors (AP1-ETS) and a nonconserved upstream
(nnGGGGC)(5) repeat sequence. Lack of hdm2-P2 activity in ERalpha(-ve) cells is
shown to be a consequence of reduced transcriptional activation through the
AP1-ETS element. Overexpression of ETS2 in SKBr3 cells reconstitutes AP1-ETS
element-dependent hdm2-P2 promoter activity, resulting in increased levels of
hdm2 protein in the cells. Our findings support the hypothesis that the elevated 
levels of hdm2 expression reported in cancers such as ERalpha(+ve) breast tumors 
play an important role in the development of these tumors.

PMID: 12750288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 May 12;113(1-2):57-66.

Ets transcription factors ER81 and Elk1 regulate the transcription of the human
presenilin 1 gene promoter.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, 76107, USA.

We have previously defined a crucial DNA element controlling 90% of the
expression of the presenilin 1 gene at (-35 to +6). This region contains an Ets
transcription factor binding motif, and a 2-base pair alteration within the core 
sequence (GGAA to TTAA) of the Ets consensus also reduced transcription by over
90%. We have shown that Ets1/2 transcription factors bind specifically to the -10
Ets element and activate PS1 transcription. The identification of other
transcription factors recognizing specifically this promoter area should provide 
insights into the regulation of PS1. We have used the -10 Ets element as a bait
in yeast one hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library. This assay selected 
three factors from the Ets family: Ets2, ER81 and Elk1. We show that in vitro
translated ER81 indeed binds specifically to the -10 region of the PS1 promoter
and that ER81 activates by two- to threefold the basal transcription of a
presenilin-1 promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter synthetic gene
(-119, +178)PS1CAT in transient infection assays in neuroblastoma cells
(SK-N-SH). GABPalpha, a member of the Ets family closely related to Ets2 and also
containing a pointed domain, only increased PS1 transcription by about twofold.
Cotransfection of GABPbeta together with GABPalpha did not increase PS1
transcription. However, GABPbeta alone activated PS1 transcription by two- to
threefold. In contrast, the more distantly related Ets factor Elk1 repressed PS1 
transcription very effectively.

PMID: 12750007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Oncogene. 2003 May 8;22(18):2699-709.

EAPII interacts with ETS1 and modulates its transcriptional function.

Pei H(1), Yordy JS, Leng Q, Zhao Q, Watson DK, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Ets proteins constitute a family of conserved sequence-specific DNA-binding
proteins and function as transcription factors. ETS1 plays important roles in
differentiation, lymphoid cell development, invasiveness and angiogenesis. Such
diverse roles of ETS1 are likely to be dependent on its associated proteins. A
yeast two-hybrid screen was conducted and here we describe a novel ETS1
interacting protein designated as ETS1-associated protein II (EAPII). EAPII
protein interacts with ETS1 and other Ets proteins (ETS2 and FLI1) both in vitro 
and in vivo. Indirect immunofluorescence demonstrated that EAPII is predominately
localized to the nucleus of mammalian cells. EAPII negatively modulates ETS1
transcriptional activity and attenuates synergistic transactivation by ETS1 and
AP-1. Significantly, re-expression of EAPII inhibits the migration of epithelial 
cancer cells, but does not affect cell viability. Therefore, EAPII is a novel
ETS1 modulator that regulates specific aspects of the ETS1 functions.

PMID: 12743594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Mar;84(4):441-52.

Glucocorticoid regulation of human eosinophil gene expression.

Chauhan S(1), Leach CH, Kunz S, Bloom JW, Miesfeld RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.

Molecular analysis of steroid-regulated gene expression in freshly isolated human
eosinophils is difficult due to the inherent high rate of spontaneous apoptosis
and elevated levels of endogenous ribonucleases. To circumvent these limitations,
we determined if the human eosinophilic cell line EoL-1 could serve as an in
vitro model of glucocorticoid signaling. We found by optimizing growth conditions
in low serum-containing media that dexamethasone (Dex) treatment of EoL-1 cells
induced an apoptotic pathway that was inhibited by interleukin-5 (IL-5).
Moreover, gene expression profiling using RNA from untreated EoL-1 cells and from
freshly isolated human eosinophils identified 380 commonly expressed genes,
including the eosinophil markers granule major basic protein,
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 1 and arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase.
Expression profiling was performed using EoL-1 cells that had been treated with
dexamethasone for 0, 4, 12, 24 and 48h identifying 162 genes as differentially
expressed. Two of the most highly upregulated genes based on expression profiling
were the transcription factor Ets-2 and the MHC Class II genes (Q, R, and P).
Expression of these genes in EoL-1 cells was shown to be dexamethasone-induced at
the RNA and protein levels which is consistent with the known function of Ets-2
in controlling cell cycle progression and the role of MHC Class II antigens in
mediating eosinophil functions.

PMID: 12732289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Reprod Dev. 2003 May;65(1):23-9.

Coactivator CBP in the regulation of conceptus IFNtau gene transcription.

Xu N(1), Takahashi Y, Matsuda F, Sakai S, Christenson RK, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, The University of
Tokyo, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Japan.

Studies of ovine interferon-tau (oIFNtau) gene regulation, an anti-luteolytic
factor produced by conceptuses of the ruminant ungulates, have been carried out, 
but a definitive mechanism for its spatial-temporal transcription has not been
elucidated. Recently, specific binding regions for transcription factors AP-1 and
Ets-2 on the oIFNtau gene were identified; however, a molecular mechanism by
which these factors regulate oIFNtau gene transcription has not been
characterized. In the present study, we investigated the potential relationship
between AP-1 and Ets-2, and their association with a coactivator, cAMP-response
element binding protein-binding protein (CBP), on oIFNtau gene transcription in a
transient transfection system using human choriocarcinoma JEG3 cells. The oIFNtau
gene promoter/enhancer (-654 to + 1 bases, wild type)-luciferase reporter
construct (pGL3-654) or its mutant at the AP-1 or Ets-2 site was cotransfected
with CBP (pRc/RSV-CBP) construct along with c-jun, c-fos, and/or Ets-2 expression
plasmid. CBP enhanced transcription of the wild type oIFNtau-reporter construct; 
however, this coactivator had no effect on the oIFNtau-reporter construct with
mutated AP-1 or Ets-2 site. Cotransfection of CBP with c-jun and/or Ets-2, but
not with c-fos, further increased oIFNtau gene transactivation although amounts
of c-jun and c-fos expression, resulting from expression vectors, were similar.
In addition, CBP inhibitor adenovirus 12S E1A (E1A), but not the mutant of E1A
without CBP binding domain (Delta2-36), suppressed oIFNtau gene transcription.
These observations suggest that c-jun and Ets-2 are the most probable binding
partners for CBP in the potentiation of oIFNtau gene transcription. Mol. Reprod. 
Dev. 65: 23-29, 2003.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12658630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 28;303(1):190-5.

ETS2 is involved in protein kinase C-activated expression of
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in human non-small lung
carcinoma cell line, A549.

Lu Z(1), Kim KA, Suico MA, Uto A, Seki Y, Shuto T, Isohama Y, Miyata T, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) is a cytokine expressed
in the non-small lung carcinoma cells (NSCLC). However, transcriptional
regulation of GM-CSF is not well characterized in NSCLC. In this study we found
that two cis-acting ETS family consensus sites are important for transcriptional 
regulation of GM-CSF in A549 human lung carcinoma cells. These two sites are
located separately at around -40 and -100 bp from the transcription start site.
Results of transient transfection assays with A549 cells indicated that ETS2 had 
a strong positive effect on GM-CSF promoter activity. Furthermore, this activity 
was enhanced by protein kinase C activator, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA), in an ETS consensus-dependent manner, while PMA could also enhance the
expression level of ETS2. The protein kinase C inhibitors decreased GM-CSF
promoter activity induced by the protein kinase C activator PMA. We also found
that antisense ETS2 mRNA decreased PMA-induced GM-CSF promoter activity,
supporting the possibility that ETS2 is involved in protein kinase C-induced
GM-CSF transcriptional function. Endogenous expression of GM-CSF mRNA was
increased by ETS2 transfection and the increased expression was further enhanced 
by PMA. These data indicate that GM-CSF is up-regulated by ETS2, a target of
protein kinase C.

PMID: 12646185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):17876-84. Epub 2003 Mar 10.

Ets-2 and components of mammalian SWI/SNF form a repressor complex that
negatively regulates the BRCA1 promoter.

Baker KM(1), Wei G, Schaffner AE, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and The Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Ets-2 is a transcriptional activator that can be modulated by ras-dependent
phosphorylation. Evidence is presented indicating that ets-2 can also act as a
transcriptional repressor. In the breast cancer cell line MCF-7, exogenous ets-2 
repressed the activity of a BRCA1 promoter-luciferase reporter dependent on a
conserved ets-2-binding site in this promoter. Conditional overproduction of
ets-2 in MCF-7 cells resulted in repression of endogenous BRCA1 mRNA expression. 
To address the mechanism by which ets-2 could act as a repressor, a biochemical
approach was used to identify proteins that interacted with the ets-2 pointed
domain. From this analysis, components of the mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex were found to interact with ets-2. Brg-1, the ATP-hydrolyzing 
component of the SWI/SNF complex, along with the BAF57/p50 and Ini1 subunits
could be co-immunoprecipitated from cells with ets-2. The pointed domain of ets-2
directly interacted in vitro with the C-terminal region of Brg-1 in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner. The combination of Brg-1 and ets-2 could
repress the BRCA1 promoter reporter in transfection assays. These results support
a role for ets-2 as a repressor and indicate that components of the mammalian
SNF/SWI complex are required as co-repressors.

PMID: 12637547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Biochem J. 2003 Jun 15;372(Pt 3):787-97.

Ets2 and protein kinase C epsilon are important regulators of parathyroid
hormone-related protein expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Lindemann RK(1), Braig M, Hauser CA, Nordheim A, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Abteilung Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, 
Auf der Morgenstelle 15, Germany.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) promotes the metastatic potential and
proliferation of breast cancer cells, and acts anti-apoptotically. In invasive
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, transforming growth factor beta-regulated PTHrP
synthesis is mediated by an Ets1/Smad3-dependent activation of the PTHrP P3
promoter. In the present study, we studied the regulation of PTHrP expression in 
non-invasive, Ets1-deficient and transforming growth factor beta-resistant MCF-7 
cells. We found PMA to be a strong stimulator of P3-dependent PTHrP expression in
MCF-7 cells. Mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase 1 (MEK-1)/ERK1/2
inhibitor PD98059 interfered with this activity. Promoter studies revealed that
the PMA effect depended on the Ets and stimulating protein-1 (Sp1)-binding sites.
Of several Ets factors tested, Ets2, but not Ese-1, Elf-1 or Ets1, supported the 
PMA-dependent increase in promoter activity. PD98059 and a threonine to alanine
mutation of the ERK1/2-responsive Ets2 phosphorylation site at position 72
inhibited the Ets2/PMA effect. Activated protein kinase C (PKC) epsilon could
mimic PMA by stimulating the P3 promoter alone or in co-operation with Ets2 in an
MEK-1/ERK1/2-dependent manner. Activated PKC alpha, although capable of
co-operating with Ets2, failed to induce transcription from the P3 promoter on
its own. The Ets2/PKalpha synergistic effect was neither sensitive to PD98059 nor
to Thr(72)/Ala(72) mutation. PMA neither increased the expression of Sp1 nor
modulated the transcriptional activity of Sp1. However, it induced the
displacement of a yet unknown factor from the Sp1-binding site, which may result 
in Sp1 recruitment to the promoter. Our results suggest an ERK1/2-dependent
Ets2/PKC epsilon synergism to be involved in PTHrP expression in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC1223436
PMID: 12628005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Immunol Lett. 2003 Mar 3;86(1):63-70.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies specific to the transcription factor
ETS-2 protein.

Sanij E(1), Scott B, Wilson T, Xu D, Hertzog P, Wolvetang E.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Clayton, Vic. 3168, Australia.

ETS-2 is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. ETS-2 was initially
characterized as a nuclear oncogene and has been shown to play a role in
regulation of apoptosis and cell cycle progression. Members of the ETS family
display high sequence homology, thus, there is considerable controversy
concerning the specificity of existing ETS-2 polyclonal antibodies that have been
used to define ETS-2 function. We therefore embarked on the production of ETS-2
specific monoclonal antibodies. In this report, we describe the production and
characterization of six antibodies and the localization of their target epitopes 
to distinct domains of the ETS-2 protein. Four antibodies are ETS-2 specific and 
two antibodies cross-react with ETS-1, an ETS family member with the highest
amino acid sequence homology to ETS-2. This report provides a comprehensive
evaluation of ETS-2 specific monoclonal antibodies verified using ETS-2 null
cells. These antibodies can be used for EMSA, Western blotting,
immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence staining experiments. Collectively,
these reagents are invaluable molecular tools that should help better understand 
the biological function of ETS-2.

PMID: 12600747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Oncogene. 2003 Feb 13;22(6):919-23.

Trans-activation of heparanase promoter by ETS transcription factors.

Lu WC(1), Liu YN, Kang BB, Chen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Human Genetics, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.

The remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important process required for
cancer cells to turn into invasive and metastatic cancer cells. To dissolve the
protein components of ECM, matrix metalloproteinases are some of the essential
enzymes. Another ECM remodeling enzyme is the heparanase (Hpa) that digests the
heparin sulfate component of the matrix. In metastatic cancer cells the Hpa gene 
is upregulated. To investigate the mechanism of why Hpa was upregulated in
metastatic cancer cells, the regulatory sequence of heparanase gene was isolated 
and its function analysed in metastatic breast cancer cells. We found there are
four ETS transcription factor binding sites. Two of them flanking the
transcription initiation of the Hpa gene are nonfunctional, whereas two others
are highly functional and responded to exogenously added ETS transcription
factors. Mutation of these two ETS binding sites abolished the transcriptional
activation of Hpa promoter by ETS transcription factors. Among four transcription
factors tested (ETS1, ETS2, PEA3, and ER81), ETS1 and ETS2 are more potent in
transactivating the human Hpa gene. Furthermore, dominant-negative ETS
transcription factors failed to transactivate Hpa promoter and could abrogate the
function of wild-type transcription factor in transactivation activity of ETS
transcription factors on the Hpa promoter. These results suggest that ETS
transcription factors play an important role in tumor invasion and metastasis by 
modulating the remodeling of ECM.

PMID: 12584571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 1;31(3):833-43.

Selective inhibition of transcription of the Ets2 gene in prostate cancer cells
by a triplex-forming oligonucleotide.

Carbone GM(1), McGuffie EM, Collier A, Catapano CV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. carbonep@musc.edu

The transcription factor Ets2 has a role in cancer development and represents an 
attractive therapeutic target. In this study, we designed a triplex-forming
oligonucleotide (TFO) directed to a homopurine:homopyrimidine sequence in the
Ets2 promoter. Transcription factors of the Sp family bound to this sequence and 
mutation of the Sp1 site reduced Ets2 promoter activity. The Ets2-TFO had high
binding affinity for the target sequence and inhibited binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the 
overlapping site. This effect occurred with a high degree of sequence
specificity. Mismatched oligonucleotides did not inhibit Sp1/Sp3 binding and
mutations in the target sequence that abolished triplex formation prevented
inhibition of Sp1/Sp3 binding by the TFO. The Ets2-TFO inhibited Ets2 promoter
activity and expression of the endogenous gene in prostate cancer cells at
nanomolar concentrations. The TFO did not affect reporter constructs with
mutations in the TFO binding site and promoters of non-targeted genes. Expression
of non-targeted genes was also not affected in TFO-treated cells. Collectively,
these data demonstrated that the anti-transcriptional activity of the Ets2-TFO
was sequence- and target-specific, and ruled out alternative, non-triplex
mediated mechanisms of action. This anti-transcriptional approach may be useful
to examine the effects of selective downregulation of Ets2 expression and may
have therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC149218
PMID: 12560478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Feb 1;12(3):247-55.

ETS2 overexpression in transgenic models and in Down syndrome predisposes to
apoptosis via the p53 pathway.

Wolvetang EJ(1), Wilson TJ, Sanij E, Busciglio J, Hatzistavrou T, Seth A, Hertzog
PJ, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

ETS2 is a transcription factor encoded by a gene on human chromosome 21 and
alterations in its expression have been implicated in the pathophysiological
features of Down syndrome (DS). This study demonstrates that overexpression of
ETS2 results in apoptosis. This is shown in a number of circumstances, including 
ETS2-overexpressing transgenic mice and cell lines and in cells from subjects
with DS. Indeed we report for the first time that the ETS2 overexpression
transgenic mouse develops a smaller thymus and lymphocyte abnormalities similar
to that observed in DS. In all circumstances of ETS2 overexpression, the
increased apoptosis correlated with increased p53 and alterations in downstream
factors in the p53 pathway. In the human HeLa cancer cell line, transfection with
functional p53 enables ETS2 overexpression to induce apoptosis. Furthermore,
crossing the ETS2 transgenic mice with p53(-/-) mice genetically rescued the
thymic apoptosis phenotype. Therefore, we conclude that overexpression of human
chromosome 21-encoded ETS2 induces apoptosis that is dependent on p53. These
results have important consequences for understanding DS and oncogenesis and may 
provide new insights into therapeutic interventions.

PMID: 12554679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Gen Virol. 2003 Jan;84(Pt 1):41-9.

Ets-2 Repressor Factor (ERF) mediates repression of the human cytomegalovirus
major immediate-early promoter in undifferentiated non-permissive cells.

Bain M(1), Mendelson M, Sinclair J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, PO Box 157, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.

The repression of human cytomegalovirus immediate-early (IE) lytic gene
expression is crucial for the maintenance of the latent viral state. By using
conditionally permissive cell lines, which provide a good model for the
differentiation state-dependent repression of IE gene expression, we have
identified several cellular factors that bind to the major immediate-early
promoter (MIEP) and whose expression is down-regulated after differentiation to a
permissive phenotype. Here we show that the cellular protein Ets-2 Repressor
Factor (ERF) physically interacts with the MIEP and represses MIEP activity in
undifferentiated non-permissive T2 embryonal carcinoma cells. This factor binds
to the dyad element and the 21 bp repeats within the MIEP - regions known to be
important for the negative regulation of MIEP activity. Finally, we show that
following differentiation to a permissive phenotype ERF's repressive effects are 
severely abrogated.

PMID: 12533699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. World J Gastroenterol. 2003 Feb;9(2):205-8.

Overexpression of ETS2 in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Li X(1), Lu JY, Zhao LQ, Wang XQ, Liu GL, Liu Z, Zhou CN, Wu M, Liu ZH.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.

AIM: To study the expression pattern of ETS2 (erythroblastosis virus oncogene
homolog 2) in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).
METHODS: Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Northern
blot were performed to examine the expression level of ETS2 mRNA in 37 pairs of
ESCC tissue samples. Western blot and immunohistochemistry were carried out to
check the expression level of ETS2 protein in 30 pairs of ESCC tissue specimens.
RESULTS: RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis showed that ETS2 mRNA upregulated in
75.7 % (28/37) examined ESCC tissues relative to matched normal tissues. From
those 37 cases, 14 cases were randomly selected to perform Western blot and the
results revealed that ETS2 protein overexpressed in 71.4 % (10/14) checked ESCC
tissues compared with the corresponding normal tissues. Moreover, the expression 
patterns of ETS2 protein in those 14 cases were identical to those of ETS2 mRNA
displayed by RT-PCR or Northern Blot. Immunohistochemistry analysis showed that
the expression level of ETS2 protein rose in 75 % (12/16) tumor epithelial cells 
contrasted to the normal cells. Altogether the expression level of ETS2 protein
increased in 73.3 % (22/30) checked ESCC tissue samples contrary to their normal 
counterparts.
CONCLUSION: The results suggested that ETS2 overexpressed in paired human ESCC
tissue samples at both mRNA and protein levels and may be associated with the
tumorigenesis of esophagus.

PMCID: PMC4611312
PMID: 12532432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jan;17(1):11-26.

A central role for Ets-2 in the transcriptional regulation and cyclic adenosine
5'-monophosphate responsiveness of the human chorionic gonadotropin-beta subunit 
gene.

Ghosh D(1), Ezashi T, Ostrowski MC, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri
65211-5300, USA.

Ets-2 has an important role in controlling the differentiation of the placenta.
Here we show by truncation and mutational analysis that two closely spaced Ets-2 
binding sites in the proximal promoter of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta5 
(hCGbeta5) gene constitute a major enhancer for hCGbeta gene expression in JAr
and JEG-3 human choriocarcinoma cells and in mouse NIH3T3 cells. Contrary to a
previous report, we also demonstrate that the ability of Ets-2 to enhance
transcription is subject to control by the Ras/MAPK pathway, although this
relationship is less easily demonstrable in JAr and JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells
than in the 3T3 cells because the former already possess a fully activated MAPK
pathway and contain Ets-2 phosphorylated at threonine residue at T72.
Coexpression of Ets-2 and activated Ras in 3T3 cells led to activation of
MAPK/ERK kinase 1/2, phosphorylation of Ets-2 at T72, and an approximately
120-fold up-regulation of reporter gene expression from a short (-175) hCGbeta
promoter. Fold activation in JAr and JEG-3 cells was rather less (20- to
30-fold), but basal activity was much higher. These effects on promoter activity 
were largely reversed in presence of the MAPK inhibitor PD98059, which prevents
ERK1/2 activation, and partially reversed by mutating T72 on Ets-2. We finally
show that the ability of 8-bromoadenosine-cAMP to stimulate hCGbeta promoter
activity in JAr and JEG-3 cells occurs with a short promoter lacking the upstream
elements previously considered to be essential for cAMP activation of the gene
and, through mutational analysis, confirm that the major cAMP effects on the
hCGbeta promoter are mediated through the proximal Ets-2 enhancer. The data are
consistent with the hypothesis that Ets-2 has a general and possibly essential
role in controlling the activity of genes associated with trophectoderm
differentiation.

PMID: 12511603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Dec;269(23):5956-62.

Activation of transcription of the human presenilin 1 gene by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health
Science Center at Fort Worth, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA.

We have recently identified an Ets element controlling over 90% of the basal
expression of the human presenilin 1 (PS1) gene. We have also shown that Ets1 and
Ets2 act as transactivators of the PS1 gene by cotransfection experiments in
SK-N-SH neuronal cells. The PS1 gene is widely but differentially expressed
across tissues and the expression in brain appears to be restricted to neurons.
To gain further insight into the regulation of the gene we have examined the
regulation of PS1 by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA). SK-N-SH neuronal
cells were treated with 0.2 micro m TPA for 30 min to 24 h and the level of
expression of the endogenous PS1 gene was measured by Northern blot analysis. A
two- to threefold increase in the level of PS1 mRNA appeared 4-8 h after the
addition of TPA. A similar increase in transcription activity was observed in
nuclear run off experiments, indicating that the increased mRNA level results
from an activation in the initiation of transcription of PS1. Consistently, TPA
also increased the level of PS1 protein. No activation of the PS1 endogenous gene
by TPA was observed in hepatoma HepG2 cells. Next we tested the effect of TPA on 
the expression of the PS1 promoter by transfecting fusion genes including various
fragments of the PS1 promoter linked to a CAT reporter into SK-N-SH cells. TPA
also stimulated the expression of the PS1CAT constructs. Generally wild type
constructs -687/+178, -118/+178, -22/+178 including the short -35/+6 fragment
showed a minor two- to threefold activation by TPA. Point mutations eliminating
the -10 Ets motif or the -6 CREB/AP1 motif did not decrease the stimulation by
TPA. Thus TPA appears to activate the transcription of the PS1 gene by a
mechanism which does not require these elements.

PMID: 12444985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Dec;22(23):8135-43.

Biallelic mutations in p16(INK4a) confer resistance to Ras- and Ets-induced
senescence in human diploid fibroblasts.

Huot TJ(1), Rowe J, Harland M, Drayton S, Brookes S, Gooptu C, Purkis P, Fried M,
Bataille V, Hara E, Newton-Bishop J, Peters G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London
WC2A 3PX.

The INK4a/ARF tumor suppressor locus is implicated in the senescence-like growth 
arrest provoked by oncogenic Ras in primary cells. INK4a and ARF are distinct
proteins encoded by transcripts in which a shared exon is decoded in alternative 
reading frames. Here we analyze dermal fibroblasts (designated Q34) from an
individual carrying independent missense mutations in each copy of the common
exon. Both mutations alter the amino acid sequence of INK4a and functionally
impair the protein, although they do so to different degrees. Only one of the
mutations affects the sequence of ARF, causing an apparently innocuous change
near its carboxy terminus. Unlike normal human fibroblasts, Q34 cells are not
permanently arrested by Ras or its downstream effectors Ets1 and Ets2. Moreover, 
ectopic Ras enables the cells to grow as anchorage-independent colonies, and in
relatively young Q34 cells anchorage independence can be achieved without
addition of telomerase or perturbation of the p53 pathway. Whereas ARF plays the 
principal role in Ras-induced arrest of mouse fibroblasts, our data imply that
INK4a assumes this role in human fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC134058
PMID: 12417717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. EMBO Rep. 2002 Nov;3(11):1075-81. Epub 2002 Oct 22.

Expression of mutant Ets protein at the neuromuscular synapse causes alterations 
in morphology and gene expression.

de Kerchove D'Exaerde A(1), Cartaud J, Ravel-Chapuis A, Seroz T, Pasteau F, Angus
LM, Jasmin BJ, Changeux JP, Schaeffer L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 2182 'Récepteurs et
Cognition' Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France.

The localized transcription of several muscle genes at the motor endplate is
controlled by the Ets transcription factor GABP. To evaluate directly its
contribution to the formation of the neuromuscular junction, we generated
transgenic mice expressing a general Ets dominant-negative mutant specifically in
skeletal muscle. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that the expression of
genes containing an Ets-binding site was severely affected in the mutant mice.
Conversely, the expression of other synaptic genes, including MuSK and Rapsyn,
was unchanged. In these animals, muscles expressing the mutant transcription
factor developed normally, but examination of the post-synaptic morphology
revealed marked alterations of both the primary gutters and secondary folds of
the neuromuscular junction. Our results demonstrate that Ets transcription
factors are crucial for the normal formation of the neuromuscular junction. They 
further show that Ets-independent mechanisms control the synaptic expression of a
distinct set of synaptic genes.

PMCID: PMC1307595
PMID: 12393756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Immunol. 2002 Nov 1;169(9):4873-81.

The role of the Ets2 transcription factor in the proliferation, maturation, and
survival of mouse thymocytes.

Zaldumbide A(1), Carlotti F, Pognonec P, Boulukos KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signaling, Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, Center de
Biochimie, Université de Nice, Parc Valrose, France.

In this study, we investigated the effects of Ets2 expression on the
proliferation, maturation, and survival of thymocytes by establishing transgenic 
mice that specifically express Ets2 or a dominant negative form of Ets2,
Deltaets2, in the thymus. We show that, in young animals, there are fewer T cells
in Deltaets2 transgenic thymi and that the maturation of these T cells is
affected at the CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative to CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive
transition compared with wild-type littermate mice. Partial recovery in the
number of thymocytes and full T cell maturation are restored with increasing age 
of Deltaets2 transgenic animals. However, thymocytes from adult Deltaets2
transgenic mice cultured ex vivo are more sensitive to cell death and to
glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis than are T cells from control littermate mice.
We also show that T cells from adult ets2 transgenic mice proliferate faster than
their wild-type littermates. The proliferation and survival of these T cells are 
clearly affected upon apoptotic signals: glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis induces
T cells from ets2 transgenic mice to continue to proliferate in vivo and to
survive better ex vivo than T cells from control littermates. It has been shown
that c-Myc expression is required for thymic proliferation and improves thymocyte
survival of dexamethasone-treated animals. We show that the expression of c-Myc, 
an Ets2 target, is elevated in T cells freshly isolated from thymi of ets2
transgenic mice pretreated with dexamethasone. Together, these results show that 
Ets2 plays a role in the proliferation and survival of thymocytes, implicating a 
Myc-dependent pathway.

PMID: 12391198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Curr Drug Targets. 2002 Oct;3(5):359-67.

ETS proteins and MMPs: partners in invasion and metastasis.

Singh S(1), Barrett J, Sakata K, Tozer RG, Singh G.

Author information: 
(1)Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre, Ontario, Canada.

Binding sites for the ETS domain family of transcription factors are found in the
promoters of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family of matrix degrading
enzymes. Evidence is accumulating that both these groups of molecules are
important in the process of angiogenesis in addition to matrix degradation.
Furthermore, they are both expressed in tumor tissue as well as in the normal
surrounding stroma. These factors along with various sites at which they may be
regulated collectively makes them attractive targets to consider for therapeutic 
intervention in the processes of invasion and metastasis.

PMID: 12182227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Anticancer Res. 2002 Jul-Aug;22(4):2385-9.

Linkage of elevated ets-2 expression to hepatocarcinogenesis.

Ito Y(1), Miyoshi E, Takeda T, Nagano H, Sakon M, Noda K, Tsujimoto M, Monden M, 
Matsuura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kuma Hospital, Kobe, Japan. ito01@kuma-h.or.jp

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that ets-2, a transcription factor, is
linked to carcinoma progression. In the present study, we investigated the
expression and clinical significance of ets-2 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and malignant transformation of the liver.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of ets-2 was immunohistochemically
investigated with 91 HCC, 46 noncancerous lesions, 8 atypical adenomatous
hyperplasias and 14 normal liver controls.
RESULTS: The ets-2 labeling index (LI) in normal liver was significantly lower
than in noncancerous lesion (p<0.0001). The LI in atypical adenomatous
hyperplasia tended to be higher than in noncancerous lesion (p=.0779). In HCC,
the LI was significantly lower (p<0.0001) than that in noncancerous lesion and
atypical adenomatous hyperplasia. In HCC, the ets-2 expression level was
significantly lower in cases with advanced stage (p=0.0085), large size
(p=0.0441), high proliferating activity (p<0.0001), poor differentiation
(p=0.0005), the presence of portal invasion (p=0.0009) and intrahepatic
metastasis (p=0.0236) and shorter disease-free survival (p=0.0372).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that ets-2 plays an important role
predominantly in malignant transformation of the liver.

PMID: 12174931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Anticancer Res. 2002 May-Jun;22(3):1581-4.

Expression of ets-1 and ets-2 in colonic neoplasms.

Ito Y(1), Takeda T, Okada M, Matsuura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Osaka Seamen's Insurance Hospital, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Investigation of transcription regulators in carcinoma can contribute
greatly to clarifying the biological character of the carcinoma. In this study,
we examined the expression of ets-1 and ets-2, prominent transcription regulators
belonging to the ets family, in various colonic tissues.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the expression of ets-1 and ets-2 in
normal colon, hyperplastic polyps, adenomas, carcinoma-in-adenoma and colonic
adenocarcinomas by means of immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Expression of ets-1 and ets-2 was not observed in normal colon and
hyperplastic polyp. The ets-1 labeling index significantly increased with the
successive events of colonic carcinogenesis. A similar tendency was observed for 
ets-2 expression in colonic neoplasms. In adenocarcinoma, ets-1 and ets-2
expression was directly linked to lymph node metastasis.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that ets-1 and ets-2 may act as transcription
regulators of the genes related to colonic carcinogenesis and the progression of 
colonic adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 12168840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mech Dev. 2002 Aug;116(1-2):165-8.

Ets2 is expressed during morphogenesis of the somite and limb in the mouse
embryo.

Ristevski S(1), Tam PP, Hertzog PJ, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168,
Australia. sika.ristevski@med.monash.edu.au

Ets2 is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. In order to address 
the developmental function of Ets2, we have examined its expression pattern in
E8.5 to E13.5 embryos using RNA whole-mount in situ hybridization. In the
paraxial mesoderm, Ets2 is expressed uniformly in the presomitic mesoderm and
then restricted to the cells in the rostral portion of the segmenting and the
next two recently formed somites. In the developing limb, Ets2 expression in the 
mesenchyme reflects the progressive formation of the hand or foot plate and the
digital skeleton. In addition, Ets2 is expressed in the otic vesicle and its
derivatives, the dorsal (posterior) root ganglia, the neuroepithelium in the
dorsal part of the caudal neural tube and the inter-segmental vasculature.

PMID: 12128217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Jul 15;11(15):1687-96.

PTEN blocks insulin-mediated ETS-2 phosphorylation through MAP kinase,
independently of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway.

Weng LP(1), Brown JL, Baker KM, Ostrowski MC, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cancer Genetics Program and Human Cancer Genetics Program, Division
of Human Cancer Genetics, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and
Medical Genetics, and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Aug 1;12(15):1943.

The tumor suppressor PTEN possesses lipid and protein phosphatase activities. It 
has been well established that the lipid phosphatase activity is essential for
its tumor-suppressive function via the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt
pathways. The precise role of the protein phosphatase activity is still unclear. 
In the current study, we demonstrate that overexpression of wild-type PTEN in the
MCF-7 breast cancer line results in phosphatase activity-dependent decreases in
the phosphorylation of ETS-2, which is a transcription factor whose DNA-binding
ability is controlled by phosphorylation. Exposure of MCF-7 cells to insulin,
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) or epidermal growth factor (EGF) can lead to
the phosphorylation of ETS-2, Akt and ERK1/2. The MEK inhibitor PD590089
abrogates insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of ETS-2. In contrast, the PI3K
inhibitor LY492002 has no effect on insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of ETS-2, 
despite the fact that it diminishes insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt.
Interestingly, overexpression of PTEN in MCF-7 leads to blockade of
insulin-stimulated, but not EGF-stimulated, phosphorylation of ERK, accompanied
by dramatic decreases in ETS-2 phosphorylation. We further show that the
relationship of PTEN and ETS-2 has functional significance by demonstrating that 
PTEN abrogates activation of the uPA Ras-responsive enhancer, a target of ETS-2
action, in a phosphatase-dependent manner, irrespective of the presence or
absence of insulin. Our observations, therefore, suggest that PTEN blocks
insulin-stimulated ETS-2 phosphorylation through inhibition of the ERK members of
the MAP kinase family independently of PI3K, and that the PTEN effect on the
phosphorylation status of ETS-2 may be mediated through PTEN's protein
phosphatase activity.

PMID: 12095911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. In Vivo. 2001 Nov-Dec;15(6):489-94.

In vivo modulation of ETS genes induced by electromagnetic fields.

Mucci N(1), Ianni A, Ursini CL, Arzani D, Bhat NK, Navarra P, Romano-Spica V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Medicine, I.S.P.E.S.L., Rome, Italy.

We have previously shown that electromagnetic field (EMF) exposure induces ETS1
oncogene overexpression in different cell lines. In order to investigate in vivo 
EMF effects, BALB/c mice were exposed at different times to 50 MHz radiation,
modulated (80%) at 16 Hz. The exposed and control animals were sacrificed and the
spleen excised for rt-pcr and western blot analysis. We observed an increase in
ETS1 mRNA and protein expression, but a decrease in ETS2 protein levels.
Preliminary results from this experimental model show in vivo evidence of the
effect of EMF on ETS oncogene expression.

PMID: 11887334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Exp Cell Res. 2002 Feb 15;273(2):127-37.

Identification of a candidate tumor-suppressor gene specifically activated during
Ras-induced senescence.

Barradas M(1), Gonos ES, Zebedee Z, Kolettas E, Petropoulou C, Delgado MD, León
J, Hara E, Serrano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Oncology, Spanish National Center of
Biotechnology (CSIC), Campus de Cantoblanco, Madrid E-28049, Spain.

Normal cells display protective responses against oncogenes. Notably, oncogenic
Ras triggers an irreversible proliferation arrest that is reminiscent of
replicative senescence and that is considered a relevant tumor-suppressor
mechanism. Here, we have used microarrayed filters to identify genes specifically
upregulated in Ras-senescent human fibroblasts. Among the initial set of genes
selected from the microarrays, we found the cell-cycle inhibitor p21(Cip1/Waf1), 
thus validating the potency of the screening to identify markers and mediators of
Ras-senescence. A group of six genes, formed by those more highly upregulated
during Ras-senescence, was analyzed in further detail to evaluate their
specificity. In particular, we examined their expression in cells overexpressing 
Ras but rendered resistant to Ras-senescence by the viral oncoprotein E1a; also, 
we have studied their expression during replicative senescence, organismal aging,
H(2)O(2)-induced senescence, and DNA damage. In this manner, we have identified a
novel gene, RIS1 (for Ras-induced senescence 1), which is not upregulated in
association to any of the above-mentioned processes, but exclusively during
Ras-senescence. Furthermore, RIS1 is also upregulated by the transcriptional
factor Ets2, which is a known mediator of Ras-induced senescence. Interestingly, 
RIS1 is located at chromosomal position 3p21.3 and, more specifically, it is
included in a short segment of just 1 Mb previously defined by other
investigators for its tumor-suppressor activity. In summary, we report the
identification of a novel gene, RIS1, as a highly specific marker of Ras-induced 
senescence and a candidate tumor-suppressor gene.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11822868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2001;(61):335-46.

Beta-amyloid precursor protein, ETS-2 and collagen alpha 1 (VI) chain precursor, 
encoded on chromosome 21, are not overexpressed in fetal Down syndrome: further
evidence against gene dosage effect.

Engidawork E(1), Baiic N, Fountoulakis M, Dierssen M, Greber-Platzer S, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, AKH, University of Vienna, Austria.

Down syndrome (DS) is the most common human chromosomal abnormality caused by an 
extra copy of chromosome 21 and characterized clinically by somatic anomalies,
mental retardation and precocious dementia. The phenotype of DS is thought to
result from overexpression of a gene or genes located on the triplicated
chromosome or chromosome region. Reports that challenge this notion, however,
have been published. To add to this body of evidence, the expression of
beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), ETS-2 and collagen alpha1 (VI) chain
precursor, encoded on chromosome 21, was investigated in fetal brain by western
blot and two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE). Western blot detected APP and
ETS-2 that migrated at approximately 75 and 50kDa, respectively. Subsequent
densitometric analysis of APP and ETS-2 immunoreactivity did not produce any
significant change between controls and DS. Since the metabolic fate of APP
determines the propensity of amyloid beta production, the expression of the
secreted forms of APP (sAPP) had been examined. Neither the expression of
sAPPalpha nor sAPPbeta showed any detectable changes among the two groups.
Collagen alpha1 (VI) chain precursor, a protein resolved as a single spot on 2D
gel was identified by matrix associated laser desorption ionization mass
spectroscopy. Quantitative analysis of this spot using the 2D Image Master
software revealed a significant decrease in fetal DS (P < 0.01) compared to
controls. Linear regression analysis did not show any correlation between protein
levels and age. The current data suggest that overexpression per se can not fully
explain the DS phenotype.

PMID: 11771756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Life Sci. 2001 Oct 19;69(22):2663-74.

Neuregulin-1 regulates expression of the Ets-2 transcription factor.

Sapru MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Kinesiology, University of
Illinois at Chicago, 60608, USA. msapru@uic.edu

At the neuromuscular synapse, synapse-specific gene expression is regulated by
neuregulin, a motor neuron-derived factor, and involves participation of the
muscle Ets transcription factors. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating
expression and activity of the Ets transcription factors at the neuromuscular
synapse are largely unknown. This study provides evidence that neuregulin induces
expression of the skeletal muscle Ets-2 transcription factor. Recombinant
neuregulin (neuregulin-1) induced RNA and protein expression of the Ets-2
transcription factor in L6 myotube cultures. Gene transfer experiments indicated 
that this neuregulin-elicited increase in Ets-2 expression resulted from enhanced
transcription of the Ets-2 gene. Interestingly, electrophoretic mobility shift
assays revealed binding activity of the Ets-2 protein to the previously
identified neuregulin-response element of the synapse-specific nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor epsilon-subunit gene. Taken together, these results
identify skeletal muscle Ets-2 transcription factor as a novel target for
neuregulin-dependent gene regulation, and suggest a role for this regulation in
contributing to motor neuron-dependent control on synapse-specific gene
expression at the neuromuscular synapse.

PMID: 11712669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;21(23):7883-91.

Repression of Ets-2-induced transactivation of the tau interferon promoter by
Oct-4.

Ezashi T(1), Ghosh D, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences and Biochemistry, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

Oct-4 is a POU family transcription factor associated with potentially totipotent
cells. Genes expressed in the trophectoderm but not in embryos prior to
blastocyst formation may be targets for silencing by Oct-4. Here, we have tested 
this hypothesis with the tau interferon genes (IFNT genes), which are expressed
exclusively in the trophectoderm of bovine embryos. IFNT promoters contain an
Ets-2 enhancer, located at -79 to -70, and are up-regulated about 20-fold by the 
overexpression of Ets-2 in human JAr choriocarcinoma cells, which are permissive 
for IFNT expression. This enhancement was reversed in a dose-dependent manner by 
coexpression of Oct-4 but not either Oct-1 or Oct-2. When cells were transfected 
with truncated bovine IFNT promoters designed to eliminate potential octamer
sites sequentially, luciferase reporter expression from each construct was still 
silenced by Oct-4. Full repression required both the N-terminal and POU domains
of Oct-4, but neither domain used alone was an effective silencer. Oct-4 and
Ets-2 formed a complex in vitro in the absence of DNA through binding of the POU 
domain of Oct-4 to a site located between the "pointed" and DNA binding domains
of Ets-2. The two transcription factors were also coimmunoprecipitated after
being expressed together in JAr cells. Oct-4, therefore, silences IFNT promoters 
by quenching Ets-2 transactivation. The POU domain most probably binds to Ets-2
directly, while the N-terminal domain inhibits transcription. These findings
provide further evidence that the developmental switch to the trophectoderm is
accompanied by the loss of Oct-4 silencing of key genes.

PMCID: PMC99954
PMID: 11689681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):46661-70.

Transforming growth factor beta regulates parathyroid hormone-related protein
expression in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells through a novel Smad/Ets synergism.

Lindemann RK(1), Ballschmieter P, Nordheim A, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Abteilung Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, 
Auf der Morgenstelle 15, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

The majority of breast cancers metastasizing to bone secrete parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP). PTHrP induces local osteolysis that leads to
activation of bone matrix-borne transforming growth factor beta (TGF beta). In
turn, TGF beta stimulates PTHrP expression and, thereby, accelerates bone
destruction. We studied the mechanism by which TGF beta activates PTHrP in
invasive MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. We demonstrate that TGF beta 1
up-regulates specifically the level of PTHrP P3 promoter-derived RNA in an
actinomycin D-sensitive fashion. Transient transfection studies revealed that TGF
beta 1 and its effector Smad3 are able to activate the P3 promoter. This effect
depended upon an AGAC box and a previously described Ets binding site. Addition
of Ets1 greatly enhanced the Smad3/TGF beta-mediated activation. Ets2 had also
some effect, whereas other Ets proteins, Elf-1, Ese-1, and Erf-1, failed to
cooperate with Smad3. In comparison, Ets1 did not increase Smad3/TGF beta-induced
stimulation of the TGF beta-responsive plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) 
promoter. Smad3 and Smad4 were able to specifically interact with the PTHrP
P3-AGAC box and to bind to the P3 promoter together with Ets1. Inhibition of
endogenous Ets1 expression by calphostin C abrogated TGF beta-induced
up-regulation of the P3 transcript, whereas it did not affect the TGF beta effect
on PAI expression. In TGF beta receptor II- and Ets1-deficient, noninvasive MCF-7
breast cancer cells, TGF beta 1 neither influenced endogenous PTHrP expression
nor stimulated the PTHrP P3 promoter. These data suggest that TGF beta activates 
PTHrP expression by specifically up-regulating transcription from the PTHrP P3
promoter through a novel Smad3/Ets1 synergism.

PMID: 11590145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Oct 5;287(4):1003-8.

Ets-2 is induced by oxidative stress and sensitizes cells to H(2)O(2)-induced
apoptosis: implications for Down's syndrome.

Sanij E(1), Hatzistavrou T, Hertzog P, Kola I, Wolvetang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, 27-31 Wright Street, Clayton,
Victoria 3168, Australia.

An elevated production of hydrogen peroxide mediates the increased rate of
apoptosis of cells derived from individuals with Down's syndrome. The mechanism
via which this occurs is unknown. Here we show that Ets-2, a transcription factor
located on human chromosome 21 and already overexpressed in multiple tissues in
Down syndrome (DS, trisomy 21), is induced by low concentrations of hydrogen
peroxide. Moreover, cells with an imbalance in the antioxidant enzymes
SOD-1/GPX-1, such as occurs in DS through the overexpression of the chromosome 21
gene SOD-1, also results in increased Ets-2 expression. The increase in Ets-2
expression is dependent on mRNA transcription. Importantly, we further
demonstrate that 3T3 fibroblasts that overexpress Ets-2 are sensitized to
hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis. These data implicate Ets-2 in the regulation
of oxidant-induced apoptosis and provide a possible rationale for both the (5- to
7-) fold increase in Ets-2 protein level in DS tissues, above the expected gene
dosage of 1.5-fold, and the elevated rate of apoptosis in DS cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11573964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Oct;60(2):137-46.

Gene for porcine pregnancy-associated glycoprotein 2 (poPAG2): its structural
organization and analysis of its promoter.

Szafranska B(1), Miura R, Ghosh D, Ezashi T, Xie S, Roberts RM, Green JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia,
Missouri 65211, USA.

The pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (PAG) are abundant secretory products of
the placental trophectoderm of ungulate species. They are structurally related to
pepsin, having the capability to bind peptides. However, many cannot function as 
enzymes due to amino acid substitutions in and around the catalytic site. Here,
we demonstrate that pigs, like cattle and sheep, but unlike equids, have multiple
PAG genes. One of the transcribed porcine PAG (poPAG) genes, the one for poPAG2, 
was cloned. It had a nine-exon organization similar to that of other mammalian
aspartic proteinase genes with an atypical TATA sequence. A total of 1.2 kbp
upstream from exon 1 was sequenced. This region shared identity (> 65%) with the 
promoter regions of the bovine (bo) PAG1, boPAG2 and equine (eq) PAG genes, but
not with other aspartyl proteinase genes, including that of pepsinogen A. Nor
were there clear similarities to the promoters of other genes with
trophoblast-specific expression. Of the different poPAG2 promoter constructs
tested in transfection experiments in two human (JAr and JEG3) and one rat (Rcho)
choriocarcinoma cell lines, only the shortest (-149 bp) was required to provide
full expression of a luciferase reporter. Although this short promoter was not
active in Cos-1 and L-929 cells, it was active in CHO cells, a transformed
non-trophoblast hamster ovarian cell line. Co-transfection of Ets2 elevated the
activity of this short promoter approximately six-fold in JAr cells, but,
disruption of the two putative Ets sites did not alter the ability of Ets2 to
transactivate the promoter. In the non-trophoblast cell lines, Ets2 failed to
elicit any response. Ets2 responsiveness may be a common feature of most or all
trophoblast-expressed genes, although in the case of poPAG2, the effect may be
indirect.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11553911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Oncogene. 2001 Apr 5;20(15):1832-8.

Cdk10, a Cdc2-related kinase, associates with the Ets2 transcription factor and
modulates its transactivation activity.

Kasten M(1), Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, PA 19107, USA.

Cdk10 is a Cdc2-related kinase that may play a role in regulating the G2/M phase 
of the cell cycle. However little is known about the proteins that interact with 
this putative kinase and contribute to its function in the cell. We report in
this study that Cdk10 interacts with the N-terminus of the Ets2 transcription
factor, which contains the highly conserved Pointed domain and transactivation
domain. The Pointed domain has been implicated in protein-protein interactions
and we find that Ets2 requires an intact Pointed domain to bind Cdk10. The
Pointed domain of Ets1 is highly similar to Ets2, however Cdk10 does not
recognize Ets1 in a two-hybrid assay thereby demonstrating significant binding
specificity on the part of Cdk10. We find that Cdk10 binds full length Ets2 in
vitro and in vivo and inhibits Ets2 transactivation in mammalian cells.

PMID: 11313931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Genet Med. 2001 Mar-Apr;3(2):91-101.

Down syndrome congenital heart disease: a narrowed region and a candidate gene.

Barlow GM(1), Chen XN, Shi ZY, Lyons GE, Kurnit DM, Celle L, Spinner NB, Zackai
E, Pettenati MJ, Van Riper AJ, Vekemans MJ, Mjaatvedt CH, Korenberg JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and UCLA, Los
Angeles, California, USA.

PURPOSE: Down syndrome (DS) is a major cause of congenital heart disease (CHD)
and the most frequent known cause of atrioventricular septal defects (AVSDs).
Molecular studies of rare individuals with CHD and partial duplications of
chromosome 21 established a candidate region that included D21S55 through the
telomere. We now report human molecular and cardiac data that narrow the DS-CHD
region, excluding two candidate regions, and propose DSCAM (Down syndrome cell
adhesion molecule) as a candidate gene.
METHODS: A panel of 19 individuals with partial trisomy 21 was evaluated using
quantitative Southern blot dosage analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) with subsets of 32 BACs spanning the region defined by D21S16 (21q11.2)
through the telomere. These BACs span the molecular markers D21S55, ERG, ETS2,
MX1/2, collagen XVIII and collagen VI A1/A2. Fourteen individuals are duplicated 
for the candidate region, of whom eight (57%) have the characteristic spectrum of
DS-CHD.
RESULTS: Combining the results from these eight individuals suggests the
candidate region for DS-CHD is demarcated by D21S3 (defined by ventricular septal
defect), through PFKL (defined by tetralogy of Fallot).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the presence of three copies of gene(s) from
the region is sufficient for the production of subsets of DS-CHD. This region
does not include genes located near D21S55, previously proposed as a "DS critical
region," or the genes encoding collagens VI and XVIII. Of the potential gene
candidates in the narrowed DS-CHD region, DSCAM is notable in that it encodes a
cell adhesion molecule, spans more than 840 kb of the candidate region, and is
expressed in the heart during cardiac development. Given these properties, we
propose DSCAM as a candidate for DS-CHD.

PMID: 11280955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 1;61(5):2267-75.

Induction of ETS-1 and ETS-2 transcription factors is required for thyroid cell
transformation.

de Nigris F(1), Mega T, Berger N, Barone MV, Santoro M, Viglietto G, Verde P,
Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche c/o Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare,
Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy.

The proteins of the Ets family are transcription factors involved in signal
transduction, cell cycle progression, and differentiation. In this study, we
report that thyroid cell neoplastic transformation is associated with a dramatic 
increase in ETS transcriptional activity, which is dependent on the accumulation 
of Ets-1, Ets-2, and other Ets-related proteins. Inhibition of ETS
transactivation activity by the Ets-dominant negative construct (Ets-Z) induced
programmed cell death in human thyroid carcinoma cell lines but not in normal
thyroid cells. Apoptotic cell death induced by Ets-Z was dependent on the
reduction of c-MYC protein levels, because it was prevented by overexpression of 
c-myc. Taken together, these data indicate that the induction of Ets-1 and Ets-2 
transcription factors plays a pivotal role in thyroid cell neoplastic
transformation.

PMID: 11280797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 25;276(21):18007-17. Epub 2001 Feb 21.

Physical interaction and functional synergy between glucocorticoid receptor and
Ets2 proteins for transcription activation of the rat cytochrome P-450c27
promoter.

Mullick J(1), Anandatheerthavarada HK, Amuthan G, Bhagwat SV, Biswas G,
Camasamudram V, Bhat NK, Reddy SE, Rao V, Avadhani NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, Mari Lowe Center for Comparative Oncology,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

We demonstrate that dexamethasone-mediated transcription activation of the
cytochrome P-450c27 promoter involves a physical interaction and functional
synergy between glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and Ets2 factor. Ets2 protein
binding to a "weak" Ets-like site of the promoter is dependent on GR bound to the
adjacent cryptic glucocorticoid response element. Coimmunoprecipitation and
chemical cross-linking experiments show physical interaction between GR and Ets2 
proteins. Mutational analyses show synergistic effects of Ets2 and GR in
dexamethasone-mediated activation of the cytochrome P-450c27 promoter. The
DNA-binding domain of GR, lacking the transcription activation and ligand-binding
domains, was fully active in synergistic activation of the promoter with intact
Ets2. The DNA-binding domain of Ets2 lacking the transcription activation domain 
showed a dominant negative effect on the transcription activity. Finally, a
fusion protein consisting of the GR DNA-binding domain and the transcription
activation domain of Ets2 fully supported the transcription activity, suggesting 
a novel synergy between the two proteins, which does not require the
transactivation domain of GR. Our results also provide new insights on the role
of putative weak consensus Ets sites in transcription activation, possibly
through synergistic interaction with other gene-specific transcription
activators.

PMID: 11279115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 25;276(21):17800-7. Epub 2001 Feb 15.

Bcl-XL expression correlates with primary macrophage differentiation, activation 
of functional competence, and survival and results from synergistic
transcriptional activation by Ets2 and PU.1.

Sevilla L(1), Zaldumbide A, Carlotti F, Dayem MA, Pognonec P, Boulukos KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signalisation, Developmental Biology and Cancer, INSERM 470,
Centre de Biochimie, Université de Nice, Faculté des Sciences, 06108 Nice,
France.

Depriving primary bone marrow-derived macrophages of colony-stimulating factor-1 
(CSF-1) induces programmed cell death by apoptosis. We show that cell death is
accompanied by decreases in the expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-x(L) protein and
the Ets2 and PU.1 proteins of the Ets transcription factor family. Macrophages
require both priming and triggering signals independent of CSF-1 to kill
neoplastic cells or microorganisms, and this activation of macrophage competence 
is accompanied by increased expression of bcl-x(L), ets2, and PU.1. Furthermore, 
we show that only Ets2 and PU.1, but not Ets1, function in a synergistic manner
to transactivate the bcl-x promoter. The synergy observed between PU.1 and Ets2
is dependent on the transactivation domains of both proteins. Although other
transcription factors like Fos, c-Jun, Myc, STAT3, and STAT5a are implicated in
the activation of macrophage competence or in CSF-1 signaling, no synergy was
observed between Ets2 and these transcription factors on the bcl-x promoter. We
demonstrate that the exogenous expression of both Ets2 and PU.1 in macrophages
increases the number of viable cells upon CSF-1 depletion and that Ets2 and PU.1 
can functionally replace Bcl-x(L) in inhibiting Bax-induced apoptosis. Together, 
these results demonstrate that PU.1 and Ets2 dramatically increase bcl-x
activation, which is necessary for the cytocidal function and survival of
macrophages.

PMID: 11278399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;21(5):1540-51.

Grb2 and Shc adapter proteins play distinct roles in Neu (ErbB-2)-induced mammary
tumorigenesis: implications for human breast cancer.

Dankort D(1), Maslikowski B, Warner N, Kanno N, Kim H, Wang Z, Moran MF, Oshima
RG, Cardiff RD, Muller WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology,
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4K1.

Amplification of the Neu (ErbB-2 or HER-2) receptor tyrosine kinase occurs in 20 
to 30% of human mammary carcinomas, correlating with a poor clinical prognosis.
We have previously demonstrated that four (Y1144 Y1201, Y1227 and Y1253) of the
five known Neu autophosphorylation sites can independently mediate transforming
signals. The transforming potential of two of these mutants correlates with their
capacity to recruit Grb2 directly to Y1144 (YB) or indirectly through Shc to
Y1227 (YD). Here, we demonstrate that these transformation-competent neu mutants 
activate extracellular signal-regulated kinases and stimulate Ets-2-dependent
transcription. Although the transforming potential of three of these mutants (YB,
YD, and YE) was susceptible to inhibition by Rap1A, a genetic antagonist of Ras, 
the transforming potential of YC was resistant to inhibition by Rap1A. To further
address the significance of these ErbB-2-coupled signaling molecules in induction
of mammary cancers, transgenic mice expressing mutant Neu receptors lacking the
known autophosphorylation sites (NYPD) or those coupled directly to either Grb2
(YB) or Shc (YD) adapter molecules were derived. In contrast to the NYPD strains,
which developed focal mammary tumors after a long latency period with low
penetrance, all female mice derived from YB and YD strains rapidly developed
mammary tumors. Although female mice from several independent YB or YD lines
developed mammary tumors, the YB strains developed lung metastases at
substantially higher rates than the YD strains. These observations argue that
Grb2 and Shc play important and distinct roles in ErbB-2/Neu-induced mammary
tumorigenesis and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC86700
PMID: 11238891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nature. 2001 Feb 22;409(6823):1067-70.

Opposing effects of Ets and Id proteins on p16INK4a expression during cellular
senescence.

Ohtani N(1), Zebedee Z, Huot TJ, Stinson JA, Sugimoto M, Ohashi Y, Sharrocks AD, 
Peters G, Hara E.

Author information: 
(1)Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie Hospital NHS Trust,
Manchester, UK.

The p16INK4a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor is implicated in replicative
senescence, the state of permanent growth arrest provoked by cumulative cell
divisions or as a response to constitutive Ras-Raf-MEK signalling in somatic
cells. Some contribution to senescence presumably underlies the importance of
p16INK4a as a tumour suppressor but the mechanisms regulating its expression in
these different contexts remain unknown. Here we demonstrate a role for the Ets1 
and Ets2 transcription factors based on their ability to activate the p16INK4a
promoter through an ETS-binding site and their patterns of expression during the 
lifespan of human diploid fibroblasts. The induction of p16INK4a by Ets2, which
is abundant in young human diploid fibroblasts, is potentiated by signalling
through the Ras-Raf-MEK kinase cascade and inhibited by a direct interaction with
the helix-loop-helix protein Id1 (ref. 11). In senescent cells, where the Ets2
levels and MEK signalling decline, the marked increase in p16INK4a expression is 
consistent with the reciprocal reduction of Id1 and accumulation of Ets1.

PMID: 11234019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6524-32.

Proteins of the ETS family with transcriptional repressor activity.

Mavrothalassitis G(1), Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Crete and IMBB-FORTH, Voutes, Heraklion,
Crete 714-09, Greece.

ETS proteins form one of the largest families of signal-dependent transcriptional
regulators, mediating cellular proliferation, differentiation and tumorigenesis. 
Most of the known ETS proteins have been shown to activate transcription.
However, four ETS proteins (YAN, ERF, NET and TEL) can act as transcriptional
repressors. In three cases (ERF, NET and TEL) distinct repression domains have
been identified and there are indications that NET and TEL may mediate
transcription via Histone Deacetylase recruitment. All four proteins appear to be
regulated by MAPKs, though for YAN and ERF this regulation seems to be restricted
to ERKs. YAN, ERF and TEL have been implicated in cellular proliferation although
there are indications suggesting a possible involvement of YAN and TEL in
differentiation as well. Other ETS-domain proteins have been shown to repress
transcription in a context specific manner, and there are suggestions that the
ETS DNA-binding domain may act as a transcriptional repressor. Transcriptional
repression by ETS domain proteins adds an other level in the orchestrated
regulation by this diverse family of transcription factors that often recognize
similar if not identical binding sites on DNA and are believed to regulate
critical genes in a variety of biological processes. Definitive assessment of the
importance of this novel regulatory level will require the identification of ETS 
proteins target genes and the further analysis of transcriptional control and
biological function of these proteins in defined pathways.

PMID: 11175368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6503-13.

Signal transduction and the Ets family of transcription factors.

Yordy JS(1), Muise-Helmericks RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29403, USA.

Cellular responses to environmental stimuli are controlled by a series of
signaling cascades that transduce extracellular signals from ligand-activated
cell surface receptors to the nucleus. Although most pathways were initially
thought to be linear, it has become apparent that there is a dynamic interplay
between signaling pathways that result in the complex pattern of cell-type
specific responses required for proliferation, differentiation and survival. One 
group of nuclear effectors of these signaling pathways are the Ets family of
transcription factors, directing cytoplasmic signals to the control of gene
expression. This family is defined by a highly conserved DNA binding domain that 
binds the core consensus sequence GGAA/T. Signaling pathways such as the MAP
kinases, Erk1 and 2, p38 and JNK, the PI3 kinases and Ca2+-specific signals
activated by growth factors or cellular stresses, converge on the Ets family of
factors, controlling their activity, protein partnerships and specification of
downstream target genes. Interestingly, Ets family members can act as both
upstream and downstream effectors of signaling pathways. As downstream effectors 
their activities are directly controlled by specific phosphorylations, resulting 
in their ability to activate or repress specific target genes. As upstream
effectors they are responsible for the spacial and temporal expression or
numerous growth factor receptors. This review provides a brief survey of what is 
known to date about how this family of transcription factors is regulated by
cellular signaling with a special focus on Ras responsive elements (RREs), the
MAP kinases (Erks, p38 and JNK) and Ca2+-specific pathways and includes a
description of the multiple roles of Ets family members in the lymphoid system.
Finally, we will discuss other potential mechanisms and pathways involved in the 
regulation of this important family of transcription factors.

PMID: 11175366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6464-71.

Ets factors and regulation of the extracellular matrix.

Trojanowska M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
96 Jonathan Lucas Street, Charleston South Carolina, SC 29401, USA.

Ets factors are critical mediators of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling. As 
the spectrum of Ets-regulated target genes widens, so does their role in various 
pathological and physiological processes. Regulation of matrix degrading
proteases by Ets factors in tumor invasion and metastasis is well established.
Emerging evidence suggests that they may also play a role in the pathology of
autoimmune diseases. Newly characterized Ets target genes such as tenascin-C and 
collagen type I suggest their role in diseases characterized by aberrant collagen
deposition (fibrosis). Ets function is also critical in bone and cartilage
development. There is increasing knowledge of the complex regulatory mechanisms
involved in transcription of Ets target genes. Ets factors may function as
activators or as repressors via association with specific cofactors depending on 
the promoter context. Signaling pathways can modulate the activation status of
Ets factors and their transcriptional partners. Precise understanding of the role
of Ets factors in the complex cellular network governing the expression of ECM
proteins and the enzymes that degrade them will be a focus of future studies.

PMID: 11175362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6455-63.

Ets transcription factors and targets in osteogenesis.

Raouf A(1), Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, MRC group in Periodontal
Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Bone formation in vivo is a complex phenomenon whereby recruitment and
replication of mesenchymal precursors of osteoblasts, differentiation into
preosteoblasts, osteoblasts, and mature osteoblasts ultimately result in the
accumulation and mineralization of the extracellular matrix. MC3T3-E1, a clonal
osteoblastic cell line, was derived from mouse calvaria and undergoes an ordered 
and time dependent developmental sequence leading to formation of multilayered
bone nodules over a 30 - 35 day period. This developmental pattern is
characterized by the replication of preosteoblasts followed by growth arrest and 
expression of mature osteoblastic characteristics such as matrix maturation and
eventual formation of multilayered nodules with a mineralized extracellular
matrix. We have found that Ets1 is expressed in proliferating preosteoblastic
cells whereas Ets2 is expressed by differentiating and mature osteoblasts. In
addition, the expression of Ets1 can be induced in MC3T3-E1 and fetal rat
calvaria cells by retinoic acid (RA) which is known to exert profound effects on 
skeletal growth and development, bone turnover, and induce specific cellular
responses in bone cells. Thus the multiple functions of RA in bone cells are
likely to be mediated in part by Ets1. Also, Ets2 transgenic mice develop
multiple neurocranial, viserocranial, and cervical skeletal abnormalities.
Significantly, these abnormalities are similar to the skeletal anomalies found in
trisomy-16 mice and in humans with Down's syndrome, wherein the dosage of Ets2 is
known to be increased. These results indicate that Ets2 has an important role in 
skeletal development and that Ets2 overexpression in transgenics is responsible
for the genesis of the same type of skeletal abnormalities that are seen in
Down's syndrome. Thus the genetic programs regulated by Ets1 and Ets2 may
significantly affect the development and differentiation of osteoblasts, and in
fact, Ets1 has been shown to interact with the 'quintessential' osteoblast
transcription factor CbfA1. This review will examine in detail the role and
possible targets of Ets1 and Ets2 in osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation.

PMID: 11175361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6443-54.

Mouse models in the study of the Ets family of transcription factors.

Bartel FO(1), Higuchi T, Spyropoulos DD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29425, USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors is one of a growing number of master
regulators of development. This family was originally defined by the presence of 
a conserved DNA binding domain, the Ets domain. To date, nearly 30 members of
this family have been identified and implicated in a wide range of physiological 
and pathological processes. Despite the likely importance of Ets-family members, 
each of their precise roles has not been delineated. Herein, we describe the
elucidation of essential functions of a few of these family members in vivo using
knockout mouse models. Of the knockouts generated to date, the majority shows
important functions in hematopoiesis, ranging from PU.1, a principle regulator of
myelo-lymphopoiesis, to Spi-B which regulates the proper function of terminally
differentiated cells. Ets1 was shown to be of intermediate importance as a
regulator of pan-lymphoid development. Other Ets family members such as Fli1 and 
TEL1 display distinct and/or overlapping functions in vasculo/angiogenesis,
hemostasis and hematopoiesis. The remaining knockouts generated, Ets2 and Er81,
show non-hematopoietic defects related to extraembryonic development and
neurogenesis, respectively. The pioneering group of knockout models described
reveals only the most distinct functions of each of these Ets family members. A
better understanding of the roles and hierarchies of Ets family members in
cellular differentiation will come with the generation of new null alleles in
previously untargeted family members, more mutant alleles in members already
disrupted, double knockouts, ES cell differentiation and chimera rescue
experiments, and tissue-specific inducible knockouts.

PMID: 11175360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Oncogene. 2000 Nov 16;19(48):5507-16.

Altered Ets transcription factor activity in prostate tumor cells inhibits
anchorage-independent growth, survival, and invasiveness.

Foos G(1), Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Center, The Burnham Institute, California 92037, USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors are important downstream targets in
cellular transformation, as altering Ets activity has been found to reverse the
transformed phenotype of Ras transformed mouse fibroblasts and of several human
tumor cell lines. To determine whether Ets factors are important targets in the
largely uncharacterized aberrant signaling in prostate cancer, we have altered
Ets activity in the prostate tumor cell line PPC-1, by stable expression of
either full-length Ets2, or a dominant inhibitor of Ets activity, the Ets2 DNA
binding domain (Ets2DBD). Analysis of multiple independent clonal cell lines
revealed that expression of either Ets2 or the Ets2DBD inhibited the
anchorage-independent growth of PPC-1 cells up to 20-fold. In contrast to our
previous findings with Ras-transformed NIH3T3 cells, PPC-1 cell lines expressing 
either Ets2 or the EtsDBD exhibited slower attached cell growth, increased
Ets-dependent gene expression, and up to a 10-fold increase in apoptotic cell
death. The p21cip gene was identified as a potential target of altered Ets
signaling. Interestingly, the two distinct Ets2 constructs had strikingly
different effects on in vitro invasiveness. Expression of the Ets2DBD almost
completely blocked PPC-1 cell invasion through Matrigel, whereas over-expression 
of full-length Ets2 did not inhibit invasion. Overall, these results demonstrate 
that the balance of Ets factor activity can regulate multiple aspects of the
transformed phenotype of PPC-1 prostate tumor cells, including
anchorage-independent growth, survival, and invasiveness.

PMID: 11114728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(21):8026-34.

ets-2 is a target for an akt (Protein kinase B)/jun N-terminal kinase signaling
pathway in macrophages of motheaten-viable mutant mice.

Smith JL(1), Schaffner AE, Hofmeister JK, Hartman M, Wei G, Forsthoefel D, Hume
DA, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and the Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The transcription factor ets-2 was phosphorylated at residue threonine 72 in a
colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1)- and mitogen-activated protein
kinase-independent manner in macrophages isolated from motheaten-viable (me-v)
mice. The CSF-1 and ets-2 target genes coding for Bcl-x, urokinase plasminogen
activator, and scavenger receptor were also expressed at high levels independent 
of CSF-1 addition to me-v cells. Akt (protein kinase B) was constitutively active
in me-v macrophages, and an Akt immunoprecipitate catalyzed phosphorylation of
ets-2 at threonine 72. The p54 isoform of c-jun N-terminal
kinase-stress-activated kinase (JNK- SAPK) coimmunoprecipitated with Akt from
me-v macrophages, and treatment of me-v cells with the specific
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 decreased cell survival, Akt and
JNK kinase activities, ets-2 phosphorylation, and Bcl-x mRNA expression.
Therefore, ets-2 is a target for phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt-JNK action,
and the JNK p54 isoform is an ets-2 kinase in macrophages. Constitutive ets-2
activity may contribute to the pathology of me-v mice by increasing expression of
genes like the Bcl-x gene that promote macrophage survival.

PMCID: PMC86413
PMID: 11027273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Biol Cell. 2000 Sep;11(9):2915-32.

A role for both Ets and C/EBP transcription factors and mRNA stabilization in the
MAPK-dependent increase in p21 (Cip-1/WAF1/mda6) protein levels in primary
hepatocytes.

Park JS(1), Qiao L, Gilfor D, Yang MY, Hylemon PB, Benz C, Darlington G,
Firestone G, Fisher PB, Dent P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Radiation Oncology, Medical College of Virginia, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.

In primary hepatocytes and HepG2 hepatoma cells, prolonged activation of the
p42/44 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is associated with a
reduction in DNA synthesis, mediated by increased expression of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor protein p21 (Cip-1/WAF1/mda6) (p21). This study
was performed to evaluate the contribution of transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulation in this response. Prolonged activation of the
MAPK pathway in wild-type or p21 null hepatocytes caused a large decrease and
increase, respectively, in DNA synthesis. Prolonged activation of the MAPK
pathway in either wild-type or p21 antisense HepG2 cells also caused large
decreases and increases, respectively, in DNA synthesis. MAPK signaling increased
the phosphorylation of the transcription factors Ets2, C/EBPalpha, and C/EBPbeta,
and rapidly increased transcription from the p21 promoter via multiple Ets- and
C/EBP-elements within the enhancer region. Eight hours after MAPK activation,
loss of C/EBPbeta or Ets2 function significantly reduced MAPK-stimulated
transcription from the p21 promoter and abolished increased p21 protein
expression. At this time, MAPK signaling increased both p21 mRNA and p21 protein 
stabilities that were also demonstrated to be essential for a profound increase
in p21 protein levels. Thirty-six hours after MAPK activation, transcription from
the p21 promoter was still significantly reduced in cells without either
C/EBPbeta or Ets2 function; however, these cells were now capable of exhibiting a
partial increase in p21 protein expression. In contrast, loss of C/EBPalpha
function modestly reduced MAPK-stimulated transcription from the p21 promoter but
strongly inhibited the ability of prolonged MAPK activation to increase protein
levels of p21. This data suggested that prolonged enhancement of p21 protein
levels may be under posttranscriptional control. In agreement with this
hypothesis, prolonged MAPK signaling further increased p21 mRNA stability at 36
h, compared with the 8-h time point. Our data argue that MAPK signaling increased
p21 promoter activity via multiple transcription factors, which alone were
insufficient for a robust prolonged increase in p21 protein levels in primary
hepatocytes, and that to increase p21 protein levels also required enhanced
stabilization of p21 mRNA and p21 protein. Collectively, these data suggest that 
loss of transcription factor and mRNA/protein stabilization functions correlates 
with an inability of MAPK signaling to cause growth arrest versus proliferation
in primary hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC14965
PMID: 10982390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Cancer Gene Ther. 2000 Aug;7(8):1188-95.

Suppression of the Ewing's sarcoma phenotype by FLI1/ERF repressor hybrids.

Athanasiou M(1), LeGallic L, Watson DK, Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, Science Applications International
Corporation, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Fusion of the 5' half of the Ewing's sarcoma (ES) gene EWS with the DNA-binding
domain of several transcription factors has been detected in many human tumors.
The t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal translocation is specifically linked to ES and 
primitive neuroectodermal tumors and results, in the majority of cases, in the
fusion of the amino terminus of the EWS gene to the carboxyl-terminal DNA-binding
domain of the FLI1 gene. The chimeric protein has been shown to be oncogenic, a
potent transcriptional activator, and necessary for the maintenance of the
Ewing's phenotype, making it an attractive target for gene therapy. In this
study, we demonstrate that the ES transformed phenotype can be suppressed by
chimeric transcriptional repressors containing the DNA-binding domain of FLI1 and
the regulatory and repressor domain of ERF, a transcription suppressor and member
of the ets gene family. The hybrid repressor is expressed at levels comparable
with EWS/FLI1, does not affect EWS/FLI1 expression, and exhibits similar
DNA-binding specificity but suppresses transcriptional activity. The FLI1/ERF
repressor, like the wild-type ERF, is regulated by mitogen-activated protein
kinase-dependent subcellular localization. Our data suggest that transformation
by EWS/FLI1 may partially be due to activation of specific EWS/FLI1-regulated
genes involved in cell proliferation.

PMID: 10975680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 10;275(45):34938-45.

Regulation of transcription of the human presenilin-1 gene by ets transcription
factors and the p53 protooncogene.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience and Department of Molecular
Biology and Immunology, University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort
Worth, Texas 76107, USA. mpastorc@hsc.unt.edu

The expression of the human presenilin-1 cellular gene is suppressed by the p53
protooncogene. The rapid kinetic of the down-regulation has suggested that it may
result from a primary mechanism. We show here that p53 also suppresses the
transcription of a presenilin-1 promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter synthetic gene in transient infection assays in neuroblastoma (SK-N-SH) 
and hepatoma (HepG2) cell lines. Only a minimum promoter including sequences from
-35 to + 6 from the transcription initiation is sufficient to confer
down-regulation. We have previously defined a crucial DNA element controlling 90%
of the expression of the gene within the same short area, and the identification 
of the transcription factors involved should also provide insights into the
regulation of PS1 by p53. This region contains an Ets transcription factor
binding motif, and a 2-base pair alteration within the core sequence (GGAA to
TTAA) of the Ets consensus also reduced transcription by more than 90%. We now
show that Ets1 and Ets2 indeed transactivate a PS1 promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter including the (-35 to +6) fragment. Furthermore, in
vitro translated Ets2 binds specifically to the -10 Ets motif in electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays. Therefore, Ets1/2 factors bind specifically to the -10 Ets
element and activate PS1 transcription. We also show that the coactivator p300
enhances the activation by Ets1 and Ets2 as well as the repression by p53. p300
is known to interact with p53 as well as with Ets1 and Ets2. We show that p53
does not bind directly to the PS1 promoter. Hence the repression of PS1
transcription by p53 is likely to be mediated through protein-protein
interactions.

PMID: 10942770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Jul 25;165(1-2):17-24.

Role of Ets2 in cyclic AMP regulation of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta
promoter.

Johnson W(1), Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Tarry Building 15-709, 303 East Chicago Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Activation of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta (hCGbeta) by the protein
kinase A (PKA) pathway has been shown to occur through an activating protein-2
(AP-2)-dependent mechanism. However, in HepG2 cells, which are deficient in AP-2,
the PKA catalytic subunit is still able to stimulate the hCGbeta promoter. Ets2
plays a critical role in placental development as revealed by placental
abnormalities in Ets2 knockout mice. Transfection of Ets2 into JEG-3 placental
cells causes a slight, but reproducible, increase in hCGbeta promoter basal
activity. However, cotransfection with the PKA catalytic subunit causes a strong 
synergistic increase in hCGbeta promoter activity. Ets2 synergistic activation of
the hCGbeta promoter is specific for the PKA pathway, as activation of the ras
pathway, which also acts through Ets2, does not activate the hCGbeta promoter.
c-Jun-mediated repression of hCGbeta is inhibited by Ets2 cotransfection,
indicating that protein-protein interactions may be responsible for Ets2
activation of the hCGbeta promoter.

PMID: 10940479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Anal Biochem. 2000 Aug 15;284(1):107-13.

Hybridization assay at a disposable electrochemical biosensor for the attomole
detection of amplified human cytomegalovirus DNA.

Azek F(1), Grossiord C, Joannes M, Limoges B, Brossier P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie Médicale et Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine et
Pharmacie, 7 Boulevard Jeanned'Arc, Dijon, 21033, France.

A disposable electrochemical biosensor for the detection of DNA sequences related
to the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is described. The sensor relies on the
adsorption of an amplified human cytomegalovirus DNA strand onto the sensing
surface of a screen-printed carbon electrode, and to its hybridization to a
complementary single-stranded biotinylated DNA probe. The extent of hybrids
formed was determined with streptavidin conjugated to horseradish peroxidase. The
peroxidase label was indirectly quantified by measuring the amount of the
chromophore and electroactive product 2,2'-diaminoazobenzene generated from the
o-phenylenediamine substrate. The intensity of differential pulse voltammetric
peak currents resulting from the reduction of the enzyme-generated product was
related to the number of target HCMV-amplified DNA molecules present in the
sample, and the results were compared to those obtained with standard methods,
i.e., agarose gel electrophoresis quantification and colorimetric hybridization
assay in a microtiter plate. A detection limit of 0.6 amol/ml of HCMV-amplified
DNA fragment was obtained with the electrochemical DNA biosensor. The
electrochemical method was 23,000-fold more sensitive than the gel
electrophoresis technique and 83-fold more sensitive than the colorimetric
hybridization assay in a microtiter plate.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10933863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Biochemistry. 2000 Aug 1;39(30):8917-28.

Ets domain transcription factor PE1 suppresses human interstitial collagenase
promoter activity by antagonizing protein-DNA interactions at a critical AP1
element.

Bidder M(1), Loewy AP, Latifi T, Newberry EP, Ferguson G, Willis DM, Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

In MC3T3E1 calvarial osteoblasts, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
signaling elicits multiple transcriptional responses, including upregulation of
the interstitial collagenase/matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) promoter. FGF
responsiveness maps to a bipartite Ets/AP1 element at base pairs -123 to -61 in
the human MMP1 promoter. Under basal conditions, the MMP1 promoter is repressed
in part via protein-DNA interactions at the Ets cognate, and minimally two
mechanisms convey MMP1 promoter upregulation by FGF2: (a) transcriptional
activation via Fra1/c-Jun containing DNA-protein interactions at the AP1 cognate 
and (b) derepression of promoter activity regulated by the Ets cognate. To
identify osteoblast Ets repressors that potentially participate in gene
expression in the osteoblast, we performed reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of mRNA isolated from MC3T3E1 cells, using
degenerative amplimers to the conserved Ets DNA binding domain to survey the Ets 
genes expressed by these cells. Six distinct Ets mRNAs were identified: Ets2,
Fli1, GABPalpha, SAP1, Elk1, and PE1. Of these, only PE1 has extensive homology
to the known Ras-regulated Ets transcriptional repressor, ERF. Therefore, we
cloned and characterized PE1 cDNA from a mouse brain library and performed
functional analysis of this particular Ets family member. A 2 kb transcript was
isolated from brain that encodes a approximately 57 kDa protein; the predicted
protein contains the known N-terminal Ets domain of PE1 and a novel C-terminal
domain with signficant homology to murine ERF. The murine PE1 open reading frame 
(ORF) is much larger than the previously reported human PE1 ORF. Consistent with 
this, affinity-purified rabbit anti-mouse PE1 antibody specifically recognizes an
approximately 66 kDa protein present only in the nuclear fraction of MC3T3E1
osteoblasts. Recombinant PE1 binds authentic AGGAWG Ets DNA cognates, and
transient transfection studies demonstrate that PE1 represses MMP1 promoter
activity. Surprisingly, although deletion of the MMP1 Ets cognate at nucleotides 
-88 to -83 abrogates FGF2 induction, it does not prevent suppression of the
AP1-dependent MMP1 promoter by PE1. PE1 regulation maps to the MMP1 promoter
region -75 to -61, suggesting that PE1 suppresses transcription via
protein-protein interactions with AP1. Consistent with this, recombinant GST-PE1 
specifically inhibits the formation of protein-DNA interactions on the MMP1 AP1
site (-72 to -66) when present in an admixture with MC3T3E1 crude nuclear
extract. In toto, these data indicate that PE1 participates in the
transcriptional regulation of the MMP1 promoter in osteoblasts. As observed with 
other transcriptional repressors of MMP1 gene expression, transcriptional
suppression by PE1 occurs via inhibition of AP1-dependent promoter activity.

PMID: 10913304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Exp Hematol. 2000 Jul;28(7):802-14.

Functional conservation of platelet glycoprotein V promoter between mouse and
human megakaryocytes.

Sato N(1), Kiyokawa N, Taguchi T, Suzuki T, Sekino T, Ohmi K, Itagaki M, Sato T, 
Lepage A, Lanza F, Fujimoto J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Children's Medical Research Center, Tokyo,
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: In an attempt to clarify the megakaryo-specific regulatory mechanism
of GPV gene transcription, we characterized the 5'-flanking region of the mouse
GPV gene.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The promotor activity of a -481/+22 5'-fragment of the
mouse GPV gene was examined in normal mouse bone marrow cells (BMC) and various
human cell lines using two distinct reporter gene assay systems, luciferase and
green fluorescence protein (GFP).
RESULTS: When a DNA construct consisting of this fragment and a GFP reporter gene
were transiently expressed in thrombopoietin-supported mouse BMC culture, GFP was
identified only in megakaryocytes. The same construct expressed high levels of
GFP in the human megakaryocytic Dami line. When assessed by dual luciferase
assay, the full -481/+22 fragment could drive variable promoter activity in human
as well as mouse megakaryocytic lines but did not work in non-megakaryocytic
cells. Sufficient transcriptional activation of this fragment was restricted to
the cells expressing apparent GPV mRNA. A deletion and point mutation study
indicated that GATA and Ets motifs, typical cis-acting elements for
platelet-specific genes, located of -75 and -46, respectively, were essential for
promoter function.
CONCLUSION: The GPV promoter has the general characteristics found in
platelet-specific genes, and the mechanism for megakaryocyte-specific,
maturation-dependent regulation of GPV gene transcription is highly conserved
between mouse and human. Analysis of GPV transcription mechanism utilizing human 
lines as well as BMC should provide new information on the final maturational
process of megakaryocytes.

PMID: 10907642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Exp Cell Res. 2000 May 25;257(1):213-22.

Involvement of Ets transcription factors and targets in osteoblast
differentiation and matrix mineralization.

Vary CP(1), Li V, Raouf A, Kitching R, Kola I, Franceschi C, Venanzoni M, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Maine Medical Cancer Research Institute, South Portland, USA.

The osteoblast-like MC3T3-E1 cell line provides an excellent in vitro model of
bone development. This system undergoes three orderly time-dependent phases
characterized by proliferating preosteoblasts, matrix accumulation by postmitotic
differentiating osteoblasts, and mineralization of the matrix, which results in
the formation of multilayered bone nodules. The Ets family transcription factors 
regulate genetic programs that affect the proliferation and differentiation of
osteoblasts. Of the eight Ets family transcription factors examined by our
laboratory, only Etsl and Ets2 were found to be expressed at significant levels
in this osteogenic system. Etsl is expressed in proliferating preosteoblastic
cells, whereas Ets2, silent during this phase, is expressed by differentiating
and mature osteoblasts. In addition, the expression of Etsl can be induced in
MC3T3-E1 and fetal rat calvaria cells by retinoic acid (RA) which is known to
exert profound effects on skeletal growth and development and bone turnover and
induce specific cellular responses in bone cells. Thus, the multiple functions of
RA in bone cells are likely to be mediated in part by Etsl. We show that the
expression of Ets2 precedes and then parallels osteopontin expression and that
the OPN promoter contains Ets binding sites and is a transcriptional target of
Ets2. In order to identify other potential Ets target genes, we analyzed promoter
regions of genes revealed by serial analysis of gene expression as present in the
differentiation stage. The functional analysis of these genes has the potential
to provide much needed information as to their function in osteogenesis and
mineralization of the extracellular matrix and in bone-related diseases.

PMID: 10854070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 29;275(39):30432-8.

The small GTPases Ras, Rac, and Cdc42 transcriptionally regulate expression of
human fibroblast growth factor 1.

Chotani MA(1), Touhalisky K, Chiu IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
43210-1228, USA.

Four distinct promoters (1A, 1B, 1C, and 1D) of fibroblast growth factor 1
(FGF1), spaced up to 70 kilobase pairs apart, direct the expression of
alternatively spliced transcript variants (FGF1.A, -1. B, -1.C, and -1.D) that
encode FGF1. These FGF1 transcripts can be detected in cultured cells as well as 
in normal and diseased tissues. These transcripts are differentially regulated in
a cell-specific manner. To further delineate the biological function of multiple 
promoter usage by a single gene, we investigated the transcriptional regulation
of these promoters by defined signaling pathways associated with cell
proliferation and cell survival. Here we show a specific association of two of
the FGF1 promoters, 1C and 1D, with signaling cascades of the Ras superfamily of 
GTPases. A serum-response element, comprised of the Ets and CArG motifs, present 
in promoter 1D was shown to be the target of distinct signaling cascades; the Ets
motif target of Ras, Rac1, and Cdc42 regulation; and the CArG motif target of de 
novo protein synthesis-independent cascade. Ras and Rac1 also activated the FGF2 
promoter. Further, the transcription factor Ets2 synergistically activated FGF1
gene, but not FGF2, in a Ras- and Rac1-dependent signaling pathway. In support of
these conclusions high levels of intracellular FGF1 were detected in cells
undergoing cytokinesis. Altogether, our results suggest that FGF1 may play a
fundamental role in cell division, spreading, and migration, in addition to cell 
proliferation.

PMID: 10849427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Oncogene. 2000 Apr 20;19(17):2086-97.

IL-2 and long-term T cell activation induce physical and functional interaction
between STAT5 and ETS transcription factors in human T cells.

Rameil P(1), Lécine P, Ghysdael J, Gouilleux F, Kahn-Perlès B, Imbert J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U119, Marseille, France.

Activation of Stat5 by many cytokines implies that it cannot alone insure the
specificity of the regulation of its target genes. We have evidenced a physical
and functional interaction between members of two unrelated transcription factor 
families, Ets-1, Ets-2 and Stat5, which could contribute to the proliferative
response to interleukin 2. Competition with GAS- and EBS-specific
oligonucleotides and immunoassays with a set of anti-Stat and anti-Ets families
revealed that the IL-2-induced Stat5-Ets complex recognizes several GAS motifs
identified as target sites for activated Stat5 dimers. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments evidenced that a Stat5/Ets-1/2 complex is formed in vivo in absence
of DNA. GST-pull down experiments demonstrated that the C-terminal domain of
Ets-1 is sufficient for this interaction in vitro. Cotransfection experiments in 
Kit225 T cells resulted in cooperative transcriptional activity between both
transcription factors in response to a combination of IL-2, PMA and ionomycin. A 
Stat5-Ets protein complex was the major inducible DNA-binding complex bound to
the human IL-2rE GASd/EBSd motif in long-term proliferating normal human T cells 
activated by CD2 and CD28. These results suggest that the inducible Stat5-Ets
protein interaction plays a role in the regulation of gene expression in response
to IL-2 in human T lymphocytes.

PMID: 10815800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Oncogene. 2000 Apr 6;19(15):1969-74.

The Ets1 proto-oncogene is upregulated by retinoic acid: characterization of a
functional retinoic acid response element in the Ets1 promoter.

Raouf A(1), Li V, Kola I, Watson DK, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, MRC group in Periodontal
Physiology, University of Toronto, and Sunnybrook and Women's College Health
Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The v-ets oncoprotein and its progenitor Ets1 belong to a family of transcription
factors that are related by an 85 amino acid conserved DNA binding domain, the
ets domain. Ets1 plays important role(s) in control of cell proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. Abnormal expression of Ets1 could lead to
disruption of these processes and contribute to development of malignancy.
Retinoic acid (RA) inhibits proliferation, induces differentiation and regulates 
apoptosis in many different cell types. Here, we demonstrate that RA treatment
increases the expression of Ets1 mRNA, but not that of Ets2, Elk1 or Fli1 in
MC3T3-E1 cells. Ets1 induction is detectable after 4 h, can be maintained for at 
least 14 days, and is inhibited by Actinomycin D, which suggests that RA
regulation of Ets1 occurs at the transcriptional level. The promoter region of
Ets1 contains four retinoic acid response element (RARE) half sites located at
-94, -152, -1765 and -2252 from the translation start site. We show that RARbeta 
is expressed by MC3T3-E1 cells in the presence of RA and demonstrate that it
binds to the -94 RARE half site. Furthermore, RA induces transcription of Ets1
promoter-reporter constructs containing this RARE half site.

PMID: 10773887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. DNA Cell Biol. 2000 Feb;19(2):79-91.

Transcription of human cathepsin B is mediated by Sp1 and Ets family factors in
glioma.

Yan S(1), Berquin IM, Troen BR, Sloane BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Cathepsin B expression is increased at both the mRNA and protein levels in a wide
variety of tumors. The mechanisms responsible for this regulation are not well
elucidated. We have isolated a 2.2-kb cathepsin B genomic fragment that contains 
the 5'-flanking region of the cathepsin B gene. Using reporter gene analysis in
human glioblastoma U87MG cells, we have mapped a 228-bp fragment (-172 to +56)
having high promoter activity. This promoter region has a high G+C content;
contains potential Spl, Ets, and USF binding motifs; and lacks canonical TATA and
CAAT boxes immediately upstream of the major transcriptional initiation site.
Cotransfection experiments demonstrated that Spl and Ets1 could trans-activate
cathepsin B transcription, whereas Ets2 could not. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays and supershift assays revealed that three of the four putative Sp1 sites
in this promoter region form a specific complex containing the Sp1 transcription 
factor. Mutating all four of the Spl binding sites individually markedly reduced 
the promoter activity of transfected reporter genes in U87 cells. Cotransfection 
of this cathepsin B promoter construct with Spl family expression vectors in
Schneider's Drosophila line 2 (SL2) cells demonstrated that Spl and Sp3, but not 
Sp4, activated cathepsin B transcription. Taken together, these results suggest
that Sp1, Sp3, and Ets1 are important factors in cathepsin B transcription. The
regulation of cathepsin B transcription by Sp1- and Sp1-related factors is
mediated through multiple GC boxes.

PMID: 10701774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1999;57:269-81.

Expression of the transcription factor ETS2 in brain of patients with Down
syndrome--evidence against the overexpression-gene dosage hypothesis.

Greber-Platzer S(1), Schatzmann-Turhani D, Cairns N, Balcz B, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Austria.

Overexpression of the transcription factor ETS2 and other genes localized in the 
socalled critical Down Syndrome region of chromosome 21 due to a gene dosage
effect, is an attractive hypothesis for the explanation of the Down Syndrome
phenotype. The overexpression of ETS2, however, has never been demonstrated in a 
human organ. We therefore challenged this hypothesis determining ETS2 levels in
several brain regions of patients with Down Syndrome as compared to controls. We 
used a highly sensitive and quantitative RT-PCR method for the determination of
ETS2 mRNA steady state levels in frontal, parietal, temporal, occipital lobe and 
cerebellum of 9 adult Down Syndrome patients and 9 adult controls. Significantly 
decreased ETS2 mRNA steady state levels (16.9 +/- 26.7 attogram mRNA ETS2/10 ng
total RNA versus 87.7 +/- 92.9 in controls) in frontal lobe of Down Syndrome
brain and decreased ETS2 mRNA steady state levels (6.99 +/- 6.4 attogram mRNA
ETS2/100 pg beta-actin versus 19.8 +/- 15.7 in controls) in temporal lobe of Down
Syndrome brain were found. In the other brain regions no statistically
significant difference was detected. Our data provide evidence against the
overexpression hypothesis for the development of the Down Syndrome phenotype.
Decreased ETS2 transcripts found in temporal and frontal lobe of patients with
Down Syndrome, however, may be involved in the pathogenesis of Down Syndrome
including specific neurodegenerative processes and deteriorated plasticity of the
brain taking place in Down Syndrome brain, as the concerted action of
transcription factors may be seriously impaired.

PMID: 10666682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Genomics. 1999 Dec 15;62(3):529-32.

Chromosomal localization of phospholipase A2 activating protein, an Ets2 target
gene, to 9p21.

Beatty BG(1), Qi S, Pienkowska M, Herbrick JA, Scheidl T, Zhang ZM, Kola I,
Scherer SW, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Ontario Cancer Institute, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1L5, Canada. barbara@beatty5.com

A murine Ets2 target gene isolated by differential display cloning was identified
as the phospholipase A2 activating protein (PLAA) gene. A 2.7-kb human cDNA
demonstrating high homology to mouse and rat Plaa genes was then isolated and
characterized. Human PLAA contains six WD-40 repeat motifs and three different
protein kinase consensus domains. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
mapping placed PLAA on chromosome 9p21, a region frequently deleted in various
cancers. A comprehensive mapping strategy was employed to define further the
chromosomal localization of PLAA relative to CDKN2A within the 9p21 locus.
Radiation hybrid mapping placed the gene 7.69 cR from WI-5735 (LOD >3.0), a
marker in close proximity to CDKN2A and CDKN2B. Yeast artificial chromosome (YAC)
mapping localized PLAA proximal to the CDKN2A/CDKN2B genes and to a region
flanked by D9S171 and INFA commonly deleted in many neoplasms. Two YACs contained
both PLAA and D9S259, a marker present in a second more proximal minimal deleted 
region observed in cutaneous melanoma and squamous cell lung carcinoma.
Double-color fiber FISH mapping confirmed the location of PLAA centromeric to
D9S171 and CDKN2A/CDKN2B. The mapping data suggest a possible tumor suppressor
role for this gene.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10644453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 15;274(42):30273-9.

The Raf-1/MEK/ERK pathway regulates the expression of the p21(Cip1/Waf1) gene in 
chondrocytes.

Beier F(1), Taylor AC, LuValle P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1,
Canada.

The gene encoding the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(Cip1/Waf1) is
up-regulated in many differentiating cells, including maturing chondrocytes.
Since strict control of chondrocyte proliferation is essential for proper bone
formation and since p21 is likely involved in this control, we initiated analyses
of the mechanisms regulating expression of p21 in chondrocytes. p21 expression
and promoter activity was strongly increased during the differentiation of
chondrogenic MCT cells. We have identified a 68-base pair fragment conferring
transcriptional up-regulation of the p21 gene in chondrocytes. The activity of
this fragment required active Raf-1 in MCT cells as well as in primary mouse
chondrocytes. Inhibition of downstream factors of Raf-1 (MEK1/2, ERK1/2, and
Ets2) also repressed the activity of the 68-base pair fragment in MCT cells. The 
chemical MEK1/2 inhibitor PD98059 reduced protein levels of p21 in MCTs and
primary mouse chondrocytes. These data suggest that signaling through the Raf-1
pathway is necessary for the optimal expression of p21 in chondrocytes and may
play an important role in the control of bone formation.

PMID: 10514521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cell Death Differ. 1999 Sep;6(9):902-7.

Regulation of the human stress response gene GADD153 expression: role of ETS1 and
FLI-1 gene products.

Seth A(1), Giunta S, Franceschil C, Kola I, Venanzoni MC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Group in Periodontal Physiology and Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Ontario M5S 1B2,
Canada.

We have previously shown that ETS transcription factors, regulate cell growth and
differentiation, and ETS1 and ETS2 are able to transcriptionally regulate wt p53 
gene expression. In the present study we show that the ETS transcription factors 
also play a role in regulating expression of GADD153, a wt p53 inducible gene,
which induces growth arrest and apoptosis in response to stress signals or DNA
damage. We report the presence of a single EBS in the human GADD153 promoter, and
that the GADD45 gene promoter lacks EBSs. The GADD153 promoter EBS shows a very
high affinity for ETS1 and FLI-1 gene products. In addition, our data show that
both ETS1 and FLI-1 strongly activate transcription of the GADD153 EBS linked to 
the CAT reporter gene. Our results also demonstrate how ETS1 and FLI-1
specifically regulate GADD153 expression. In addition, ectopic ETS2 protein
expression resulted in only a weak induction of the same CAT reporter construct. 
The ETS1 and FLI-1 proteins provide a novel mechanism of activation for GADD153, 
allowing these two ETS genes to control its expression during cell growth and
differentiation, rather than in response to oxidative stress.

PMID: 10510472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cancer Res. 1999 Sep 1;59(17):4242-6.

A single targeted Ets2 allele restricts development of mammary tumors in
transgenic mice.

Neznanov N(1), Man AK, Yamamoto H, Hauser CA, Cardiff RD, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Heterozygous female mice carrying a targeted mutation of the Ets2 transcription
factor gene were mated with a mouse strain that develops mammary tumors due to
the expression of the polyoma virus middle T oncogene. Tumors from females with
only one wild-type Ets2 gene were approximately one-half the size of tumors from 
controls. The smaller size of the tumors was correlated with a more
differentiated state of early hyperplastic growths and not to differential growth
of the frank tumors or to decreased middle T gene expression. Ets2 may regulate
the progression of these aggressive mammary tumors.

PMID: 10485465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Hum Mol Genet. 1999;8(10):1839-46.

Osteopetrosis and osteoporosis: two sides of the same coin.

Lazner F(1), Gowen M, Pavasovic D, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Institute of Reproduction
and Development, Monash University, Monash Medical Centre, Clayton, Victoria,
Australia.

Together, osteoporosis and osteopetrosis comprise a substantial proportion of the
bone diseases that severely affect humans. In order to understand and effectively
treat these disorders, an understanding of the mechanisms controlling bone
remodelling is essential. While numerous animal models of bone disease have been 
generated, the lack of correlation between these animal models and human disease 
has limited their utility in terms of defining therapeutic strategies. The
generation and analysis of cathepsin K knockout mice has resulted in a model for 
pycnodysostosis, a rare human osteopetrotic disease, and is now providing
considerable insights into both osteoclast function and potential therapeutic
strategies for the treatment of bone disease. This review highlights the
importance of genes such as cathepsin K in understanding bone remodelling and
illustrates a new trend towards understanding bone disease as a complete entity
rather than as a series of unrelated disorders.

PMID: 10469835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6240-52.

Role of distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways and cooperation
between Ets-2, ATF-2, and Jun family members in human urokinase-type plasminogen 
activator gene induction by interleukin-1 and tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate.

Cirillo G(1), Casalino L, Vallone D, Caracciolo A, De Cesare D, Verde P.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR, 80125 Naples, Italy.

We have investigated the in vivo and in vitro regulation of the human
urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene by interleukin-1 (IL-1) and
analyzed the transcription factors and signalling pathways involved in the
response of the -2.0-kb uPA enhancer to IL-1 induction and to tetradecanoyl
phorbol acetate (TPA) induction. Mutational analysis showed the cooperative
activity of the Ets-binding site (EBS) and the two AP-1 elements of the enhancer.
The results reveal that the EBS is required for the response to both inducers
mediated by Ets-2, which is regulated at a level subsequent to DNA binding, by an
IL-1- and phorbol ester-inducible transactivation domain. Both the IL-1 and the
TPA-mediated induction result in a drastic increase of AP-1 binding to the
downstream site of the enhancer (uPA 3' TPA-responsive element), while a mostly
qualitative change, resulting from the interplay between ATF-2 homodimers and
c-Jun-ATF-2 heterodimers, takes place at the upstream AP-1 element. The analysis 
of two distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways shows that
stress-activated protein kinase-Jun N-terminal kinase activation, resulting in
the phosphorylation of ATF-2, c-Jun, and JunD, is required not only for the IL-1-
but also for the TPA-dependent induction, while the extracellular signal-related 
kinase 1 (ERK-1) and ERK-2 activation is involved in the TPA- but not in the
IL-1-dependent stimulation of the uPA enhancer.

PMCID: PMC84576
PMID: 10454570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Biol Reprod. 1999 Jul;61(1):120-6.

Transcription factors Ets1, Ets2, and Elf1 exhibit differential localization in
human endometrium across the menstrual cycle and alternate isoforms in cultured
endometrial cells.

Kilpatrick LM(1), Kola I, Salamonsen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, 3168,
Australia Institute of Reproduction and Development, Monash Medical Centre,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia. lynette.kilpatrick@med.monash.edu.au

To better understand the transcriptional regulation of human endometrial
remodeling, the localization of three members of the Ets family of transcription 
factors was examined at different stages of the menstrual cycle. Elf1 was found
by immunohistochemistry to be predominantly localized to the glandular
epithelium. In contrast, Ets1 and Ets2 were found at lower intensities in both
glandular epithelial and stromal cells. Low expression during the menstrual phase
of the cycle, and high expression and intensity of staining in decidualized
stromal cells of the late secretory phase were common to Ets1, Ets2, and Elf1.
These localization patterns were confirmed in cultured human endometrial stromal 
and epithelial cells by Western blotting, which also demonstrated different
isoforms and phosphorylation products of Ets1 and Ets2 in the two cell types.
This study has shown for the first time that members of the Ets family of
transcription factors, previously found predominantly during development and in
hematopoietic cells, are expressed in the human endometrium and display cell and 
cycle-stage specificity. Expression of Elf1 predominantly in the glandular
epithelium may indicate that Elf1 plays a unique role in epithelium-specific gene
regulation in the endometrium.

PMID: 10377039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3131-48.

Precise developmental regulation of Ets family transcription factors during
specification and commitment to the T cell lineage.

Anderson MK(1), Hernandez-Hoyos G, Diamond RA, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.
evroth@its.caltech.edu

Ets family transcription factors control the expression of a large number of
genes in hematopoietic cells. Here we show strikingly precise differential
expression of a subset of these genes marking critical, early stages of mouse
lymphocyte cell-type specification. Initially, the Ets family member factor Erg
was identified during an arrayed cDNA library screen for genes encoding
transcription factors expressed specifically during T cell lineage commitment.
Multiparameter fluorescence-activated cell sorting for over a dozen cell surface 
markers was used to isolate 18 distinct primary-cell populations representing
discrete T cell and B cell developmental stages, pluripotent lymphoid precursors,
immature NK-like cells and myeloid hematopoietic cells. These populations were
monitored for mRNA expression of the Erg, Ets-1, Ets-2, Fli-1, Tel, Elf-1,
GABPalpha, PU.1 and Spi-B genes. The earliest stages in T cell differentiation
show particularly dynamic Ets family gene regulation, with sharp transitions in
expression correlating with specification and commitment events. Ets, Spi-B and
PU.1 are expressed in these stages but not by later T-lineage cells. Erg is
induced during T-lineage specification and then silenced permanently, after
commitment, at the beta-selection checkpoint. Spi-B is transiently upregulated
during commitment and then silenced at the same stage as Erg. T-lineage
commitment itself is marked by repression of PU.1, a factor that regulates B-cell
and myeloid genes. These results show that the set of Ets factors mobilized
during T-lineage specification and commitment is different from the set that
maintains T cell gene expression during thymocyte repertoire selection and in all
classes of mature T cells.

PMID: 10375504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 11;274(24):17342-52.

p300/cAMP-responsive element-binding protein interactions with ets-1 and ets-2 in
the transcriptional activation of the human stromelysin promoter.

Jayaraman G(1), Srinivas R, Duggan C, Ferreira E, Swaminathan S, Somasundaram K, 
Williams J, Hauser C, Kurkinen M, Dhar R, Weitzman S, Buttice G, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Lurie Cancer Center and Microbiology and Immunology Department, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

In this paper we show that transcription factors Ets-1 and Ets-2 recruit
transcription adapter proteins p300 and CBP (cAMP-responsive element-binding
protein) during the transcriptional activation of the human stromelysin promoter,
which contains palindromic Ets-binding sites. Ets-2 and p300/CBP exist as a
complex in vivo. Two regions of p300/CBP between amino acids (a.a.) 328 and 596
and a. a. 1678 and 2370 independently can interact with Ets-1 and Ets-2 in vitro 
and in vivo. Both these regions of p300/CBP bind to the transactivation domain of
Ets-2, whereas the C-terminal region binds only to the DNA binding domain of
Ets-2. The N- and the C-terminal regions of CBP (a.a. 1-1097 and 1678-2442,
respectively) which lack histone acetylation activity independently are capable
of coactivating Ets-2. Other Ets family transcription factors failed to cooperate
with p300/CBP in stimulating the stromelysin promoter. The LXXLL sequence,
reported to be important in receptor-coactivator interactions, does not appear to
play a role in the interaction of Ets-2 with p300/CBP. Previous studies have
shown that the stimulation of transcriptional activation activity of Ets-2
requires phosphorylation of threonine 72 by the Ras/mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling pathway. We show that mutation of this site does not affect its 
capacity to bind to and to cooperate with p300/CBP.

PMID: 10358095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Clin Genet. 1999 Mar;55(3):203-6.

An extra idic(21)(q22.1) in a child with some features of Down's syndrome.

Gütiérrez-Angulo M(1), Ramos AL, Dávalos N, Sánchez-Corona J, Rivera H.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Biomédica de Occidente, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro 
Social, Guadalajara, Jal., Mexico.

A 30-month-old boy with mental retardation, hypotonia, joint hyperlaxity,
Brushfield spots, open mouth, distal axial triradius t", and ulnar loops on both 
forefingers was found to have a 47,XY, + psu idic(21)(q22.1).ish psu
idic(21)(q22.1)(D13Z1/D21Z1 + + ,ETS2-) karyotype. The patient's phenotype, with 
only some Down's syndrome (DS) features, is probably related to his disomy for
most or all of the critical region 21q22.2 q22.3 and agrees with the current
notion that certain DS features may also result from 21q proximal duplications.
The phenotypical comparison with 2 other patients with a similar extra idic(21)
reveals some discrepancies, which may be related to the inherent clinical
variability of similar imbalances: yet, a real difference between the tetrasomic 
segments cannot be excluded. Noticeably, all 3 patients with 21q proximal
tetrasomy did not have cardiac defect and exhibited none or just one out of the
five other DS phenotypic features attributed to a single gene or cluster on
distal 21q22.

PMID: 10334475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4121-33.

Transcriptional repressor ERF is a Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase target
that regulates cellular proliferation.

Le Gallic L(1), Sgouras D, Beal G Jr, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)IMBB-FORTH, University of Crete, Voutes, Heraklion, Crete 714-09, Greece.

A limited number of transcription factors have been suggested to be regulated
directly by Erks within the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling
pathway. In this paper we demonstrate that ERF, a ubiquitously expressed
transcriptional repressor that belongs to the Ets family, is physically
associated with and phosphorylated in vitro and in vivo by Erks. This
phosphorylation determines the ERF subcellular localization. Upon mitogenic
stimulation, ERF is immediately phosphorylated and exported to the cytoplasm. The
export is blocked by specific Erk inhibitors and is abolished when residues
undergoing phosphorylation are mutated to alanine. Upon growth factor
deprivation, ERF is rapidly dephosphorylated and transported back into the
nucleus. Phosphorylation-defective ERF mutations suppress Ras-induced
tumorigenicity and arrest the cells at the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle. Our
findings strongly suggest that ERF may be important in the control of cellular
proliferation during the G0/G1 transition and that it may be one of the effectors
in the mammalian Ras signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC104371
PMID: 10330152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12910-6.

Regulation of the human interleukin-5 promoter by Ets transcription factors. Ets1
and Ets2, but not Elf-1, cooperate with GATA3 and HTLV-I Tax1.

Blumenthal SG(1), Aichele G, Wirth T, Czernilofsky AP, Nordheim A, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Abteilung Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, 
Auf der Morgenstelle 15, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5), expressed primarily by type-2 T helper (Th2) cells, plays
an important role in the development of allergic diseases, such as allergic
asthma. Studying the regulation of IL-5 gene expression by Ets transcription
factors, we found that Ets1 and Ets2, but not Elf-1, were able to activate the
human IL-5 promoter in Jurkat T-cells. This required the presence of either
phorbol 12-myristate acetate (PMA) plus ionomycin or PMA plus the viral protein
HTLV-I Tax1. By mutation studies, it could be shown that Ets1 and Ets2 exerted
their effects on the IL-5 promoter through a GGAA motif within the Cle0 element. 
In myeloid Kasumi cells, Ets1 and Ets2 failed to stimulate IL-5 promoter
activity, unless the T-cell specific transcription factor GATA3 was added. These 
results show, for the first time, that Ets1 and Ets2 are able to cooperate with
GATA3. Both ionomycin and Tax1 increased the combined effect of GATA3 with Ets1
and Ets2 in the presence of PMA. The data further demonstrate that, in addition
to Ets1, Ets2 is also able to functionally cooperate with Tax1. The synergism of 
GATA3 with either Ets1 or Ets2 may play an important role in calcium- or
Tax1-dependent regulation of IL-5 expression in Th2 cells or in HTLV-I
transformed adult T-cell leukemia cells, respectively.

PMID: 10212281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 May;8(5):923-33.

Transchromosomal mouse embryonic stem cell lines and chimeric mice that contain
freely segregating segments of human chromosome 21.

Hernandez D(1), Mee PJ, Martin JE, Tybulewicz VL, Fisher EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurogenetics, Imperial College School of Medicine, Norfolk
Place, London W2 1PG, UK.

At least 8% of all human conceptions have major chromosome abnormalities and the 
frequency of chromosomal syndromes in newborns is >0.5%. Despite these disorders 
making a large contribution to human morbidity and mortality, we have little
understanding of their aetiology and little molecular data on the importance of
gene dosage to mammalian cells. Trisomy 21, which results in Down syndrome (DS), 
is the most frequent aneuploidy in humans (1 in 600 live births, up to 1 in 150
pregnancies world-wide) and is the most common known genetic cause of mental
retardation. To investigate the molecular genetics of DS, we report here the
creation of mice that carry different human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) fragments as a 
freely segregating extra chromosome. To produce these 'transchromosomal' animals,
we placed a selectable marker into Hsa21 and transferred the chromosome from a
human somatic cell line into mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells using irradiation
microcell-mediated chromosome transfer (XMMCT). 'Transchromosomal' ES cells
containing different Hsa21 regions ranging in size from approximately 50 to
approximately 0.2 Mb have been used to create chimeric mice. These mice maintain 
Hsa21 sequences and express Hsa21 genes in multiple tissues. This novel use of
the XMMCT protocol is applicable to investigations requiring the transfer of
large chromosomal regions into ES or other cells and, in particular, the
modelling of DS and other human aneuploidy syndromes.

PMID: 10196383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Apr;19(4):2624-34.

The Ets2 transcription factor inhibits apoptosis induced by colony-stimulating
factor 1 deprivation of macrophages through a Bcl-xL-dependent mechanism.

Sevilla L(1), Aperlo C, Dulic V, Chambard JC, Boutonnet C, Pasquier O, Pognonec
P, Boulukos KE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie, Université de Nice, Faculté des Sciences, 06108 Nice,
France.

Bcl-xL, a member of the Bcl-2 family, inhibits apoptosis, and its expression is
regulated at the transcriptional level, yet nothing is known about the
transcription factors specifically activating this promoter. The bcl-x promoter
contains potential Ets binding sites, and we show that the transcription factor, 
Ets2, first identified by its sequence identity to v-ets of the E26 retrovirus,
can transactivate the bcl-x promoter. Transient expression of Ets2 results in the
upregulation of Bcl-xL but not of Bcl-xS, an alternatively spliced gene product
which induces apoptosis. Ets2 is ubiquitously expressed at low levels in a
variety of cell types and tissues but is specifically induced to abundant levels 
during macrophage differentiation. Since Bcl-xL is also upregulated during
macrophage differentiation, we asked whether the bcl-x could be a direct
downstream target gene of Ets2 in macrophages. BAC1.2F5 macrophages, which are
dependent on macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) for their growth and 
survival, were used in these studies. We show that CSF-1 stimulation of BAC1.2F5 
macrophages results in the upregulation of expression of ets2 and bcl-xL with
similar kinetics of induction. In the absence of CSF-1, these macrophages undergo
cell death by apoptosis, whereas constitutive expression of Ets2 rescues these
cells from cell death, and bcl-xL is upregulated. These results strongly suggest 
a novel role of Ets2 in affecting apoptosis through its regulation of Bcl-xL
transcription.

PMCID: PMC84055
PMID: 10082528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Amino Acids. 1999;16(1):13-9.

Determination of the protooncogene ets-2 gene transcript in human brain at the
atto-gram-level by the use of competitive RT/PCR.

Schatzmann-Turhani D(1), Greber-Platzer S, Cairns N, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Austria.

Protooncogenes (PO) play a crucial role for brain biology and pathology. Only the
concerted action of protooncogenes enables normal brain development. The reliable
and sensitive quantification of brain PO is still holding centre stage in
neurobiological research. The aim of our study was therefore the determination of
PO in minute amounts of brain areas. For this purpose we decided to apply the
most sensitive detection principle of competitive reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction using capillary electrophoresis and laser-induced
fluorescence detection. We selected the PO ets-2 for our studies as this
transcription factor was shown to be involved in neurodegenerative disease. As
little as 10 ng of total RNA each were extracted from 5 different regions of
human postmortem brain and used in the assay system. Our results revealed that
the ets-2 gene transcript was detectable at the atto-gram level in the brain
(54.5 +/- 17.7 ag/ 10 ng RNA in the occipital lobe, 34.2 +/- 7.5 in temporal
lobe, 40.2 +/- 15.6 in the frontal lobe, 31.4 +/- 15.7 in the cerebellum, and
undetectably low in the parietal lobe). This is the first report at this
sensitivity level providing neurobiology with a powerful analytical tool.

PMID: 10078330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Mar;13(3):385-99.

Identification of a placental-specific enhancer in the rat placental lactogen II 
gene that contains binding sites for members of the Ets and AP-1 (activator
protein 1) families of transcription factors.

Sun Y(1), Duckworth ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

We previously identified a 3-kb proximal 5'-flanking region of the rat placental 
lactogen (rPLII) gene that is important for reporter gene transcription in the
rat trophoblast cell line, Rcho, and targets expression to the placentas of
transgenic mice. In our current studies we have used further deletion analysis
and transfection studies in Rcho and GC cells to map more precisely the locations
of regulatory elements involved in this placental expression. We show that
sequences between - 1435 and -765 are necessary for minimal expression in Rcho
cells and that there are negative regulatory elements between -3031 to -2838 and 
-1729 to -1435. Most importantly, we have identified a fragment between -1793 to 
-1729 that is essential for expression levels characteristic of the complete 3-kb
5'-region. When linked to the herpes simplex thymidine kinase minimal promoter,
this fragment acts as an enhancing element in Rcho but not GC cells.
Deoxyribonuclease I (DNAse I) protection and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays with nuclear extracts and in vitro translated proteins identify binding
sites for members of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) and Ets families of
transcription factors. Site-directed mutagenesis of the individual AP-1- and
Ets-binding sites leads to a partial loss of the enhancing activity; a double
AP-1/Ets mutation leads to a complete loss of activity, demonstrating the
functional importance of these sites. By these criteria, putative GATA-binding
sites located within the enhancing fragment are not active. These new data
suggest an important role for this enhancing fragment in rPLII placental giant
cell expression and are the first to implicate a member of the Ets family in the 
regulation of this gene family.

PMID: 10076996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Biol Reprod. 1999 Mar;60(3):664-73.

Involvement of polyomavirus enhancer activator 3 in the regulation of expression 
of gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase messenger ribonucleic acid-IV in the rat
epididymis.

Lan ZJ(1), Lye RJ, Holic N, Labus JC, Hinton BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) mRNA-IV and polyomavirus enhancer activator 3
(PEA3) mRNA are highly expressed in the initial segment of the rat epididymis,
and both are regulated by testicular factors. PEA3 protein in rat initial segment
nuclear extracts has been shown to bind to a PEA3/Ets binding motif, which is
derived from the partially characterized GGT mRNA-IV promoter region. This
suggests that PEA3 may be involved in regulating transcription from the rat GGT
mRNA-IV gene promoter in the initial segment. Using DNA oligonucleotide primers
and DNA sequencing analysis, an approximately 1500-basepair (bp) DNA sequence at 
the 5' region of the promoter was obtained. Using transient transfection, PEA3
activated transcription of the rat GGT mRNA-IV promoter only in cultured
epididymal cells from the rat initial segment, but not in Cos-1 or NRK-52E cells.
Promoter deletion analysis indicated that a PEA3/Ets binding motif between
nucleotides -22 and -17 is the functional site for PEA3 to activate transcription
of GGT promoter IV and that an adjacent Sp1 binding motif is also required to
maintain promoter IV activity in epididymal cells. Transcriptional activation of 
promoter IV was shown to be epididymal cell-specific and PEA3-specific. In
addition, PEA3 may act as a weak repressor for transcription of promoter IV,
probably using a PEA3/Ets binding motif(s) distal to the transcription start
site. A model of how PEA3 is involved in the regulation of transcription of GGT
promoter IV in epididymal cells is proposed.

PMID: 10026114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. FASEB J. 1999 Feb;13(2):377-86.

Role of ets factors in the activity and endothelial cell specificity of the mouse
Tie gene promoter.

Iljin K(1), Dube A, Kontusaari S, Korhonen J, Lahtinen I, Oettgen P, Alitalo K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular/Cancer Biology Laboratory, Haartman Institute and Department of
Biomedicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

The Tie gene encodes an endothelial cell receptor tyrosine kinase necessary for
normal vascular development. The Tie gene promoter targets expression of
heterologous genes specifically to endothelial cells in transgenic mice. Here we 
have characterized the promoter sequences critical for endothelial cell-specific 
activity in cultured cells and transgenic mice. Progressive deletions and
site-directed mutations of the promoter showed that the critical endothelial
cell-specific elements are an octamer transcription factor binding site and
several Ets binding sites located in two clusters within 300 bp upstream of the
major transcription initiation site. Among members of the Ets transcription
factor family tested, NERF-2 (a novel transcription factor related to the ets
factor ELF-1), which is expressed in endothelial cells, and ETS2 showed the
strongest transactivation of the Tie promoter; ETS1 gave lower levels of
stimulation and the other Ets factors gave little or no transactivation.
Furthermore, the Tie promoter directed the production of high amounts of human
growth hormone into the circulation of transgenic mice. The secreted amounts
correlated with transgene copy number, being relatively insensitive to the
effects of the transgene integration site. These properties suggest that Tie
promoter activity is controlled by endothelial cell Ets factors and that it has
potential for use in vectors for endothelial cell-specific gene expression.

PMID: 9973326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jan 19;254(2):395-9.

Evidence against the current hypothesis of "gene dosage effects" of trisomy 21:
ets-2, encoded on chromosome 21" is not overexpressed in hearts of patients with 
Down Syndrome.

Greber-Platzer S(1), Schatzmann-Turhani D, Wollenek G, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18, Vienna,
A1090, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The major current concept for the pathogenesis of the Down Syndrome
(DS) phenotype including congenital heart disease (CHD) is the so-called "gene
dosage effect." According to this hypothesis, genes encoded by chromosome 21 at
the "critical region" (which is thought to be crucial for the development of the 
DS phenotype) are overexpressed in the trisomic state, thus leading to an
imbalance of genes as, e.g., the protooncogene ets-2, superoxide dismutase, etc.
METHODS: We studied heart biopsies obtained at surgery from 6 patients with DS
and 7 patients with congenital heart disease. ets-2-mRNA steady state levels were
determined by a competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) technique which allowed the determination of this gene at the attomol
level.
RESULTS: ets-2 mRNA in total ventricular tissue of DS patients showed
concentrations of 0.60 +/- 0.42 fg/10 ng total RNA (mean, +/- SD). When
normalized versus the housekeeping gene beta-actin to rule out general
transcriptional changes in that disorder, the ratio of 0.56 +/- 0.28 (mean, +/-
SD) was calculated. ets-2 mRNA in total ventricular tissue of patients with
non-DS CHD showed concentrations of 0.45 +/- 0.22 fg/10 ng total RNA (mean,
+/-SD) and ratios of 0.48 +/- 0.35 (mean, +/-SD). No differences could be found
at the p<0.05 level.
CONCLUSION: No absolute quantification of a gene incriminated in the "gene dosage
effect-hypothesis" was performed so far and the only approach to (semi-)
quantitative determination of the ets-2 gene using northern blotting was
published on one individual DS sample only. This is the first report to clearly
show that no overexpression of ets-2 can be found in heart of patients with DS,
thus providing evidence against the current gene dosage effect-hypothesis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9918849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Oncogene. 1998 Dec 3;17(22):2883-8.

ETS2 function is required to maintain the transformed state of human prostate
cancer cells.

Sementchenko VI(1), Schweinfest CW, Papas TS, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

The contribution of the ETS2 transcription factor to the transformed state in
prostate cancer cells has been assessed. Northern blot analysis easily detects
ETS2 in DU145 and PC3, high grade human prostate cell lines, but ETS2 is not
present in lower grade LNCaP cells. Stable transfection of PC3 and DU145 prostate
cell lines with an antisense ETS2 vector or with a dominant negative ETS2 mutant 
significantly reduced the ability of DU145 and PC3 cells to form large colonies
in soft agar. Thus, the presence of ETS2 is positively correlated with a more
transformed phenotype and blockage of ETS2 function can reduce transformed
properties of prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 9879994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 27;273(48):31909-15.

Selective inhibition of prolactin gene transcription by the ETS-2 repressor
factor.

Day RN(1), Liu J, Sundmark V, Kawecki M, Berry D, Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Cell Biology, National Science Foundation
Center for Biological Timing, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
22908, USA. rnd@virginia.edu

Regulation of prolactin gene transcription requires cooperative interactions
between the pituitary-specific POU domain protein Pit-1 and members of the ETS
transcription factor family. We demonstrate here that the ETS-2 repressor factor 
(ERF) is expressed in pituitary tumor cells and that overexpression of
recombinant ERF inhibits prolactin promoter activity, but not the closely related
growth hormone promoter. In non-pituitary cell lines, coexpression of ERF
disrupts the cooperative interactions between Pit-1 and ETS-1 and blocks the
induction of Pit-1-dependent prolactin promoter activity by cAMP. The potential
role of ERF in the inhibitory response of the prolactin promoter to dopamine was 
examined using pituitary tumor cells stably expressing dopamine D2 receptors. The
inhibitory responses of the prolactin promoter to ERF and dopamine are additive, 
suggesting that ERF has a complementary role in this hormonal response. A single 
Pit-1 DNA-binding element from the prolactin promoter is sufficient to
reconstitute the inhibitory response to ERF. DNA binding analysis using either a 
composite Pit-1/ETS protein-binding site or a Pit-1 element with no known
affinity for ETS proteins revealed that ERF interferes with Pit-1 binding.
Together, these results demonstrate that ERF is a specific inhibitor of basal and
hormone-regulated transcription of the prolactin gene and suggest a new level of 
complexity for the interaction of ETS factors with Pit-1 target genes.

PMID: 9822660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Oncogene. 1998 Oct 22;17(16):2087-93.

The her-2/neu oncogene stimulates the transcription of
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V and expression of its cell surface
oligosaccharide products.

Chen L(1), Zhang W, Fregien N, Pierce M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Complex Carbohydrate
Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens 30602, USA.

Malignant transformation is associated with changes in the glycosylation of cell 
surface proteins. For example, the N-linked oligosaccharides containing the
[GlcNAc beta(1,6)Man] branch are increased after transformation of many cell
types by a number of tumor viruses and oncogenes which induce the expression of
N-acetylglucosaminyl-transferase V (GlcNAc-T V), the enzyme that adds this
branch. A large percentage of human breast carcinomas have increased N-linked
beta(1,6) branches on glycoproteins, while up to 30% of breast carcinomas have
amplified the oncogene her-2/neu (erb-B2). We tested the hypothesis that
expression of her-2/neu stimulates GlcNAc-T V gene expression and increases the
beta(1,6) branching of N-linked oligosaccharides. We found that neu-transformed
NIH3T3 cells have a threefold increase in GlcNAc-T V enzyme activity and
increased beta(1,6) branching on a specific set of glycoproteins.
Promoter/reporter experiments showed that her-2/neu stimulates transcription from
the human GlcNAc-T V promoter and that the her-2/neu response element was located
about 400 bp 5' of the transcription initiation site and includes three Ets
transcription factor binding sequences. Co-transfections with dominant-negative
Raf and Ets expression plasmids demonstrated that the transcriptional activation 
of the GlcNAc-T V promoter by neu is mediated by the Ras-Raf-Ets signal
transduction pathway.

PMID: 9798679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Sep 29;250(3):547-54.

Identification and characterization of a new gene from human chromosome 21
between markers D21S343 and D21S268 encoding a leucine-rich protein.

Vidal-Taboada JM(1), Sanz S, Egeo A, Scartezzini P, Oliva R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Faculty
of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Casanova 143, Barcelona, 08036, Spain.

We initiated the present work as part of an effort to identify and characterize
genes from the EST2-HMG14 region from human chromosome 21 potentially responsible
for some of the Down syndrome (DS) features. Genomic sample sequencing with
cosmid clone A1047 located in the ETS2-HMG14 region of chromosome 21 has led to
the identification and sequencing of a novel 1080-bp cDNA. This cDNA contains a
potential ORF of 867 bp predicting a 288-amino-acid protein rich in leucine with 
a molecular weight of 32.8 kD. Northern blot analysis and RT-PRC indicate that
the expression of this novel gene is high in testis and in the human leukemic T
cell line Jurkat and lower in other tissues including all fetal tissues studied. 
We have called to this novel gene c21-LRP (chromosome 21 leucine-rich protein)
and, because of its location in the DS-2 region, it could be a candidate for some
of the DS anomalies. Mapping experiments have narrowed the location of the
c21-LRP gene between markers D21S343 and D21S268 from chromosome 21. Analysis of 
the c21-LRP protein predicts two transmembrane helices and detects several
signatures and potential homologies to known proteins pointing toward several
potential roles for this protein.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9784380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Genome Res. 1998 Sep;8(9):940-50.

Physical and comparative mapping of distal mouse chromosome 16. 5 p5.

Cabin DE(1), McKee-Johnson JW, Matesic LE, Wiltshire T, Rue EE, Mjaatvedt AE, Huo
YK, Korenberg JR, Reeves RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA.

Distal mouse Chromosome 16 (Chr. 16) includes a region of conserved linkage with 
human Chromosome 21 (Chr. 21). Mouse models of Down syndrome based on trisomy of 
distal Chr. 16 have several phenotypes similar to those seen in human patients
and have proven useful for correlating dosage imbalance of specific genes with
specific developmental anomalies. The degree to which such findings can be
related to Down syndrome depends on how well the conserved synteny is maintained.
Twenty-four genes have been mapped in both species and there are no
discordancies, but the region could carry hundreds of genes. Comparative sequence
represents the ultimate comparative map and will aid in identification of genes
and their regulatory sequences. A physical map of the distal 4.5 Mb of Chr. 16
has been assembled as an essential step toward a map of sequence-ready templates.
The map consists of 51 YACs and 15 BACs and includes 18 transcripts, 9 of which
are mapped for the first time in mouse, and 3 of which are, for the first time,
described in either species. YAC fragmentation was used to precisely localize the
49 markers on the map. Comparison of this physical map with that of the
corresponding region on Chr. 21 shows conservation not only of gene order but of 
size in the 3 Mb from Cbr1 to Ets2; distal to Ets2, the human map is expanded.

PMCID: PMC310775
PMID: 9750193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):5148-56.

Persistent activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases p42 and p44 and ets-2 
phosphorylation in response to colony-stimulating factor 1/c-fms signaling.

Fowles LF(1), Martin ML, Nelsen L, Stacey KJ, Redd D, Clark YM, Nagamine Y,
McMahon M, Hume DA, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Biochemistry and the Centre for Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, University of Queensland, Queensland Q4072, Australia.

An antibody that specifically recognized phosphothreonine 72 in ets-2 was used to
determine the phosphorylation status of endogenous ets-2 in response to
colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1)/c-fms signaling. Phosphorylation of ets-2 was
detected in primary macrophages, cells that normally express c-fms, and in
fibroblasts engineered to express human c-fms. In the former cells, ets-2 was a
CSF-1 immediate-early response gene, and phosphorylated ets-2 was detected after 
2 to 4 h, coincident with expression of ets-2 protein. In fibroblasts, ets-2 was 
constitutively expressed and rapidly became phosphorylated in response to CSF-1. 
In both cell systems, ets-2 phosphorylation was persistent, with maximal
phosphorylation detected 8 to 24 h after CSF-1 stimulation, and was correlated
with activation of the CSF-1 target urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) gene.
Kinase assays that used recombinant ets-2 protein as a substrate demonstrated
that mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases p42 and p44 were constitutively
activated in both cell types in response to CSF-1. Immune depletion experiments
and the use of the MAP kinase kinase inhibitor PD98059 indicate that these two
MAP kinases are the major ets-2 kinases activated in response to CSF-1/c-fms
signaling. In the macrophage cell line RAW264, conditional expression of raf
kinase induced ets-2 expression and phosphorylation, as well as uPA mRNA
expression. Transient assays mapped ets/AP-1 response elements as critical for
basal and CSF-1-stimulated uPA reporter gene activity. These results indicate
that persistent activation of the raf/MAP kinase pathway by CSF-1 is necessary
for both ets-2 expression and posttranslational activation in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC109100
PMID: 9710599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Chromosome Res. 1998 Jun;6(4):333-5.

Cloning and chromosomal localization of MX1 and ETS2 to chromosome 26 of the
horse (Equus caballus)

Lear TL(1), Breen M, Ponce de Leon FA, Coogle L, Ferguson EM, Chambers TM, Bailey
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, M. H. Gluck Equine Research Center,
University of Kentucky, Lexington 40546, USA. eqigene@pop.uky.edu

Comment on
    Chromosome Res. 1996 Apr;4(3):218-25.

PMID: 9688525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 24;273(30):18871-80.

Elevated expression of Ets2 or distinct portions of Ets2 can reverse Ras-mediated
cellular transformation.

Foos G(1), García-Ramírez JJ, Galang CK, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Center, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Ets transcription factors are important downstream targets of oncogenic Ras. The 
transcriptional activity of several Ets family members is regulated by Ras, and
interfering with Ets-dependent transcription by expression of just the Ets2 DNA
binding domain can inhibit or reverse Ras-mediated cellular transformation. To
better understand the role of Ets proteins in Ras transformation, we have now
analyzed the effects of stably expressing a variety of Ets2 constructs in
Ras-transformed NIH3T3 (DT) cells. Expression of only the Ets2 transactivation
domains, which also inhibits Ras or Neu/ErbB-2-mediated activation of
Ets-dependent transcription, strongly inhibited anchorage-independent growth, but
did not revert the transformed DT cell morphology. Unexpectedly, high expression 
of full-length Ets2, a transcriptional activator, broadly reversed the
transformed properties of DT cells, including anchorage-independent growth,
transformed morphology, and tumorigenicity, but did not impair attached cell
growth. Increasing full-length Ets2 transcriptional activity by fusing it to the 
VP16 transactivation domain enhanced its ability to reverse DT cell
transformation. Mutational analysis revealed that the mitogen-activated protein
kinase phosphorylation site required for Ras-mediated activation, Ets2(T72), was 
not essential for Ets2 reversion activity. The distinct reversion activities of
the highly expressed Ets2 transactivation domains or full-length Ets2, along with
the specific reversion activity by Ets2 constructs that either inhibit or
activate Ets-dependent transcription, suggests multiple roles for Ets factors in 
cellular transformation. These results indicate that several distinct approaches 
for modulating Ets activity may be useful for intervention in human cancers.

PMID: 9668063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Inflamm. 1998;48(2):67-83.

Involvement of Ets, rel and Sp1-like proteins in lipopolysaccharide-mediated
activation of the HIV-1 LTR in macrophages.

Sweet MJ(1), Stacey KJ, Ross IL, Ostrowski MC, Hume DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.

The HIV-1 promoter was used as a model to identify transcription factors involved
in LPS-dependent transcription in RAW 264 murine macrophages. Expression plasmids
for Ets-2 and PU.1 trans-activated the HIV-1 LTR and recombinant PU.1 and an
Ets-2 DNA binding domain/GST fusion protein bound to the 5' kappa B site of the
HIV-1 enhancer. Ets-2 mRNA was LPS-inducible in RAW 264 cells and LPS stimulated 
phosphorylation of threonine 72 residue within the Ets-2 pointed domain.
Induction of Ets-2 and other LPS-responsive transcription factors was also
observed upon addition of plasmid DNA, which complicates interpretation of
transient transfections. The proximal promoter region, containing two Sp1 sites, 
was also LPS-responsive. We propose that the kappa B elements and the tandem Sp1 
sites act as LPS response elements and that kappa B-mediated LPS action involves 
Ets and rel factors.

PMID: 9656143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 7;95(14):7882-7.

Control of interferon-tau gene expression by Ets-2.

Ezashi T(1), Ealy AD, Ostrowski MC, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211,
USA.

Expression of the multiple interferon-tau (IFN-tau) genes is restricted to
embryonic trophectoderm of ruminant ungulate species for a few days in early
pregnancy. The promoter regions of these genes are highly conserved. A proximal
(bp -91 to -69) sequence has been implicated in controlling trophoblast-specific 
expression. Here it was used as a target for yeast one-hybrid screening of a day 
13 conceptus cDNA library. Two transcription factors of the Ets family, Ets-2 and
GABPalpha, were identified, consistent with the observation that active ovine
IFN-tau genes contain a single 10-bp Ets motif (core: GGAA) in the proximal
segment, whereas three known inactive ovine genes contain a mutated core motif
(TGAA). Cotransfection of a promoter- (-126 to +50) luciferase reporter construct
from an active gene (bovineIFN-tau1; boIFNT1) and an Ets-2 expression plasmid in 
human JAr cells provided up to a 30-fold increase in reporter expression, whereas
promoters from inactive genes were not transactivated. GABPalpha alone was
ineffective and had only a approximately 2-fold positive effect when coexpressed 
with its partner GABPbeta. Other Ets-related transcription factors, which were
not detected in the genetic screen, also provided a range of lesser
transactivation effects. Coexpression of Ets-2 and activated Ras failed to
transactivate the IFNT promoter greater than Ets-2 alone in JAr cells. The
presence of Ets-2 in nuclei of embryonic trophectoderm was confirmed
immunocytochemically. Together, these data suggest that Ets-2 plays a role in the
transient expression of the nonvirally inducible IFNT genes.

PMCID: PMC20898
PMID: 9653109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Int J Cancer. 1998 Jul 3;77(1):128-37.

The Ets-1 and Ets-2 transcription factors activate the promoters for
invasion-associated urokinase and collagenase genes in response to epidermal
growth factor.

Watabe T(1), Yoshida K, Shindoh M, Kaya M, Fujikawa K, Sato H, Seiki M, Ishii S, 
Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University, School of Medicine, Japan.

Urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) has been associated with invasion and
metastasis in breast cancer. The expression of uPA and 92 kDa type IV collagenase
(gelatinase B/MMP-9) is regulated by growth factors, receptor-type tyrosine
kinases and cytoplasmic oncoproteins. Here, we have identified transcriptional
requirements for the induction of uPA and 92 kDa type IV collagenase by epidermal
growth factor (EGF). EGF stimulates the motile and invasive activities
specifically in the ErbB-2-overexpressing SK-BR-3 cells. Expression of
extracellular matrix-degrading proteases including type I collagenase/MMP-1, 92
kDa type IV collagenase/MMP-9, uPA and uPA receptor were induced. EGF also
transiently stimulated expression of the transcription factors Ets-1 and Ets-2.
Reporter transfection assays revealed the activation of uPA and MMP-9 collagenase
promoters by EGF and the requirement of each of the composite Ets and AP-1
transcription factor binding sites for an EGF response. Most notably,
transfections with the Ets-1 and Ets-2 expression vectors potentiated uPA and
MMP-9 promoter activation in response to EGF. Mutation of the threonine 75
residue of chicken Ets-2 conserved in the Pointed group of the Ets family
proteins abrogated the ability of Ets-2 to collaborate with EGF. Ets-1 and Ets-2 
were highly expressed in invasive breast tumor cell lines. Our results suggest
that Ets-1 and Ets-2 provide the link connecting EGF stimuli with activation of
uPA and 92 kDa type IV collagenase promoters and may contribute to invasion
phenotypes.

PMID: 9639404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Genes Dev. 1998 May 1;12(9):1315-26.

Defective trophoblast function in mice with a targeted mutation of Ets2.

Yamamoto H(1), Flannery ML, Kupriyanov S, Pearce J, McKercher SR, Henkel GW, Maki
RA, Werb Z, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. rgoshima@ljcrf.edu

Members of the Ets family of transcription factors mediate transcriptional
responses of multiple signaling pathways in diverse cell types and organisms.
Targeted deletion of the conserved DNA binding domain of the Ets2 transcription
factor results in the retardation and death of homozygous mouse embryos before
8.5 days of embryonic development. Defects in extraembryonic tissue gene
expression and function include deficient expression of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9, gelatinase B), persistent extracellular matrix, and
failure of ectoplacental cone proliferation. Mutant embryos were rescued by
aggregation with tetraploid mouse embryos, which complement the developmental
defects by providing functional extraembryonic tissues. Rescued Ets2-deficient
mice are viable and fertile but have wavy hair, curly whiskers, and abnormal hair
follicle shape and arrangement, resembling mice with mutations of the EGF
receptor or its ligands. However, these mice are not deficient in the production 
of TGFalpha or the EGF receptor. Homozygous mutant cell lines respond
mitogenically to TGFalpha, EGF, FGF1, and FGF2. However, FGF fails to induce
MMP-13 (collagenase-3) and MMP-3 (stromelysin-1) in the Ets2-deficient
fibroblasts. Ectopic expression of Ets2 in the deficient fibroblasts restores
expression of both matrix metalloproteinases. Therefore, Ets2 is essential for
placental function, mediating growth factor signaling to key target genes
including MMP-3, MMP-9, and MMP-13 in different cell types, and for regulating
hair development.

PMCID: PMC316781
PMID: 9573048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Apr 17;1377(2):F1-11.

Ets transcription factors and human disease.

Dittmer J(1), Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, Germany.

PMID: 9606973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cancer Res. 1998 May 15;58(10):2253-9.

Activation of the ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway and
phosphorylation of ets-2 at position threonine 72 in human ovarian cancer cell
lines.

Patton SE(1), Martin ML, Nelsen LL, Fang X, Mills GB, Bast RC Jr, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA.

The activation status of the ras pathway was studied in eight ovarian tumor cell 
lines. Three biochemical parameters indicative of ras activation were tested: (a)
the ratio of the ras-GTP:ras-GDP complex; (b) the activity of mitogen-activated
protein kinases p42/p44; and (c) ets-2 phosphorylation at position threonine 72, 
a mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation site in vivo. Four of the
ovarian tumor cell lines had an activated ras pathway by these three parameters, 
whereas only one of these contained a mutated ras gene. In addition, ras/ets-2
responsive genes such as the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) were activated
in these four cell lines. Transient transfection assays indicated that the
compound ets-AP1 oncogene responsive enhancer present in the uPA gene was the
target of ras signaling in ovarian tumor cells and that the combination of
activated ras and ets-2 could superactivate the uPA enhancer element.
Coexpression of the dominant-negative ras-Asn17 cDNA gene abrogated activity of
this uPA element in ovarian tumor cells. These data indicate that ets-2 is a
nuclear target of ras action in ovarian tumor cell lines and that ras signaling
pathways may be activated in ovarian cancer by mechanisms independent of direct
genetic damage to ras genes.

PMID: 9605774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Oncogene. 1998 Apr 23;16(16):2065-73.

The transcription of the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 is regulated by Ets
transcription factors.

de Launoit Y(1), Audette M, Pelczar H, Plaza S, Baert JL.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 319 CNRS - Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie, France.

The Ets family of transcription factors comprises several members which are
involved to regulate gene transcription. Although several consensus binding sites
for Ets proteins can be found in a wide series of promoter, only a limited number
of them are indeed activated by these transcription factors. The human
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) plays a crucial role in immune
responses by enabling the binding of effector cells to various target cell types.
ICAM-1 is constitutively expressed at different levels in the absence of stimuli 
in different cell types, and its expression is upregulated by several
proinflammatory cytokines. We have here examined the transcriptional regulation
of human ICAM-1 expression by Ets proteins, and more particularly by ERM, a
member of this family of transcription factors. Transient transfection assays
revealed that Ets-2 and ERM significantly activate the transcription of ICAM-1
promoter, whereas the less-related Ets family member, Spi-1/Pu.1, failed to do
so. Transfection of a series of ICAM-1 promoter deletion mutants together with
ERM expression plasmids have shown that an Ets responsive element is located
within the first 176 bp upstream from the translational start site.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and DNase I footprinting analysis have
enabled us to identify two Ets binding sites at positions -158 and -138 from the 
ATG, respectively. Site directed mutagenesis of these elements has shown that the
distal site is the major element required for the ERM-mediated activation of the 
ICAM-1 promoter. We can thus conclude that expression of ICAM-1 can be regulated 
by Ets transcription factors.

PMID: 9572487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Hum Genet. 1998 Mar;102(3):289-93.

Identification and characterization of a new human cDNA from chromosome 21q22.3
encoding a basic nuclear protein.

Egeo A(1), Mazzocco M, Sotgia F, Arrigo P, Oliva R, Bergonòn S, Nizetic D,
Rasore-Quartino A, Scartezzini P.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Pediatria, E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) affects over 40% of Down syndrome (DS) patients.
The region proposed to contain the gene(s) for DS CHD has been restricted to
21q22.2-22.3, from D21S55 to MX1. The identification and functional
characterization of the genes mapping to this region is a necessary step to
understand the pathogenesis of CHD in DS. In an effort to contribute to the
construction of a transcriptional map of the DS CHD region we have performed
direct cDNA selection using a YAC contig that maps between ETS2 and D21S15 and
cDNAs synthesised from fetal heart structures. Here we describe the
identification and characterization of a new gene, WRB, that maps to 21q22.3
between ACTL5 and HMG 14 and appears to be widely expressed in adult and fetal
tissues. The new gene encodes a basic protein of unknown function containing a
tryptophan-rich carboxyl-terminal region and a potential nuclear localization
signal. Immunofluorescence analysis shows a predominant localization in the cell 
nucleus. The understanding of the biological function of the protein product
should clarify the potential role of WRB in the pathogenesis of DS CHD.

PMID: 9544840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 13;273(11):6431-8.

Synergistic regulation of the human interleukin-12 p40 promoter by NFkappaB and
Ets transcription factors in Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B cells and
macrophages.

Gri G(1), Savio D, Trinchieri G, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104,
USA.

Monocytes/macrophages produce interleukin-12 (IL-12) in response to pathogenic
stimulation, whereas most Epstein-Barr virus-transformed (EBV+) B cells
constitutively secrete IL-12. The molecular mechanism regulating the constitutive
IL-12 gene expression in EBV+ B cells has not been addressed. In this study,
using the EBV+ B cell line RPMI-8866, we localized to the human IL-12 p40
promoter two essential cis elements, the NFkappaB site and the Ets site. The
NFkappaB site was shown to interact with members of the NFkappaB family: p50 and 
c-Rel. The Ets site constitutively bound a multi-component Ets-2-containing
complex. While the NFkappaB and Ets sites appear equally critical for inducible
p40 promoter activity in macrophage cell lines, NFkappaB plays a more dominant
role in the constitutive p40 promoter activity in EBV+ B cells. Transient
expression of Ets-2 and c-Rel in B, T, and monocytic cell lines synergistically
activated the IL-12 p40 promoter, apparently overcoming the requirement for cell 
type- or stimulant-specific transcription factors. These data provide new
evidence that full activation of the human IL-12 p40 promoter may result
primarily from the interplay between NFkappaB and Ets family members.

PMID: 9497375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Blood. 1998 Mar 15;91(6):1934-46.

Myb and ets proteins are candidate regulators of c-kit expression in human
hematopoietic cells.

Ratajczak MZ(1), Perrotti D, Melotti P, Powzaniuk M, Calabretta B, Onodera K,
Kregenow DA, Machalinski B, Gewirtz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Kit is a tyrosine kinase receptor that plays an important role in human
hematopoietic cell growth. The promoter elements that modulate the gene's
expression have not been extensively studied. Because of c-kit's acknowledged
importance in hematopoiesis, we sought to address this issue in more detail. To
perform these studies we analyzed a human c-kit 5' flanking fragment
approximately 1 kilobase in length. Deletion constructs showed a region
approximately 139 nucleotides upstream from the translation initiation site that 
was critical for promoter activity. A region containing a potential silencing
element was also identified. Sequence analysis indicated several potential Myb-
and Ets-binding sites. The functional significance of these sites was explored by
showing that both wild-type Myb and Ets-2 protein, but not a DNA
binding-deficient Myb mutant protein, bound to distinct 5' flanking fragments
that included these sites. Furthermore, binding of recombinant Myb and Ets-2
protein to these fragments could be competed with an excess of double stranded
oligodeoxynucleotides containing canonical, but not mutated, Myb- or Ets-binding 
sites. We also showed that the 5' flanking region of c-kit exhibited promoter
activity in nonhematopoietic cells only when the cells were transfected with
c-myb or ets-2 expression vectors. Moreover, Myb and Ets-2 coexpression in such
cells augmented transactivation of c-kit promoter constructs in comparison to
that observed in cells transfected with either construct alone. Promoter
constructs lacking various Myb and Ets sites deleted were much less effective in 
this same system. Finally, Myb and Ets-2 mRNA expression was detected in CD34+,
Kit low as well as CD34+, Kit bright cells. In aggregate, these data further
define the human c-kit promoter's functional anatomy and suggest that Myb and Ets
proteins play an important, perhaps cooperative, role in regulating expression of
this critical hematopoietic cell receptor.

PMID: 9490676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cancer Res. 1998 Mar 1;58(5):1027-33.

Ets-2 transdominant mutant abolishes anchorage-independent growth and macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor-stimulated invasion by BT20 breast carcinoma cells.

Sapi E(1), Flick MB, Rodov S, Kacinski BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520-8040, USA. eva.sapi@yale.edu

Activation of the macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor (CSF-1R) by its
cognate ligand CSF-1 dramatically increases the tumorigenicity and invasive
potential of both normal and neoplastic mammary epithelial cells. Recent studies 
have suggested that the Ets2 transcription factor plays a central role in
mediating CSF-1R-induced mitogenesis in fibroblasts. To determine whether the
Ets2 transcription factor can also mediate CSF-1- and CSF-1R-stimulated signaling
pathways in mammary epithelial cells, we expressed a dominant negative mutant,
Ets2, in the CSF-1R- and Ets2-positive BT20 breast carcinoma cell line and
examined its effects on CSF-1-induced cellular invasion and on colony formation
in soft agar. Our data show that stable expression of the mutant Ets2 in BT20
cells completely inhibits the formation of soft agar colonies and abolishes the
CSF-1-stimulated invasion of these cells through a barrier of reconstituted
basement membrane (Matrigel). We have also demonstrated that the expression of
this Ets2 mutant is capable of interrupting the CSF-1R-regulated intracellular
signaling pathways by inhibiting CSF-1-induced c-myc, c-fos, and c-jun expression
in BT20 cells. Our results are the first demonstration of an important role for
the Ets2 transcription factor in the regulation of the anchorage-independent
growth and cellular invasiveness of neoplastic mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 9500466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Feb 3;95(3):1289-94.

Identification of a neuregulin and protein-tyrosine phosphatase response element 
in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor epsilon subunit gene: regulatory role of 
an Rts transcription factor.

Sapru MK(1), Florance SK, Kirk C, Goldman D.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Research Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

At the neuromuscular synapse, innervation induces endplate-specific expression of
adult-type nicotinic acetylcholine receptors by selective expression of their
subunit-encoding genes (alpha2betaepsilondelta) in endplate-associated myonuclei.
These genes are specifically regulated by protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase)
activity. In addition, neuregulin/acetylcholine-receptor-inducing activity, a
nerve-derived factor that stimulates nicotinic acetylcholine receptor synthesis, 
induces adult-type specific epsilon subunit gene expression via activation of a
Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. However, the DNA regulatory
elements and the binding proteins that mediate PTPase and neuregulin-dependent
gene expression remain unknown. Herein we report that PTPase, neuregulin, and
Ras-dependent regulation of the epsilon subunit gene map to a 15-bp promoter
sequence. Interestingly, this same 15-bp sequence appears to be necessary for low
epsilon subunit gene expression in extrajunctional regions of the muscle fiber.
Site-directed mutagenesis of a putative Ets binding site located within this
15-bp sequence, reduced PTPase, neuregulin, and Ras-dependent regulation.
Overexpression of the rat muscle Ets-2 transcription factor resulted in a
sequence-specific induction of epsilon subunit promoter activity. Further, a
dominant negative mutant of Ets-2 abolished neuregulin-dependent induction of
epsilon subunit gene expression. Thus, these results indicate a crucial role for 
the 15-bp element in determining synapse-specific and neuregulin-mediated motor
neuron control of epsilon subunit gene expression and suggest the participation
of Ets transcription factor(s) in this control.

PMCID: PMC18748
PMID: 9448324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Gene. 1997 Nov 12;201(1-2):179-87.

Cooperation of two PEA3/AP1 sites in uPA gene induction by TPA and FGF-2.

D'Orazio D(1), Besser D, Marksitzer R, Kunz C, Hume DA, Kiefer B, Nagamine Y.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

We have previously shown in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts that treatment with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) or fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) 
activates the Ras/Erk signaling pathway in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, leading to the
induction of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene. In this study, 
we characterize cis-acting elements involved in this induction. DNase I
hypersensitive (HS) site analysis of the uPA promoter showed that two regions
were enhanced after TPA and FGF-2 treatment. One was located 2.4kb upstream of
the transcription start site (-2.4kb), where a known PEA3/AP1 (AGGAAATGAGGTCAT)
element is located. The other was located in a previously undefined far upstream 
region. Sequencing of this region revealed a similar AP1/PEA3 (GTGATTCACTTCCT)
element at -6.9 kb corresponding to the HS site. Deletion analysis of the uPA
promoter in transient transfection assays showed that both PEA3/AP1 elements are 
required for full inducibility, suggesting a synergism between the two elements. 
When the two sites were inserted together upstream of a minimal promoter derived 
from the thymidine kinase gene, expression of the reporter gene was more strongly
induced by TPA and FGF-2 than with either of the two elements alone. Alone, the
-6.9 element was more potent than the -2.4 element. The involvement of AP1 as
well as Ets transcription factors was confirmed by examining different promoter
constructs containing deletions in either the AP-1 or the PEA3 element, and by
using an expression plasmid for dominant negative Ets-2. Electromobility shift
analyses using specific antibodies showed that c-Jun and, JunD bind to both
elements with or without induction. In addition, ATF-2 binds to the -2.4-kb
element even without induction and c-Fos to the -6.9-kb element only after
induction. Accordingly, overexpression of c-Fos caused induction from the -6.9-kb
element, but reduced induction from the -2.4-kb element. The involvement of the
Ets-2 transcription factor was shown by using expression plasmids for wild-type
and dominant negative Ets-2.

PMID: 9409785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Oncogene. 1997 Nov 13;15(20):2449-62.

A novel epithelial-expressed ETS gene, ELF3: human and murine cDNA sequences,
murine genomic organization, human mapping to 1q32.2 and expression in tissues
and cancer.

Tymms MJ(1), Ng AY, Thomas RS, Schutte BC, Zhou J, Eyre HJ, Sutherland GR, Seth
A, Rosenberg M, Papas T, Debouck C, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Group, Institute of Reproduction and
Development, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The ETS family of genes are implicated in cancers such as Ewings sarcoma, acute
myeloid leukemia and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Further, they have
important functions in embryonic development. Hence, identification and
characterization of members of this family are important. We identify a novel ETS
family member, ELF3, and report its human and murine cDNA sequences. The mouse
cDNA has an alternatively spliced transcript with an extra 60 bp inserted. Hence 
we present the organization of the murine Elf3 gene together with its exon/intron
structure. This gene consists of 9 exons and 8 introns spanning 4.8 kb. ELF3
binds and transactivates ETS sequences and interestingly also shows the ability
to bind a GGAT-like purine core, a preferential ETS1/ETS2 type binding site. The 
expression of ELF3, unlike most other ETS family members, is absent in
hematopoietic cells and hematopoietic organs in humans and mice. Intriguingly,
the gene is specifically expressed in cell lines of epithelial origin and in
organs such as lung, stomach, intestine, kidney that have specialized epithelial 
cells. We localize the human gene to 1q32.2, a region that is amplified in
epithelial tumors of the breast, lung and prostate. Finally, we show that ELF3
expression is increased in a lung carcinoma and adenocarcinoma, as compared to
normal tissue. ELF3 is also expressed in cell lines derived from lung cancers.
These results suggest that this novel ETS gene may be involved in lung
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9395241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 31;272(44):27549-57.

A regulatory element within a coding exon modulates keratin 18 gene expression in
transgenic mice.

Neznanov N(1), Umezawa A, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Multiple tissue-specific, DNase-hypersensitive sites are correlated with known or
potential regulatory regions of the human keratin 18 (K18) gene. One of these
sites is found within exon 6, close to a potential AP-1 binding site. Footprint
analysis confirmed that this site is capable of binding c-Jun and c-Fos in vitro.
However, exon 6 can stimulate expression of a reporter gene driven by the K18
proximal promoter independent of AP-1 in F9 cells and additionally modulates AP-1
responsiveness when in combination with an intron enhancer. Analysis in
transgenic mice and by transient transfections of mutant forms of the K18 gene
showed that exon 6 contributes to the expression of the K18 gene. However,
substitution of part of exon 6 with the corresponding part of the keratin 19 gene
which lacks an AP-1 site decreased but did not destroy the regulatory activity of
the exon. Furthermore, this mutation did not alter either the tissue specificity 
or the position-independent and copy number-dependent behavior of the K18 gene.
In contrast, a frameshift mutation within exon 6 dramatically decreased the
expression of the gene. K18 RNA expression from the frameshift mutation was less 
than 10% of the wild type K18 transgene. This decline in expression was the
result of a combination of decreased stability of mutant K18 RNA and the creation
of a negative regulatory element that can interact with the first intron
regulatory elements and actively suppress K18 expression. These results
demonstrate that a protein-coding portion of the K18 gene also has a regulatory
function.

PMID: 9346889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 17;272(42):26188-95.

The Ets transcription factors interact with each other and with the c-Fos/c-Jun
complex via distinct protein domains in a DNA-dependent and -independent manner.

Basuyaux JP(1), Ferreira E, Stéhelin D, Butticè G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, CNRS IFR3, 1 rue Calmette, B.P. 447, 59021
Lille, France.

The transcription factors Fos, Jun, and Ets regulate the expression of human
stromelysin-1 and collagenase-1 genes. Recently, we found that ERG, an Ets family
member, activates collagenase-1 gene but not stromelysin-1 by physically
interacting with c-Fos/c-Jun. Interestingly, ERG binds to stromelysin-1 promoter 
and represses its activation by ETS2. Here, to investigate the molecular
mechanism of this regulation, we have used an in vitro protein-protein
interaction assay and studied the transcription factor interactions of ETS2. We
found that ETS2 could weakly associate with in vitro synthesized ETS1, c-Fos, and
c-Jun and strongly with c-Fos/c-Jun complex and ERG via several distinct ETS2
domains including the C-terminal region that contains the DNA-binding domain.
Strikingly, these interactions were stabilized in vitro by DNA as they were
inhibited by ethidium bromide. Both the N-terminal region, comprising the
transactivation domain, and the C-terminal region of ETS2 associated with ERG
and, interestingly, the interaction of ERG through the transactivation domain of 
ETS2 was DNA-independent. The DNA-dependent interaction of ETS2 with c-Fos/c-Jun 
was enhanced by specific DNA fragments requiring two Ets-binding sites of the
stromelysin-1 promoter. Using the two hybrid system, we also demonstrated that
ETS2 interacts with c-Jun or ERG in vivo.

PMID: 9334186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):4885-94.

Methylation of an ETS site in the intron enhancer of the keratin 18 gene
participates in tissue-specific repression.

Umezawa A(1), Yamamoto H, Rhodes K, Klemsz MJ, Maki RA, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The activities of ETS transcription factors are modulated by posttranscriptional 
modifications and cooperation with other proteins. Another factor which could
alter the regulation of genes by ETS transcription factors is DNA methylation of 
their cognate binding sites. The optimal activity of the keratin 18 (K18) gene is
dependent upon an ETS binding site within an enhancer region located in the first
intron. The methylation of the ETS binding site was correlated with the
repression of the K18 gene in normal human tissues and in K18 transgenic mouse
tissues. Neither recombinant ETS2 nor endogenous spleen ETS binding activities
bound the methylated site effectively. Increased expression of the K18 gene in
spleens of transgenic mice by use of an alternative, cryptic promoter 700 bp
upstream of the enhancer resulted in modestly decreased methylation of the K18
ETS site and increased RNA expression. Expression in transgenic mice of a mutant 
K18 gene, which was still capable of activation by ETS factors but was no longer 
a substrate for DNA methylation of the ETS site, was fivefold higher in spleen
and heart. However, expression in other organs such as liver and intestine was
similar to that of the wild-type gene. This result suggests that DNA methylation 
of the K18 ETS site may be functionally important in the tissue-specific
repression of the K18 gene. Epigenetic modification of the binding sites for some
ETS transcription factors may result in a refractory transcriptional response
even in the presence of necessary trans-acting activities.

PMCID: PMC232341
PMID: 9271368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 28;15(9):1103-10.

Cellular and viral trans-acting factors modulate N-myc2 promoter activity in
woodchuck liver tumors.

Flajolet M(1), Gegonne A, Ghysdael J, Tiollais P, Buendia MA, Fourel G.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique (INSERM U163), Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.

Activation of the N-myc2 oncogene by integration of woodchuck hepatitis virus
(WHV) DNA is a central event in woodchuck liver oncogenesis. In this study, we
have evaluated the influence of several cellular and viral trans-acting factors
and mediators of inflammation on N-myc2 promoter activity in hepatoma cell lines.
Ets oncoproteins, including Ets1, Ets2 and PEA3 efficiently activated a chimeric 
N-myc2 promoter/luciferase reporter gene. By electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, we show that Etsl and Ets2 proteins can efficiently bind two consensus
Ets sites located within a 59 bp sequence upstream of the N-myc2 transcription
start site. Site-directed mutagenesis of these Ets-binding motifs abolished
transactivation of the N-myc2 promoter by Ets proteins. Addition of interleukin-6
(IL-6) induced a weak but reproducible activation of the N-myc2 promoter, while
IL-1 was ineffective. We further show that the N-myc2 promoter can be
transactivated by the hepadna-virus X protein, and that distal promoter sequences
are required for both IL-6 and X responsiveness. Similar effects of these factors
were observed in the context of the N-myc2 promoter activated by WHV
cis-regulatory elements. In view of the high-level expression of the N-myc2
oncogene in most woodchuck liver tumors, the Ets oncoproteins,
inflammation-associated cytokine IL-6 and the viral X transactivator might play
important roles in hepadnavirus-associated tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9285565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 22;272(34):21432-43.

Murine A-myb gene encodes a transcription factor, which cooperates with Ets-2 and
exhibits distinctive biochemical and biological activities from c-myb.

Oh IH(1), Reddy EP.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

The myb gene family consists of three members, named A-, B-, and c-myb, which
encode nuclear proteins that bind to DNA and function as regulators of
transcription. Our results show that murine A-myb is a poor transactivator of
transcription compared with murine c-myb. Deletion of the COOH-terminal domain of
A-Myb, or co-expression with Ets-2 resulted in increased transactivation
potential. While ectopic overexpression of c-myb in 32Dcl3 cells results in a
block to the ability of these cells to undergo terminal differentiation resulting
in indefinite growth in granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), similar
overexpression of A-myb results in growth arrest and concomitant terminal
differentiation of 32D cells into granulocytes. Co-expression of A-myb and ets-2 
in these cells results in the restoration of the proliferative activity of the
cells in G-CSF, but fails to induce a block to G-CSF-induced terminal
differentiation. However, overexpression of the COOH-terminal deletion mutant of 
A-myb results in a block to G-CSF-induced differentiation of 32D cells,
suggesting that the distinctive biological phenotypes produced by A-myb and c-myb
genes are mediated by their COOH-terminal domains.

PMID: 9261159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Leukemia. 1997 Aug;11(8):1224-33.

ETS-1 induces increased expression of erythroid markers in the pluripotent
erythroleukemic cell lines K562 and HEL.

Clausen PA(1), Athanasiou M, Chen Z, Dunn KJ, Zhang Q, Lautenberger JA,
Mavrothalassitis G, Blair DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA.

Members of the ETS gene family are known to be expressed in hematopoietic tissues
and cell lines, and there is increasing evidence that ETS proteins may play a
role in normal hematopoietic cell development. We demonstrate that ETS-1 can
contribute to the development of an erythroid phenotype in vitro. The pluripotent
erythroleukemic K562 and HEL cell lines express messages for a number of ETS
genes, but only c-ETS-1 levels are elevated in response to treatment with hemin
or cytosine arabinofuranoside (Ara-C), agents which induce erythroid
differentiation. Furthermore, ETS-1 antisense oligonucleotides inhibit
hemoglobinization of cells treated with Ara-C or hemin, and K562 and HEL cells
infected with retrovirus expressing the c-ETS-1 gene exhibit a significant
increase in erythroid character (as indicated by benzidine staining for
hemoglobin (Hb) and surface marker analysis), a dramatic increase in
responsiveness to hemin or Ara-C, and a decreased rate of proliferation (20-40%
of control rates). In contrast, infection with virus expressing ETS-2 or vector
sequences only causes no detectable changes in the proliferation or erythroid
character of either the HEL or K562 cell lines. These data indicate a role for
ETS-1 in erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 9264374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 8;94(14):7170-5.

ETS target genes: identification of egr1 as a target by RNA differential display 
and whole genome PCR techniques.

Robinson L(1), Panayiotakis A, Papas TS, Kola I, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced BioScience Laboratories, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

ETS transcription factors play important roles in hematopoiesis, angiogenesis,
and organogenesis during murine development. The ETS genes also have a role in
neoplasia, for example in Ewing's sarcomas and retrovirally induced cancers. The 
ETS genes encode transcription factors that bind to specific DNA sequences and
activate transcription of various cellular and viral genes. To isolate novel ETS 
target genes, we used two approaches. In the first approach, we isolated genes by
the RNA differential display technique. Previously, we have shown that the
overexpression of ETS1 and ETS2 genes effects transformation of NIH 3T3 cells and
specific transformants produce high levels of the ETS proteins. To isolate ETS1
and ETS2 responsive genes in these transformed cells, we prepared RNA from ETS1, 
ETS2 transformants, and normal NIH 3T3 cell lines and converted it into cDNA.
This cDNA was amplified by PCR and displayed on sequencing gels. The
differentially displayed bands were subcloned into plasmid vectors. By Northern
blot analysis, several clones showed differential patterns of mRNA expression in 
the NIH 3T3-, ETS1-, and ETS2-expressing cell lines. Sixteen clones were analyzed
by DNA sequence analysis, and 13 of them appeared to be unique because their DNA 
sequences did not match with any of the known genes present in the gene bank.
Three known genes were found to be identical to the CArG box binding factor,
phospholipase A2-activating protein, and early growth response 1 (Egr1) genes. In
the second approach, to isolate ETS target promoters directly, we performed ETS1 
binding with MboI-cleaved genomic DNA in the presence of a specific mAb followed 
by whole genome PCR. The immune complex-bound ETS binding sites containing DNA
fragments were amplified and subcloned into pBluescript and subjected to DNA
sequence and computer analysis. We found that, of a large number of clones
isolated, 43 represented unique sequences not previously identified. Three clones
turned out to contain regulatory sequences derived from human serglycin,
preproapolipoprotein C II, and Egr1 genes. The ETS binding sites derived from
these three regulatory sequences showed specific binding with recombinant ETS
proteins. Of interest, Egr1 was identified by both of these techniques,
suggesting strongly that it is indeed an ETS target gene.

PMCID: PMC23781
PMID: 9207063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Oncogene. 1997 May 8;14(18):2149-57.

Altered expression of Erg and Ets-2 transcription factors is associated with
genetic changes at 21q22.2-22.3 in immortal and cervical carcinoma cell lines.

Simpson S(1), Woodworth CD, DiPaolo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 is the most frequently detected HPV in
cervical cancer. Although epidemiologic and experimental evidence indicates a
prominent role for HPV infection in the development of this disease, other
factors are also involved. Altered expression of the ets family transcription
factors erg and ets-2 was found associated with the development of cervical
carcinoma. Overexpression also occurred in a HPV-16-immortalized cervical cell
line, CX16-2, which has HPV integrated at a translocation breakpoint t(19;21)
involving 21q22.2-22.3, where these genes have been mapped. Six of 10 cervical
carcinoma cell lines overexpressed ets-2 RNA suggesting an association of
overexpression with cervical cell neoplasia. A clonally related pair of cervical 
carcinoma cell lines, C-4I and C-4II, showed differential expression of erg and
ets-2. C-4I overexpressed ets-2 RNA compared to normal cervical cells and C-4II. 
C-4II expressed a 5.3 kb erg transcript not seen in C-4I, ectocervical cells or
other cervical carcinoma cell lines examined. Pulsed field gel electrophoresis
was used to analyse changes in DNA fragments related to structural changes and to
construct a physical map encompassing erg and ets-2. Alterations in erg and ets-2
RNA expression in each of three different cell lines examined were associated
with translocations. Association between altered expression of erg and ets-2 and 
altered regional structural suggests that these genes are important targets in
cervical carcinogenesis.

PMID: 9174050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2401-12.

Rapid phosphorylation of Ets-2 accompanies mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation and the induction of heparin-binding epidermal growth factor gene
expression by oncogenic Raf-1.

McCarthy SA(1), Chen D, Yang BS, Garcia Ramirez JJ, Cherwinski H, Chen XR,
Klagsbrun M, Hauser CA, Ostrowski MC, McMahon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Signaling, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, California
94304, USA.

Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor (HB-EGF) gene transcription is rapidly
activated in NIH 3T3 cells transformed by oncogenic Ras and Raf and mediates the 
autocrine activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) observed in these
cells. A 1.7-kb fragment of the promoter of the murine HB-EGF gene linked to a
luciferase reporter was strongly induced following activation of deltaRaf-1:ER, a
conditionally active form of oncogenic human Raf-1. Promoter activation by
deltaRaf-1:ER required a composite AP-1/Ets transcription factor binding site
located between bp -974 and -988 upstream of the translation initiation site. In 
vivo genomic footprinting indicated that the basal level of occupancy of this
composite AP-1/Ets element increased following deltaRaf-1:ER activation.
Cotransfection of Ets-2 and p44 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase expression
vectors strongly potentiated HB-EGF promoter activation in response to
deltaRaf-1:ER. Potentiated activation required both p44 MAP kinase catalytic
activity and threonine 72 in the Pointed domain of Ets-2. Biochemical assays
demonstrated the ability of the p42 and p44 MAP kinases to phosphorylate Ets-2 on
threonine 72. Importantly, in intact cells, the kinetics of phosphorylation of
Ets-2 on this residue closely mirror the activation of the p42 and p44 MAP
kinases and the observed onset of HB-EGF gene transcription following
deltaRaf-1:ER activation. These data firmly establish Ets-2 as a direct target of
the Raf-MEK-MAP kinase signaling pathway and strongly implicate Ets-2 in the
regulation of HB-EGF gene expression.

PMCID: PMC232089
PMID: 9111309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 18;272(16):10389-95.

Identification and characterization of a novel Ets-2-related nuclear complex
implicated in the activation of the human interleukin-12 p40 gene promoter.

Ma X(1), Neurath M, Gri G, Trinchieri G.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a proinflammatory cytokine produced by
antigen-presenting cells in response to many microbial infections. IL-12 plays an
important role in the generation of T helper type-1 cells, which favor
cell-mediated immune response. IL-12 is composed of two different subunits, p40
and p35, whose expression can be regulated concomitantly or differentially.
Monocytic cells, the major producers of IL-12, can be primed by interferon-gamma 
(IFN-gamma) to produce optimal amounts of IL-12 in response to LPS stimulation as
a consequence of bacterial infection. The priming effect is exerted primarily at 
the transcriptional level on the p40 promoter in conjunction with the effects of 
LPS, possibly by inducing specific transcription factors, which individually have
no direct effect but which cooperatively can activate the promoter. We examined
in detail one of these DNA-protein interactions observed around an Ets-2 element 
situated at -211/-207 of the p40 promoter, which is known to be a functionally
critical site. This region interacts with a nuclear complex termed F1 that
appears to be highly inducible by either IFN-gamma treatment for 16 h or
lipopolysaccharide stimulation for 8 h. F1 binding to the Ets-2 site requires a
considerable amount of spacing around the Ets-2 site, as revealed by gel mobility
shift and in vitro methylation assays. Supershift experiments and DNA affinity
purification indicated that both Ets-2 and a novel, antigenically related protein
with an approximate molecular mass of 109 kDa are part of the F1 complex,
together with additional components including IRF-1 and c-Rel. This novel protein
is designated GLp109 for its inducibility by IFN-gamma or lipopolysaccharide. Its
possible role in the activation of the IL-12 p40 promoter is discussed.

PMID: 9099678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Oncogene. 1997 Mar 27;14(12):1445-51.

ERF: genomic organization, chromosomal localization and promoter analysis of the 
human and mouse genes.

Liu D(1), Pavlopoulos E, Modi W, Moschonas N, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)SAIC, National Cancer Institute-FCRDC, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

ERF (Ets2 Repressor Factor) is a ubiquitously expressed ets-domain protein that
exhibits strong transcriptional repressor activity, has been shown to suppress
ets-induced transformation and has been suggested to be regulated by MAPK
phosphorylation. We report here the sequence of the mouse gene, the genomic
organization of the human and the mouse genes, their chromosomal position and the
analysis of the promoter region. Genomic clones encompassing either the human ERF
or the mouse Erf gene were isolated and utilized to define their molecular
organization. The gene in both species consists of 4 exons over a 10 kb region.
Utilizing FISH, somatic cell hybrids and linkage analysis, we identified the
chromosomal position of ERF on human chromosome 19q13.1 and on its syntenic
region in the mouse, on chromosome 7. Sequence analysis of the mouse gene
indicated a 90% identity to the human gene within the coding and promoter
regions. The predicted Erf protein is 98% identical to the human protein and all 
of the identifiable motifs are conserved between the two proteins. However, the
mouse protein is three amino acids longer (551 versus 548 aa). The area
surrounding the region that is homologous to the 5' end of the human cDNA can
serve as a promoter in transfection into eukaryotic cells. This region is highly 
conserved between the mouse and the human genes. A number of conserved
transcription factor binding sites can be identified in the region including an
ets binding site (EBS). Interestingly, removal of a small segment that includes
the EBS, seriously hampers promoter function, suggesting the ERF transcription
may be regulated by ets-domain proteins.

PMID: 9136988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1065-74.

Interaction of Ets-1 and the POU-homeodomain protein GHF-1/Pit-1 reconstitutes
pituitary-specific gene expression.

Bradford AP(1), Wasylyk C, Wasylyk B, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262, USA.

The pituitary-specific, POU-homeodomain factor GHF-1/Pit-1 is necessary, but not 
sufficient, for cell-specific expression of prolactin (PRL), growth hormone (GH),
and thyrotropin. Combinatorial interactions of GHF-1 with other factors are
likely to be required; however, such factors and their mechanisms of action
remain to be elucidated. Here we identify Ets-1 as a factor that functionally and
physically interacts with GHF-1 to fully reconstitute proximal PRL promoter
activity. In contrast, Ets-2 has no effect, and the alternatively spliced
GHF-2/Pit-1beta variant fails to synergize with Ets-1. The Ets-1-GHF-1 synergy
requires a composite Ets-1-GHF-1 cis element and is dependent on an
Ets-1-specific protein domain. Furthermore, the ancestrally related and
GHF-1-dependent GH promoter, which lacks this composite element, does not exhibit
this response. Finally, Ets-1, but not Ets-2, binds directly to GHF-1 and GHF-2. 
These data show that a functional interaction of GHF-1 and Ets-1, acting via a
composite DNA element, is required to establish lactotroph-specific PRL gene
expression, thus providing a molecular mechanism by which GHF-1 can discriminate 
between the GH and PRL genes. These results underscore the importance of
transcription factors that are distinct from, but interact with, homeobox
proteins to establish lineage-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC231831
PMID: 9032233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Oncogene. 1997 Feb 27;14(8):899-913.

Conserved mechanisms of Ras regulation of evolutionary related transcription
factors, Ets1 and Pointed P2.

Wasylyk C(1), Bradford AP, Gutierrez-Hartmann A, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, 
ULP, Illkirch, France.

Cell transformation by the Ras oncogene is mediated by members of the ets gene
family. To analyse the mechanisms of regulation, we have studied activation of
several ets factors by Ras expression. We show that expression of Ha-Ras strongly
activates the Ets1 p68 and p54 isoforms and Ets2 in F9 EC cells. We have mapped
the Ras responsive elements of Ets1 p68 to two domains, RI+II and RIII. Mutation 
of threonine 82 to alanine in RI+II abolishes both Ras activation and
phosphorylation by MAP kinase. Threonine 82 is part of a sequence that is
conserved in Drosophila Pointed P2, an ets protein that has been shown both
genetically and biochemically to mediate Ras signalling in Drosophila cells. We
extend the comparison of these evolutionary related proteins by showing that
Pointed P2 is activated by Ras in mammalian cells and mutation of the homologous 
threonine abolishes activation. Furthermore, we show that Pointed P2 resembles
Ets1, in that it has conserved sequences in a similar position adjacent to the
ets DNA binding domain that negatively auto-regulates DNA binding. These results 
go towards showing that the Drosophila Pointed and vertebrate Ets1 are
evolutionary related proteins that have remarkably conserved Ras regulatory
mechanisms downstream from MAP kinase.

PMID: 9050989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Prostate. 1997 Feb 15;30(3):145-53.

Identification of differentially expressed prostate genes: increased expression
of transcription factor ETS-2 in prostate cancer.

Liu AY(1), Corey E, Vessella RL, Lange PH, True LD, Huang GM, Nelson PS, Hood L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the genetic events in the malignant
transformation of prostatic cells. This is due in large measure to the cellular
heterogeneity of the prostate.
METHODS: An amplification method was devised to synthesize cDNA from small
samples of cancer and benign tissues of the same resected glands. Differential
gene expression of candidate informative markers between cancer and benign was
screened by the polymerase chain reaction with gene-specific oligonucleotide
primers.
RESULTS: The expression of a transcription factor, ETS-2, was shown to be
elevated in some cancer specimens. Elevated expression was also noted for
neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and another transcription factor, SEF2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our method can be used to identify quickly genes that are
differentially expressed between benign and cancerous prostate cells.
Transcription factors, such as ETS-2, may play a significant role in cancer
progression.

PMID: 9122038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Oncogene. 1997 Jan 16;14(2):213-21.

FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 function as ternary complex factors and ELK1 and SAP1a function
as ternary and quaternary complex factors on the Egr1 promoter serum response
elements.

Watson DK(1), Robinson L, Hodge DR, Kola I, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

The ETS gene products are a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins that
contain a highly conserved and structurally unique DNA binding domain, termed the
ETS domain. Several ETS proteins bind to DNA as monomers, however it has been
shown that the DNA binding activity is enhanced or modulated in the presence of
other factors. By differential display and whole genome PCR techniques, we have
recently shown that the Erg1 gene is a target for ETS proteins. The Egr1 promoter
contains multiple ETS binding sites, three of which exist as parts of two serum
response elements (SREI and SREII). The SRE is a cis-element that regulates the
expression of many growth factor responsive genes. ELK1 and SAP1a have been shown
to form ternary complexes with SRF on the SRE located in the c-fos promoter.
Similarly, we examined whether the ELK1, SAP1a, FLI1, EWS-FLI1, ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 
and PU.1 proteins can form ternary complexes with SRF on the Egr1 SREI and II.
Our results demonstrate that indeed ELK1, SAPla, FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 are able to
form ternary complexes with SRF on Egr1 SREs. In addition, ELK1 and SAP1a can
also form quarternary complexes on the Egr1 SREI. However, the proteins ETS1,
ETS2, PEA3 and PU.1 were unable to form ternary complexes with SRF on either the 
Egr1 or c-fos SREs. Our data demonstrate that FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 constitute new
members of a subgroup of ETS proteins that can function as ternary complex
factors and further implicate a novel function for these ETS transcription
factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene. By amino acid sequence comparison we 
found that, in fact, 50% of the amino acids present in the B-box of SAP1a and
ELK1, which are required for interaction with SRF, are identical to those present
in both FLI1 (amino acids 231- 248) and EWS-FLI1 proteins. This B-box is not
present in ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 or PU.1 and these proteins were unable to form
ternary complexes with SRF and Egrl-SREs or c-fos SRE. Furthermore, deletion of
194 amino terminal amino acids of FLI1 did not interfere with its ability to
interact with SRF, in fact, this truncation increased the stability of the
ternary complex. The FLI1 protein has a unique R-domain located next to the DNA
binding region. This R-domain may modulate the interaction with SRF, providing a 
mechanism that would be unique to FLI1 and EWS-FLI1, thus implicating a novel
function for these ETS transcription factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene.

PMID: 9010223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Gene Expr. 1997;6(6):333-47.

Identification of a second promoter in the human c-ets-2 proto-oncogene.

Bègue A(1), Crepieux P, Vu-Dac N, Hautefeuille A, Spruyt N, Laudet V, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Oncologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

We localized and characterized a new regulatory element with promoter activity in
the human c-ets-2 intron 1. This promoter governs the expression of 5' divergent 
c-ets-2 transcripts through multiple start sites dispersed within 300 bp. Among
the multiple start sites detected, three are major transcriptional initiation
points. We detected transcripts initiated from this new promoter in various cell 
lines such as COLO 320, NBE, or HepG2 cells. This promoter exhibits
transcriptional activity when linked to the CAT gene, and deletion constructs
reveal that it contains activating and repressing elements. The sequence of the
promoter reveals putative binding sites for ETS, MYB, GATA, and Oct factors. In
addition, we show that this promoter is functionally conserved in the chicken.

PMID: 9495315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Adv Immunol. 1997;64:65-104.

The role of Ets transcription factors in the development and function of the
mammalian immune system.

Bassuk AG(1), Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

PMID: 9100980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 5;13(11):2331-7.

TATA-less promoters of some Ets-family genes are efficiently repressed by
wild-type p53.

Iotsova V(1), Crépieux P, Montpellier C, Laudet V, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

p53 has been reported to repress a number of TATA-containing promoters in
transient transfection assays. TATA-less promoters are generally believed to be
refractive to p53 repression. We report here that the TATA-less promoters of
Ets-family genes (Ets-1 and Ets-2) are efficiently repressed by wild-type but not
mutant p53 in transient co-transfection assays. Moreover, p53 was immunologically
detected in protein complexes formed on oligonucleotides from both the
TATA-containing and TATA-less promoters. Our data suggest that p53 is involved in
the regulation of the expression of both promoter types, most probably by
protein-protein interaction. A model for p53 function in promoter repression is
proposed.

PMID: 8957074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 5;13(11):2297-306.

Erg, an Ets-family member, differentially regulates human collagenase1 (MMP1) and
stromelysin1 (MMP3) gene expression by physically interacting with the Fos/Jun
complex.

Butticè G(1), Duterque-Coquillaud M, Basuyaux JP, Carrère S, Kurkinen M, Stéhelin
D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

Collagenase1 (MMP1) and stromelysin1 (MMP3) are extracellular proteolytic enzymes
that degrade connective tissue macromolecules and basement membranes. Both genes 
are regulated by the Ets and Fos/Jun families of transcription
factors/oncoproteins. Here, we show that two members of the Ets-family, Ets2 and 
Erg and their combinations differentially regulate collagenase1 and stromelysin1 
promoter activity. In transiently transfected cells, Ets2 activates both
promoters whereas Erg induces collagenase1 but not stromelysin1 promoter
activity. Moreover, Erg completely inhibits stromelysin1 promoter activation by
Ets2. In gel shift assays however, the Erg protein bound little or not to the
collagenase1 promoter, whereas it bound to the stromelysin1 promoter. By
site-specific mutagenesis, we identified one major site at -88 that abolished
collagenase1 promoter activation by Erg. Surprisingly, mutation of the
collagenase1 AP1 site at -73 also abolished the activation by Erg suggesting that
Erg cooperates with Fos/Jun in collagenase1 promoter regulation. Indeed, gel
shift and in vitro protein interaction studies showed that Erg binds to the
Fos/Jun complex. Thus, Erg represents the first example of a transcription factor
that can distinguish between the collagenase1 and stromelysin1 promoters in that 
when Erg is recruited by Fos/Jun at the promoter, it transcriptionally activates 
collagenase1 gene but not stromelysin1 expression.

PMID: 8957070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8590-605.

Synergistic interactions between overlapping binding sites for the serum response
factor and ELK-1 proteins mediate both basal enhancement and phorbol ester
responsiveness of primate cytomegalovirus major immediate-early promoters in
monocyte and T-lymphocyte cell types.

Chan YJ(1), Chiou CJ, Huang Q, Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is nonpermissive or persistent in many lymphoid
and myeloid cell types but can be activated in differentiated macrophages. We
have shown elsewhere that both the major immediate-early gene (MIE) and lytic
cycle infectious progeny virus expression can be induced in otherwise
nonpermissive monocyte-like U-937 cell cultures infected with either human CMV
(HCMV) or simian CMV (SCMV) by treatment with the phorbol ester
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Two multicopy basal enhancer motifs
within the SCMV MIE enhancer, namely, 11 copies of the 16-bp cyclic AMP response 
element (CRE) and 3 copies of novel 17-bp serum response factor (SRF) binding
sites referred to as the SNE (SRF/NFkappaB-like element), as well as four
classical NFkappaB sites within the HCMV version, contribute to TPA
responsiveness in transient assays in monocyte and T-cell types. The SCMV SNE
sites contain potential overlapping core recognition binding motifs for SRF,
Rel/NFkappaB, ETS, and YY1 class transcription factors but fail to respond to
either serum or tumor necrosis factor alpha. Therefore, to evaluate the mechanism
of TPA responsiveness of the SNE motifs and of a related 16-bp SEE (SRF/ETS
element) motif found in the HCMV and chimpanzee CMV MIE enhancers, we have
examined the functional responses and protein binding properties of multimerized 
wild-type and mutant elements added upstream to the SCMV MIE or simian virus 40
minimal promoter regions in the U-937, K-562, HL-60, THP-1, and Jurkat cell
lines. Unlike classical NFkappaB sites, neither the SNE nor the SEE motif
responded to phosphatase inhibition by okadaic acid. However, the TPA
responsiveness of both CMV elements proved to involve synergistic interactions
between the core SRF binding site (CCATATATGG) and the adjacent inverted ETS
binding motifs (TTCC), which correlated directly with formation of a bound
tripartite complex containing both the cellular SRF and ELK-1 proteins. This
protein complex was more abundant in U-937, K-562, and HeLa cell extracts than in
Raji, HF, BALB/c 3T3, or HL-60 cells, but the binding activity was altered only
twofold after TPA treatment. A 40-fold stimulation of chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase activity mediated by four tandem repeats of the SNE could be
induced within 2 h (and up to 250-fold within 6 h) after addition of TPA in
DNA-transfected U-937 cells, indicating that the stimulation appeared likely to
be a true protein kinase C-mediated signal transduction event rather than a
differentiation response. Slight differences in the sequence of the core SRF
binding site compared with that of the classical c-Fos promoter serum response
element, together with differences in the spacing between the SRF and ETS motifs,
appear to account for the inability of the SCMV SNEs to respond to serum
induction.

PMCID: PMC190952
PMID: 8970984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;16(12):6851-8.

Constitutive c-ets2 expression in M1D+ myeloblast leukemic cells induces their
differentiation to macrophages.

Aperlo C(1), Pognonec P, Stanley ER, Boulukos KE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, Nice, France.

The expression of c-ets2 is rapidly induced in a variety of myelomonocytic cell
lines as they differentiate into macrophages. We find that constitutive
expression of c-ets2 in the M1D+ myeloblast leukemic cell line (M1ets2) is
sufficient to push these cells to a more differentiated state. The expression of 
several differentiation-specific genes is upregulated in M1ets2 cells, including 
those encoding macrophage-specific lysozyme M and tumor necrosis factor alpha,
which are involved in bacteriolytic and inflammatory processes, respectively.
Transcription factors c-jun and junB, previously shown to induce partial
macrophage differentiation when overexpressed in myelomonocytic leukemia cell
lines, are also upregulated in M1ets2 cells. The upregulation of junB is the
result of a direct interaction of Ets2 with ets binding sites of the junB
promoter, since transient or constitutive Ets2 expression in M1D+ cells activates
junB transcription via ets binding sites. In addition, transfection of a dominant
negative mutant of Ets2, devoid of its transcriptional activation domain, greatly
reduces transcriptional activities of the junB promoter in M1ets2 cells. Finally,
unlike their parental M1D+ counterparts, M1ets2 cells secrete the macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, CSF-1, and are able to phagocytize. Taken together,
these results show that when the immature myeloid M1D+ cell line constitutively
expresses c-ets2, these cells acquire different functions of mature macrophages.

PMCID: PMC231688
PMID: 8943340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Oct 31;795:357-60.

A novel ets-2-related nuclear factor is involved in transcriptional activation of
the human interleukin-12 p40 gene promoter in response to interferon-gamma and
LPS stimulation of monocytic cells.

Ma X(1), Gri G, Trinchieri G.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

PMID: 8958954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Blood. 1996 Oct 15;88(8):2917-26.

PU.1 but not ets-2 is essential for macrophage development from embryonic stem
cells.

Henkel GW(1), McKercher SR, Yamamoto H, Anderson KL, Oshima RG, Maki RA.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute, La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, CA 92037, USA.

Transcription factors play an important role choreographing lineage commitment
and expansion of blood cells. Nuclear factors that are expressed primarily or
exclusively in hematopoietic cells are likely candidates for regulating blood
cell development. The transcription factor PU.1 is found only in hematopoietic
cells, whereas ets-2, a related family member, is ubiquitously expressed. To
compare the role of these two transcription factors in macrophage development,
embryonic stem (ES) cells with a homozygous disruption of either the PU.1 or the 
ets-2 gene were generated. The ability of both knockout ES cells to differentiate
to macrophages was tested. Normal development of macrophages, as determined by
histochemical and immunohistochemical analysis, from PU.1 knockout ES cells was
significantly blocked. Furthermore, the expression of known markers associated
with macrophages, such as c-fms, CD11b, CD18 and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor receptor, were not detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. In contrast to the PU.1 knockout ES
cells, macrophages, development from the ets-2 knockout ES cells was normal.
Although both PU.1 and ets-2 are found in macrophages, these data show a distinct
role for the lineage-restricted PU.1 transcription factor in macrophage
development.

PMID: 8874188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Sep;10(9):1084-94.

Stimulation of the P-450 side chain cleavage enzyme (CYP11A1) promoter through
ras- and Ets-2-signaling pathways.

Pestell RG(1), Albanese C, Watanabe G, Lee RJ, Lastowiecki P, Zon L, Ostrowski M,
Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Expression of the ovine P-450 side-chain cleavage enzyme gene (CYP11A1) is
stimulated by epidermal growth factor (EGF) through a pathway that involves c-Jun
in JEG-3 placental cells. Growth factor signaling involves ras-dependent and
ras-independent signaling pathways, which in turn regulate gene transcription
through related but distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways (MAPKs)
including the extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) and the
stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs). We investigated the intracellular
signaling pathways governing EGF induction of the CYP11A1 promoter. EGF
stimulation of the CYP11A1 promoter (4-fold) was reduced 60% by a dominant
negative mutant of ras (N17), and 30-40% by antisense ras. EGF induced both ERK
and SAPK activity in JEG-3 cells. EGF-induced CYP11A1 promoter activity was
reduced 60% by the MEK1 inhibitor PD098059 and 50% by a dominant negative mutant 
of the ERK-specific regulator MEK1. In contrast, dominant negative mutants of the
SAPK-specific activator, SEK1, induced a further increase in EGF-induced CYP11A1 
promoter activity. Constitutively active mutants of ras (V12 or L61) increased
CYP11A1 promoter activity 6- to 8-fold. Deletion of the EGF response element
(EGF-RE) between -92 and -77 bp reduced ras induction by 60%; however, a residual
3-fold induction remained through the proximal -77 bp. Mutation of the EGF-RE
AP-1-like sequence in the context of the native promoter reduced CYP11A1 promoter
activation by ras 60%. The EGF-RE sequence was sufficient for 6-fold activation
by ras in the context of an heterologous thymidine kinase promoter. Candidate
transcription factor targets (c-Jun, c-Ets-2) for the ras-signaling cascade were 
examined for their effects on CYP11A1 promoter activity. Overexpression of c-Jun 
induced the CYP11A1 promoter through the EGF-RE; however, c-Ets-2 activation of
the CYP11A1 promoter (12-fold) required the proximal ras-responsive promoter
sequences that are distinct from the EGF/MEK/c-Jun-responsive element. Induction 
of the CYP11A1 promoter by EGF involves a ras/MEK1/AP-1-dependent pathway that is
distinct from induction by ras/c-Ets-2.

PMID: 8885243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Aug 20;93(17):8863-7.

The [(G/C)3NN]n motif: a common DNA repeat that excludes nucleosomes.

Wang YH(1), Griffith JD.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill 27599-7295, USA.

Nucleosomes, the basic structural elements of chromosomes, consist of 146 bp of
DNA coiled around an octamer of histone proteins, and their presence can strongly
influence gene expression. Considerations of the anisotropic flexibility of
nucleotide triplets containing 3 cytosines or guanines suggested that a [5'(G/C)3
NN3']n motif might resist wrapping around a histone octamer. To test this, DNAs
were constructed containing a 5'-CCGNN-3' pentanucleotide repeat with the Ns
varied. Using in vitro nucleosome reconstitution and electron microscopy, a
plasmid with 48 contiguous CCGNN repeats strongly excluded nucleosomes in the
repeat region. Competitive reconstitution gel retardation experiments using DNA
fragments containing 12, 24, or 48 CCGNN repeats showed that the propensity to
exclude nucleosomes increased with the length of the repeat. Analysis showed that
a 268-bp DNA containing a (CCGNN)48 block is 4.9 +/- 0.6-fold less efficient in
nucleosome assembly than a similar length pUC19 fragment and approximately
78-fold less efficient than a similar length (CTG)n sequence, based on results
from previous studies. Computer searches against the GenBank database for matches
with a [(G/C)3NN]48 sequence revealed numerous examples that frequently were
present in the control regions of "TATA-less" genes, including the human ETS-2
and human dihydrofolate reductase genes. In both cases the (G/C)3NN repeat,
present in the promoter region, co-maps with loci previously shown to be nuclease
hypersensitive sites.

PMCID: PMC38559
PMID: 8799118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Int J Oncol. 1996 Jul;9(1):9-18.

Expression of ets family of genes in systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjogren's
syndrome.

Georgiou P(1), Maroulakou I, Green J, Dantis P, Romanospica V, Kottaridis S,
Lautenberger J, Watson D, Papas T, Fischinger P, Bhat N.

Author information: 
(1)NCI, FREDERICK CANC RES & DEV CTR, SCI APPLICAT INT CORP, ONCOL MOLEC LAB,
FREDERICK, MD 21702 USA. EVANGELISMOS MED CTR, DEPT RHEUMATOL, ATHENS, GREECE.
UCSC, FAC MED, INST HYG, ROME, ITALY. HELLENIC ANTICANC INST, PAPANICOLAOU RES
CTR ONCOL & EXPT SURG, ATHENS, GREECE. MED UNIV S CAROLINA, HOLLINGS CANC CTR,
CTR MOL & STRUCT BIOL, CHARLESTON, SC USA. UNIV IOANNINA, SCH MED, DEPT INTERNAL 
MED, GR-45110 IOANNINA, GREECE.

We have examined the expression of three members of the ets family of genes,
ETS1, ETS2 and ERGB/Fli-1, in lymphocytes from patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus and in two murine autoimmune model systems. The ERGB/Fli-1 gene is 
expressed at a higher level in lymphocytes from autoimmune disease patients than 
healthy individuals. In addition, we found that the ERGB/Fli-1 gene expression is
higher in splenic T-cells from lupus prone mice and in infiltrating lymphocytes
in the salivary glands of HTLV-I tax transgenic mice. Taken together, these
results suggest that the elevated expression of the ERGB/Fli-1 gene in
lymphocytes may be a prelude to the development of autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 21541474  [PubMed]


385. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1996 May;22(3):167-75.

Molecular genetic characterization and comparative mapping of the human PCP4
gene.

Cabin DE(1), Gardiner K, Reeves RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The mouse Pcp4 gene is highly expressed in brain, primarily in cerebellar
Purkinje cells. It maps to chromosome 16 (Chr 16), in a region of conserved
synteny with human chromosome 21 (Chr 21). To further characterize PCP4 and its
possible contribution to cerebellar hypoplasia in trisomy 21, or Down Syndrome
(DS), we cloned and sequenced the full length human cDNA, isolated a YAC which
carries the entire gene, determined the gene structure, and characterized its
expression. The gene spans at least 55 kb and contains two introns, the placement
of which is the same in mouse. Expression in the mouse brain during development
was detected at embryonic day 10, and thereafter through development. The PCP4
YAC was placed on the human Chr 21 YAC contig by a link to a YAC carrying the
markers D21S15 and D21S349. This placement distal to ETS2 was confirmed by
mapping on a somatic cell hybrid panel of Chr 21 translocations. This position
caused an apparent break in gene order with mouse Chr 16. However, mapping in the
mouse was reassessed, and Pcp4 and a linked marker, D16Mit71, were both moved
distal to Ets2, corresponding to the position of PCP4 on Chr 21.

PMID: 8914602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Ann Rheum Dis. 1996 May;55(5):298-304.

Constitutive expression of c-fos and c-jun, overexpression of ets-2, and reduced 
expression of metastasis suppressor gene nm23-H1 in rheumatoid arthritis.

Dooley S(1), Herlitzka I, Hanselmann R, Ermis A, Henn W, Remberger K, Hopf T,
Welter C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universität des Saarlandes, Homburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: To identify genes that are involved in the development and
progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: We used a multiple gene analysis system and a set of available genes
participating in processes such as proliferation, differentiation, tumour
progression, and metastasis, to identify their RA related expression. Synovial
tissues from 22 patients with RA were evaluated in comparison with those from six
patients with osteoarthritis and two patients with non-inflamed joints as
controls, using northern blot and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
experiments.
RESULTS: Our data confirm the role of c-fos and c-jun as constitutive signal
transmitters in solid RA tissues, thus demonstrating the potential of the
approach. Activation of both genes persisted through multiple passages of the
cells in tissue cultures derived from the synovial lining of RA tissues. There
was an increased expression of ets-2 in 30% of RA samples and an up to 30-fold
decreased expression of the potential metastasis suppressor gene nm23-H1 in 90%
of RA tissues, compared with control tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented show for the first time a significant decrease of
nm23-H1 expression in RA, which is possibly involved in local invasiveness, and a
strong activation of the ets-2 nuclear oncogene in about one third of RA tissues,
which may also be part of a pathway leading to advanced disease stages. The
constitutive expression of c-fos and c-jun in RA tissue most probably results
from a continuing inflammatory stimulus. These findings with cell cultures
suggest an intrinsic activation mechanism of these early response genes in RA.

PMCID: PMC1010166
PMID: 8660103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):7992-8.

Oncogenic Neu/ErbB-2 increases ets, AP-1, and NF-kappaB-dependent gene
expression, and inhibiting ets activation blocks Neu-mediated cellular
transformation.

Galang CK(1), García-Ramírez J, Solski PA, Westwick JK, Der CJ, Neznanov NN,
Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, La Jolla, California, 92037-1063, USA.

Overexpression of Neu (ErbB-2/HER2) is found in approximately 20% of breast
tumors. Activation of Neu by a point mutation (NeuT) causes constitutive tyrosine
kinase activity of this transmembrane receptor and transforming activity in
fibroblasts. To identify downstream targets of Neu, we have analyzed the ability 
of Neu to activate gene expression. Expression of NeuT, but not normal Neu,
caused transcriptional activation of Ets, AP-1, or NF-kappaB-dependent reporter
genes. Dominant inhibitory Ras or Raf mutants blocked the Neu-mediated
transcriptional activation, confirming that Ras signaling pathways were required 
for this activation. Analysis with Ets2 mutants indicated that activation of Ets2
transcriptional activity mediated by NeuT or oncogenic Ras required
phosphorylation of the same Ets2 residue, threonine 72. Cotransfection of
dominant inhibitory Ets2 mutants specifically blocked NeuT-mediated activation of
Ets-dependent reporter genes. Furthermore, in focus formation assays using NIH
3T3 cells, the transforming activity of NeuT was inhibited 5-fold when NeuT was
cotransfected with a dominant negative Ets2 mutant. However, parallel colony
formation assays showed that the Ets2 dominant negative mutant did not inhibit
the growth of normal cells. Together, these data show that NeuT activates a
variety of transcription factor families via the Ras signaling pathway and that
Ets activation is required for NeuT-mediated cellular transformation. Thus,
downstream targets of Neu, including Ets transcription factors, may be useful
points for therapeutic intervention in Neu/ErbB-2-associated cancers.

PMID: 8626480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Apr;7(4):429-37.

EWS/FLI-1 antagonists induce growth inhibition of Ewing tumor cells in vitro.

Kovar H(1), Aryee DN, Jug G, Henöckl C, Schemper M, Delattre O, Thomas G, Gadner 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria.

Among primitive neuroectodermal tumors, Ewing tumors are characterized by a gene 
rearrangement recombining the 5'-EWS gene portion with one of two ETS-related
proto-oncogenes, FLI-1 or ERG, in roughly 90 and 10% of cases, respectively. We
attempted to antagonize EWS/FLI-1 function in Ewing tumor cell lines. As a
control, a cell line derived from another small round cell tumor of
neuroectodermal origin, neuroblastoma, was used. This cell line was found to
express almost identical patterns of ETS proteins except for EWS/FLI-1 and a
novel, ELF-related gene product. Stable expression of antisense EWS/FLI-1 cDNA
resulted in decreased endogenous EWS/FLI-1 RNA levels and growth reduction of ET 
cells but not of neuroblastoma cells. DNA-binding FLI-1 derivatives localizing to
the nucleus in which the 5'-EWS regulatory domain was replaced by bacterial
beta-galactosidase dominantly modulated transcriptional transactivation from a
degenerate ETS-binding motif. Transient transfection of these dominant-negative
recombinants resulted in a significant decrease in the relative number of mitoses
in four Ewing tumor cell lines tested but not in the neuroblastoma cell line. The
presented evidence for modulation of tumor cell proliferation by EWS/FLI-1
antagonists suggests a causal role for EWS/FLI-1-mediated gene activation in the 
malignant transformation of the enigmatic Ewing tumor-precursor cell.

PMID: 9052984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Oncogene. 1996 Mar 21;12(6):1199-1204.

ETS1 and ETS2 in p53 regulation: spatial separation of ETS binding sites (EBS)
modulate protein: DNA interaction.

Venanzoni MC(1), Robinson LR, Hodge DR, Kola I, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute-FCRDC, Frederick, 
Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

p53 is an extensively studied tumor suppressor gene implicated in the genesis of 
a large number of varied tumors. However, the pathways of regulation for the
wild-type p53 gene and its product are as yet unknown. In situ hybridization
analyses of ETS1 and ETS2 expression during mouse embryogenesis, have shown a
pattern similar to that of p53 gene expression. Significantly, we have identified
several ETS-binding sites (EBS) in the promoter regions of the human and mouse
p53 genes. In the human promoter two of these EBS are present in the form of a
palindrome, with the two EBS cores being separated by four nucleotides. This
report shows that the EBS palindrome of the human p53 promoter has a high
affinity for ETS1 and ETS2 and that such binding interaction intracellularly is
able to activate the transcription of a CAT reporter gene by 5-10-fold using COS 
cells. To investigate whether the spacing between the two EBS cores influences
the DNA binding activity, we synthesized oligonucleotides with increasing
distances (4,12,16, and 20 bases respectively) between the two EBS cores of the
palindrome. We observed an inverse correlation between an increasing distance in 
the two EBS cores of the palindrome and the ETS1 and ETS2 DNA binding activity
respectively. Interestingly, optimal DNA binding activity was observed when the
distance between the two EBS cores was four bases, identical to that which occurs
in the natural promoter. Furthermore we show that the p53 mRNA is expressed at
higher levels in NIH3T3 cells overexpressing ETS2 gene product, suggesting that
the ETS2 transcription factor is a likely candidate for regulating the expression
of p53 in vivo.

PMID: 8649821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Cancer Lett. 1996 Feb 27;100(1-2):215-21.

Expression of the c-jun, jun-B, ets-2 and liver regeneration factor-1 (LRF-1)
genes during promotion and progression of rat liver carcinogenesis in the
resistant hepatocyte model.

Liao DZ(1), Blanck A, Gustafsson JA, Hällström IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge University
Hospital, Sweden.

During promotion in the RH-model, the mRNA expression of c-jun and LRF-1 was 2-
to 8-fold elevated in both initiated and uninitiated rats receiving 2-AAF. The
increase was more pronounced in male than in female rats, and GH treatment of
male rats down-regulated the expression towards the level in females. The level
in uninitiated 2-AAF-treated livers was as high as in isolated early nodules.
jun-B also showed 3- to 8-fold increased expression, but without sex differences.
An increased nuclear transcription of the LRF-1 and jun-B genes but not of c-jun 
was observed. During progression, LRF-1 and ets-2 showed a 2- to 3-fold higher
expression in persistent nodules and hepatocellular carcinomas than in the
corresponding surrounding liver tissues, whereas the expression of the jun genes 
was 3- to 4-fold increased both in lesions and in surrounding livers when
compared to age-matched control rats. In conclusion, while the changes during
promotion might not be connected with control of early focal growth, the
increased levels of LRF-1 and ets-2 in advanced lesions might indicate that these
genes could contribute to the growth advantage for persistent nodules during
progression.

PMID: 8620444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Nature. 1996 Feb 8;379(6565):534-7.

Down's syndrome-like skeletal abnormalities in Ets2 transgenic mice.

Sumarsono SH(1), Wilson TJ, Tymms MJ, Venter DJ, Corrick CM, Kola R, Lahoud MH,
Papas TS, Seth A, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Group, Monash University, Monash Medical
Centre, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Expression of Ets2, a proto-oncogene and transcription factor, occurs in a
variety of cell types. During murine development it is highly expressed in newly 
forming cartilage, including in the skull precursor cells and vertebral
primordia. Ets2 is located on human chromosome 21 (ref. 8) and is overexpressed
in Down's syndrome (trisomy 21). Here we generate transgenic mice to investigate 
the consequences of overexpression of Ets2. We find that mice with less than
2-fold Ets2 overexpression in particular organs develop neurocranial,
viscerocranial and cervical skeletal abnormalities. These abnormalities have
similarities with the skeletal anomalies found in trisomy-16 mice and humans with
Down's syndrome, in which the gene dosage of Ets2 is increased. Our results
indicate that Ets2 has a role in skeletal development and implicate the
overexpression of Ets2 in the genesis of some skeletal abnormalities that occur
in Down's syndrome.

PMID: 8596630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Feb;16(2):538-47.

Ras-mediated phosphorylation of a conserved threonine residue enhances the
transactivation activities of c-Ets1 and c-Ets2.

Yang BS(1), Hauser CA, Henkel G, Colman MS, Van Beveren C, Stacey KJ, Hume DA,
Maki RA, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

The Ras oncogene products regulate the expression of genes in transformed cells, 
and members of the Ets family of transcription factors have been implicated in
this process. To determine which Ets factors are the targets of Ras signaling
pathways, the abilities of several Ets factors to activate Ras-responsive
enhancer (RRE) reporters in the presence of oncogenic Ras were examined. In
transient transfection assay, reporters containing RREs composed of Ets-AP-1
binding sites could be activated 30-fold in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and 80-fold in
the macrophage-like line RAW264 by the combination of Ets1 or Ets2 and Ras but
not by several other Ets factors that were tested in the assay. Ets2 and Ras also
superactivated an RRE composed of Ets-Ets binding sites, but the Ets-responsive
promoter of the c-fms gene was not superactivated. Mutation of a threonine
residue to alanine in the conserved amino-terminal regions of Ets1 and Ets2
(threonine 38 and threonine 72, respectively) abrogated the ability of each of
these proteins to superactivate reporter gene expression. Phosphoamino acid
analysis of radiolabeled Ets2 revealed that Ras induced normally absent
threonine-specific phosphorylation of the protein. The Ras-dependent increase in 
threonine phosphorylation was not observed in Ets2 proteins that had the
conserved threonine 72 residue mutated to alanine or serine. These data indicate 
that Ets1 and Ets2 are specific nuclear targets of Ras signaling events and that 
phosphorylation of a conserved threonine residue is a necessary molecular
component of Ras-mediated activation of these transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC231032
PMID: 8552081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 6;270(40):23589-97.

Transforming p21ras mutants and c-Ets-2 activate the cyclin D1 promoter through
distinguishable regions.

Albanese C(1), Johnson J, Watanabe G, Eklund N, Vu D, Arnold A, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Several different oncogenes and growth factors promote G1 phase progression.
Cyclin D1, the regulatory subunit of several cyclin-dependent kinases, is
required for, and capable of shortening, the G1 phase of the cell cycle. The
present study demonstrates that transforming mutants of p21ras (Ras Val-12, Ras
Leu-61) induce the cyclin D1 promoter in human trophoblasts (JEG-3), mink lung
epithelial (Mv1.Lu), and in Chinese hamster ovary fibroblast cell lines.
Site-directed mutagenesis of AP-1-like sequences at -954 abolished
p21ras-dependent activation of cyclin D1 expression. The AP-1-like sequences were
also required for activation of the cyclin D1 promoter by c-Jun. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts from cultured cells 
and primary tissues, several AP-1 proteins (c-Jun, JunB, JunD, and c-Fos) bound
the cyclin D1 -954 region. Cyclin D1 promoter activity was stimulated by
overexpression of mitogen-activated protein kinase (p41MAPK) or c-Ets-2 through
the proximal 22 base pairs. Expression of plasmids encoding either dominant
negative MAPK (p41MAPKi) or dominant negatives of ETS activation (Ets-LacZ),
antagonized MAPK-dependent induction of cyclin D1 promoter activity. Epidermal
growth factor induction of cyclin D1 transcription, through the proximal promoter
region, was antagonized by either p41MAPKi or Ets-LacZ, suggesting that ETS
functions downstream of epidermal growth factor and MAPK in the context of the
cyclin D1 promoter. The activation of cyclin D1 transcription by p21ras provides 
evidence for cross-talk between the p21ras and cell cycle regulatory pathways.

PMID: 7559524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. EMBO J. 1995 Oct 2;14(19):4781-93.

ERF: an ETS domain protein with strong transcriptional repressor activity, can
suppress ets-associated tumorigenesis and is regulated by phosphorylation during 
cell cycle and mitogenic stimulation.

Sgouras DN(1), Athanasiou MA, Beal GJ Jr, Fisher RJ, Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis
GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA.

ERF (ETS2 Repressor Factor) is a novel member of the ets family of genes, which
was isolated by virtue of its interaction with the ets binding site (EBS) within 
the ETS2 promoter. The 2.7 kb ubiquitously expressed ERF mRNA encodes a 548 amino
acid phosphoprotein that exhibits strong transcriptional repressor activity on
promoters that contain an EBS. The localization of the DNA-binding domain of the 
protein at the N-terminus and th repression domain at the C-terminus is
reminiscent of the organization of ELK1-like members of the ets family; however, 
there is no significant homology between ERF and ELK1 or any other ets member
outside the DNA-binding domain. The repressor activity of ERF can antagonize the 
activity of other ets genes that are known transcriptional activators.
Furthermore, ERF can suppress the ets-dependent transforming activity of the
gag-myb-ets fusion oncogene of ME26 virus. Although ERF protein levels remain
constant throughout the cell cycle, the phosphorylation level of the protein is
altered as a function of the cell cycle and after mitogenic stimulation. The ERF 
protein is also hyperphosphorylated in cells transformed by the activated Ha-ras 
and v-src genes and the transcription repressor activity of ERF is decreased
after co-transfection with activated Ha-ras or the kinase domain of the c-Raf-1
gene, indicating that ERF activity is probably regulated by the ras/MAPK pathway.
Consistent with the in vivo phosphorylation and inactivation by ras, ERF is
efficiently phosphorylated in vitro by Erk2 and cdc2/cyclin B kinases, at sites
similar to those detected in vivo. Furthermore, a single mutation at position 526
results in the loss of a specific phosphopeptide both in in vivo and in vitro (by
Erk2) labeling. Substitution of Thr526 for glutamic acid also decreases the
repression ability of ERF. Our data suggest a model in which modulation of ERF
activity is involved in the transcriptional regulation of genes activated during 
entry into G1 phase. Obstruction of the ERF repressor function by the
transactivating members of the ets family of genes (i.e.gag-myb-ets) may be
essential for the control of genes involved in cell proliferation and may also
underlie their tumorigenic effects.

PMCID: PMC394576
PMID: 7588608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1995 Oct;14(2):97-105.

Genetic instability of chromosome 3 in HPV-immortalized and tumorigenic human
keratinocytes.

Montgomery KD(1), Tedford KL, McDougall JK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Group, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98104, USA.

The HPV-1811 cell line is derived from primary human foreskin keratinocytes that 
have been transfected with human papilloma virus type 18. At late passage, these 
cells produce invasive squamous cell carcinomas when injected into nude mice. A
striking, but unstable, aberration of chromosome 3 occurs very early after
establishment of the culture; a consistent rearrangement is observed concomitant 
with tumorigenicity. Using molecular cytogenetic techniques, we characterized the
complex development of this aberration. A whole chromosome probe to this
chromosome was made by linker-adapter PCR amplification of a single flow-sorted
chromosome. Hybridization of this probe to normal metaphase chromosomes revealed 
the der (3) to be composed of chromosome 3, distal 13q, and 21q22. Hybridization 
of a 3q subtelomeric probe and a glycoprotein V probe which maps to 3qter
indicated that this locus is duplicated in the final form of the chromosome, but 
that much instability occurs prior to its establishment. The ETS2 oncogene, which
maps to 21q22, is translocated to the der(3) when the cell line becomes
tumorigenic, but not prior to this time. Early-passage cells which have been
induced to become tumorigenic by exposure to the carcinogen nitrosomethylurea
also have the localization of the ETS2 at 3qter.

PMID: 8527399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Oncogene. 1995 Apr 6;10(7):1423-30.

Human ERG is a proto-oncogene with mitogenic and transforming activity.

Hart AH(1), Corrick CM, Tymms MJ, Hertzog PJ, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Birth Defects Laboratory, Monash University, Monash
Medical Centre, Victoria, Australia.

The ETS related gene, ERG, is one of 20 or more genes belonging to the ETS family
of transcription factors. Translocation of the ERG gene t(21;22) results in the
chimeric fusion transcript seen in approximately 10% of Ewings sarcomas. In
addition, recent studies have shown that a reciprocal translocation t(21;16) of
ERG gives rise to two aberrant transcripts seen in some forms of acute myeloid
leukaemia. In vitro studies have linked the up regulation of ERG expression with 
stromal cell independence in erythroleukemic clones and shown that the ERG
related genes ETS1 and ETS2 have a mitogenic and transforming activity when
overexpressed in NIH3T3 cells. Interestingly ERGB/FLI-1, which is also involved
in Ewings sarcoma translocations and shares a very high sequence identify with
ERG has been reported to be unable to transform NIH3T3 cells. In this study we
investigate the effects of overexpression of ERG on cell proliferation, factor
dependence, growth in soft agar and tumorigenesis in nude mice. An ERG expression
construct with the human ERG2 cDNA driven by the sheep metallothionein la
promoter (sMTERG) was transfected into NIH3T3 cells. Clonal cell lines
overexpressing ERG were established. The cell lines became morphologically
altered, grew in low serum and serum free media and gave rise to colonies in soft
agar suspension. Furthermore, we demonstrate that after subcutaneous injection
these clones grow as solid tumors in nude mice. These data demonstrate that c-ERG
is a proto-oncogene capable of transforming NIH3T3 cells. Therefore,
overexpression or inappropriate expression of ERG may contribute to oncogenesis.

PMID: 7731694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Mar 25;23(6):901-9.

CpG methylation has differential effects on the binding of YY1 and ETS proteins
to the bi-directional promoter of the Surf-1 and Surf-2 genes.

Gaston K(1), Fried M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
UK.

The divergently transcribed Surf-1 and Surf-2 housekeeping genes are separated by
a bi-directional, TATA-less promoter which lies within a CpG-rich island. Here we
show that CpG methylation severely reduces transcription in the direction of both
Surf-1 and Surf-2. Previous work has identified three promoter elements (Su1, Su2
and Su3) which are conserved between the human and mouse Surf-1/Surf-2 promoters.
These elements bind transcription factors present in human and mouse cell nuclear
extracts in vitro and mutations which prevent factor binding also reduce promoter
activity in vivo. Transcription initiation factor YY1 binds to the Su1 site and
stimulates transcription in the direction of Surf-1 and, to a lesser extent,
Surf-2. Here we show that members of the ETS family of transcription factors bind
to the Su2 site. Although the Su1 factor binding site contains three CpG
dinucleotides, the binding of YY1 is not affected by CpG methylation. In
contrast, CpG methylation abolishes the binding of ETS proteins to the Su2 site; 
methylation of a single cytosine, at position 3 of the consensus ETS site, is
sufficient to prevent factor binding. This direct effect on the binding of ETS
proteins is, however, not in itself sufficient to explain the repression of this 
promoter by CpG methylation. A mutation of the Su2 site which removes the
sequence CpG, but which does not prevent ETS factor binding, fails to relieve
this promoter from repression by CpG methylation.

PMCID: PMC306783
PMID: 7731802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Mar;217(1):8-14.

ets-2 regulates cdc2 kinase activity in mammalian cells: coordinated expression
of cdc2 and cyclin A.

Wen SC(1), Ku DH, De Luca A, Claudio PP, Giordano A, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

ets-2 is a member of a family of transcription factors implicated in the
regulation of gene expression during cell proliferation, cell differentiation,
and development. We report that the ets-2 protein transactivates the promoter of 
the cdc2 gene which encodes a 34-kDa serine-threonine kinase required for mitotic
initiation in mammalian cells. Transactivation occurs via specific interaction
with multiple ets binding sites in the 5' flanking region of the gene. In
BALB/c3T3 rodent fibroblasts constitutively expressing ets-2 and cultured in
either 10 or 0.5% serum, cdc2 expression and its associated histone H1 kinase
activity are increased, compared to control cells. Such increased activity
correlates with elevated levels of cyclin A but not cyclin B1. Furthermore,
ets-2-transfected, but not parental, BALB/c3T3 cells, grow under low serum
conditions, albeit at a reduced rate. These data demonstrate that ets-2 plays a
direct role in the regulation of cdc2 expression and raise the possibility that
ets-2 participates in the coordinated regulation of cdc2 cyclin A expression
which is essential for the modulation of cdc2-regulated processes.

PMID: 7867724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mamm Genome. 1995 Feb;6(2):127-30.

A high-resolution map of 1.6 Mb in the Down syndrome region: a new map between
D21S55 and ETS2.

Gosset P(1), Crété N, Ait Ghezala G, Théophile D, Van Broeckhoven C, Vayssettes
C, Sinet PM, Créau N.

Author information: 
(1)URA1335 CNRS, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France.

PMID: 7766996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1995;70(1-2):48-51.

The invasion-inducing TIAM1 gene maps to human chromosome band 21q22 and mouse
chromosome 16.

Habets GG(1), van der Kammen RA, Jenkins NA, Gilbert DJ, Copeland NG, Hagemeijer 
A, Collard JG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

The murine invasion-inducing Tiam1 gene maps to the distal end of chromosome 16, 
3.8 cM centromeric of the Ets2 gene. TIAM1, the human homolog of Tiam1, maps to
the syntenic region (q22) on human chromosome 21. The gene order in 21q22 is
cen-TIAM1-AML1-ERG-ETS2-tel.

PMID: 7736788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Oncogene. 1994 Dec;9(12):3609-15.

Myb and Ets related transcription factors are required for activity of the human 
lck type I promoter.

McCracken S(1), Leung S, Bosselut R, Ghysdael J, Miyamoto NG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess 
Margaret Hospital, University of Toronto, Canada.

The lck gene, which encodes a lymphoid-specific Src family tyrosine kinase, is
transcribed from two promoters that are differentially utilized during T cell
development. We have shown previously that the human lck type I promoter, which
is preferentially expressed in immature thymocytes, requires a binding site (-97 
to -90) for the Ets family of transcription factors for its activity in Jurkat T 
leukemia cells. Three putative Myb binding sites (-86 to -82, -77 to -72 and -59 
to -54) were analysed for their ability to activate the lck type I promoter. In
vitro assays demonstrated specific binding of purified, bacterially expressed
c-Myb DNA binding domain to the Myb (-59 to -54) site. Transient transfection
assays using the site-directed mutants of the lck type I promoter in Jurkat cells
revealed that mutation of the Myb (-59 to -54) site abolished transcriptional
activity. In transiently transfected HeLa cells, the lck type I promoter was
activated by co-transfection with a vector that expresses c-Myb. This c-Myb
dependent activation required the presence of intact Myb and Ets binding sites,
indicating that the expressed c-Myb functions with endogenous Ets related
transcription factors to activate the lck type I promoter. This effect was
further enhanced by co-transfection with vectors that express either Ets1 or
Ets2. These results demonstrate that Myb and Ets related transcription factors
synergistically activate the human lck type I promoter.

PMID: 7970721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):7744-57.

AP-1, ETS, and transcriptional silencers regulate retinoic acid-dependent
induction of keratin 18 in embryonic cells.

Pankov R(1), Neznanov N, Umezawa A, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, California 92037.

The differentiation of both embryonal carcinoma (EC) and embryonic stem (ES)
cells can be triggered in culture by exposure to retinoic acid and results in the
transcriptional induction of both the endogenous mouse keratin 18 (mK18)
intermediate filament gene and an experimentally introduced human keratin 18
(K18) gene as well as a variety of other markers characteristic of extraembryonic
endoderm. The induction of K18 in EC cells is limited, in part, by low levels of 
ETS and AP-1 transcription factor activities which bind to sites within a complex
enhancer element located within the first intron of K18. RNA levels of ETS-2,
c-Jun, and JunB increase upon the differentiation of ES cells and correlate with 
increased expression of K18. Occupancy of the ETS site, detected by in vivo
footprinting methods, correlates with K18 induction in ES cells. In somatic
cells, the ETS and AP-1 elements mediate induction by a variety of oncogenes
associated with the ras signal transduction pathway. In EC cells, in addition to 
the induction by these limiting transcription factors, relief from negative
regulation is mediated by three silencer elements located within the first intron
of the K18 gene. These silencer elements function in F9 EC cells but not their
differentiated derivatives, and their activity is correlated with proteins in F9 
EC nuclei which bind to the silencers and are reduced in the nuclei of
differentiated F9 cells. The induction of K18, associated with the
differentiation of EC cells to extraembryonic endoderm, is due to a combination
of relief from negative regulation and activation by members of the ETS and AP-1 
transcription factor families.

PMCID: PMC359315
PMID: 7526151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Oncogene. 1994 Nov;9(11):3259-71.

A model for gene evolution of the ets-1/ets-2 transcription factors based on
structural and functional homologies.

Albagli O(1), Soudant N, Ferreira E, Dhordain P, Dewitte F, Begue A, Flourens A, 
Stehelin D, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The chicken c-ets-1 locus encodes two transcription factors, p54c-ets-1 and
p68c-ets-1 that differ in their N-termini, encoded respectively by the I54 and
alpha beta exons. p68c-ets-1 equivalents are only found in birds and reptiles
while p54c-ets-1 is widely conserved in vertebrates, from amphibians to mammals. 
Thus, the classical view concerning the evolution of the c-ets-1 gene has been to
consider that I54 is of ancient origin whereas alpha and beta, which provide an
additional activating domain in p68c-ets-1, would have been acquired much more
recently. Sequencing the alpha and beta exons in various species pinpointed a
highly conserved region of 13 amino acids which is rich in acidic and hydrophobic
residues, a feature of some other transactivating domains. Strikingly, this
subdomain is also present in the otherwise unrelated N-terminal activating region
of p58c-ets-2 and was thus named BEC for Ets-1-beta/Ets-2-Conserved sequence.
Moreover, the two N-termini share the BEC sequence at a homologous position in
their highly similar genomic organization indicating a common origin. This
structural homology underlies a functional similarity since fusion of the
heterologous GAL4 DNA-binding domain with either of the two isolated domains
demonstrates that BEC is essential in both cases for the transactivating
activity. The function of the alpha beta domain in the context of p68c-ets-1 also
strictly depends on the presence of the BEC sequence. Finally, the whole
N-terminus of p58c-ets-2 can functionally substitute for its counterpart in
p68c-ets-1 further demonstrating that p68c-ets-1 and p58c-ets-2 are structurally 
and functionally more closely related than previously thought. Besides, we also
found BEC in the N-terminus of the Drosophila pointed gene which may be
considered as closely related to the uncommitted 'ets1/2' common ancestor. These 
data demonstrate that the alpha and beta exons are not a recent and specific
acquisition but stem, like the p58c-ets-2 N-terminus, from the invertebrate
unduplicated 'ets 1/2' gene. This work unravels a new model for the ets-1/ets-2
gene's evolution, based for the first time on both structural and functional
evidences. Accordingly, p68c-ets-1 and p58c-ets-2 are the direct descendants of
the ancestral 'ets1/2' gene whereas I54 may have been acquired as a second
promoter in the c-ets-1 gene after the duplication. Indeed, I54 is not found in
the Drosophila pointed gene. The high degree of similarity, and hence of
functional redundancy, between p68c-ets-1 and p58c-ets-2 may have led to the
rapid divergence (and even loss in mammals) of alpha and beta during evolution
whereas I54, which provided a novel function unique to c-ets-1, was maintained
within the presently widespread p54c-ets-1 version.

PMID: 7936650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 14;269(41):25303-9.

Ets-2 and c-Myb act independently in regulating expression of the hematopoietic
stem cell antigen CD34.

Melotti P(1), Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107.

CD34 is currently the only well defined human hematopoietic stem cell marker and 
is expressed on 1-4% of normal bone marrow cells. Putative binding sites for Ets 
proteins, a family of transcription factors involved in the regulation of cell
differentiation and proliferation in many cell systems, are present in the
5'-flanking region of the CD34 gene. Some of these sites are in close proximity
to binding sequences of the encoded product of the proto-oncogene c-myb, which
regulates CD34 expression by interacting with the Myb binding sites. Here we
demonstrate that Ets-2 (i) transactivates the CD34 promoter in rodent fibroblasts
upon interaction with Ets binding sites and (ii) induces expression of CD34 mRNA 
and protein in the CD34- human glioblastoma T98G cells. Ets-2 and c-Myb
transactivate the CD34 promoter independently because specific transactivation is
abrogated by site-specific mutations of the binding sites or by competition with 
oligomers that include wild type but not mutated Myb or Ets binding sites. Ets-2 
and c-Myb appear to have addictive effects on transactivation of the CD34
promoter and on induction of CD34 mRNA. Instead, CD34 surface protein levels
might be induced synergistically, raising the possibility of a posttranslational 
mechanism of CD34 expression in cells constitutively expressing c-Myb and Ets-2.

PMID: 7523384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Oncogene. 1994 Oct;9(10):2913-21.

Oncogenic Ras can induce transcriptional activation through a variety of promoter
elements, including tandem c-Ets-2 binding sites.

Galang CK(1), Der CJ, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, California 92037.

Oncogenic Ras activates the transcription of a variety of viral and cellular
genes through promoter elements consisting of two closely linked binding sites
for transcription factors from several distinct families. To better understand
what constitutes a promoter oncogene response element (ORE), various
transcription factor binding site configurations were inserted into a reporter
gene, and transactivation by oncogenic Ras was measured by cotransfection assays 
in NIH3T3 cells. We show that a single copy of two closely linked binding sites
for either AP-1, Ets, NF-kappa B, or single closely linked Ets and AP-1 binding
sites, are sufficient to confer at least 10-fold transactivation by similar
amounts of oncogenic Ras. Single binding sites for these factors, or several
other pairings of binding sites, are not sufficient to confer Ras responsiveness.
The effect of altered ORE binding site spacing and orientation was systematically
analysed, and limited flexibility was observed. The novel observation that two
adjacent c-Ets-2 binding sites are sufficient to act as an ORE, indicates that
Ets family proteins are a target of the Ras pathway distinct from AP-1. This ORE 
also mediates equivalent transactivation by c-Ets-2, and mutant OREs show a
parallel decrease in Ras and c-Ets-2 responsiveness. Together, these data help to
define transcriptional targets of the Ras signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 8084596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Reprod Dev. 1994 Oct;39(2):208-14.

Regulation of gene expression by transcription factors Ets-1 and Ets-2.

Tymms MJ(1), Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Birth Defects Laboratory, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

The ETS family of transcription factors have a DNA-binding domain in common that 
binds a core GGA(A/T) DNA sequence. A large number of proteins have now been
identified that contain an ETS DNA-binding domain (see review by Wasylyk et al., 
1993). Ets-1 was first described as the cellular homolog of v-ets. which is
translated as a 135-kDa gag-myb-ets fusion protein from the replication-deficient
retrovirus E26 in chickens. Ets-2 was subsequently described as a closely related
protein that contains the highly conserved ETS DNA-binding domain. This paper
considers the manner by which the two closely related genes, Ets-1 and Ets-2,
apparently play distinct roles in embryo development and in the immune system of 
adult mice. Although both Ets-1 and Ets-2 transform fibroblasts (Seth et al.,
1989), the temporal and tissue-specific expression patterns suggest that these
two proteins play distinct biological roles and consequently transactivate
different downstream cellular target genes.

PMID: 7826624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Sep 25;22(19):3871-9.

A residue of the ETS domain mutated in the v-ets oncogene is essential for the
DNA-binding and transactivating properties of the ETS-1 and ETS-2 proteins.

Soudant N(1), Albagli O, Dhordain P, Flourens A, Stéhelin D, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille,
France.

The c-ets-1 locus encodes two transcription factors, p54c-ets-1 and p68c-ets-1
that recognize purine-rich motifs. The v-ets oncogene of the avian retrovirus E26
differs from its cellular progenitor p68c-ets-1 by two amino acid substitutions
(alanine 285 and isoleucine 445 in c-ets-1 both substituted by valine in v-ets,
mutations A and B respectively) and its carboxy-terminal end (mutation C). The B 
mutation affects a well conserved residue in the carboxy-terminal 85 amino acids,
ETS DNA-binding domain. To address the biological relevance of the B mutation
found between v-ets and c-ets-1, we have randomly mutagenized isoleucine 445 of
p68c-ets-1 by polymerase chain reaction. Using in vitro gel mobility shift
assays, we show that this residue is crucial for the binding properties of
c-ets-1 since the 12 mutations we have generated at this position, all diminish
or even abolish the binding, to the 'optimized' Ets-1 binding site (EBS), of 35
kDa proteins corresponding to the 311 carboxy-terminal residues of c-ets-1. Among
them, substitutions of isoleucine to glutamic acid, glycine or proline have the
highest inhibitory effects. Similar results were obtained when the same mutations
were introduced either in full-length p68c-ets-1 protein or into a
carboxy-terminal polypeptide of 109 amino acids encompassing the ETS-domain which
has previously been shown to display a very high binding activity as compared
with the full-length protein. Consistent with the in vitro results, point
mutations in p68c-ets-1 that decrease binding activity to EBS abrogate its
ability to transactivate reporter plasmids carrying either the TPA Oncogene
Response Unit of the Polyoma virus enhancer (TORU) or a sequence derived from the
HTLV-1 LTR. Furthermore, as this isoleucine residue is rather well-conserved
within the ETS gene family, we show that mutation of the corresponding isoleucine
of c-ets-2 into glycine also abrogates its DNA-binding and hence, transactivating
properties. Thus, the v-ets B mutation highlights the isoleucine 445 as an
essential amino acid of the c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 DNA-binding domains.

PMCID: PMC308383
PMID: 7937106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Arkh Patol. 1994 Jul-Aug;56(4):22-31.

[Cell oncogene expression in normal, metaplastic, dysplastic epithelium and
squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix].

[Article in Russian]

Petrov SV, Mazurenko NN, Sukhova NM, Moroz IP, Katsenel'son VM, Raikhlin NT,
Kiselev FL.

Immunohistochemical analysis of the protein expression c-myc, ets 1, ets 2,
TPR-met, c-fos, c-jun, c-ras-pan, p53, yes, src in 79 samples of normal,
metaplastic squamous epithelium, intraepithelial and invasive squamous cell
carcinoma of uterine cervix was performed using polyclonal rabbit antibodies to
the synthetic peptides homologous active areas of corresponding oncoproteins.
Higher content of myc, fos, ets2, p53, ras is noted in metaplasia, dysplasia and 
in tumours as compared to the normal tissues. Protein myc is revealed in the
cytoplasm at a grave dysplasia and in the nucleus in the intraepithelial
carcinoma: this may serve as a criterion at a differential diagnosis of these
conditions. Expression of the oncoproteins fos, ets2, p53, src in the metaplastic
squamous cell carcinoma was higher than in the true squamous cell (ectocervical) 
carcinoma. When compared to the advanced carcinomas, increase of ets2, p53, and
at some degree that of myc, the increase is noted in the latter. Invasive
carcinoma with a high level of oncoproteins showed a tendency to the
synchronization of myc and ras expression. Poor prognosis was associated with a
low level (before treatment) of the expression of the majority of the
oncoproteins studied.

PMID: 7848100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Oncogene. 1994 Jun;9(6):1551-65.

Differential expression of ets-1 and ets-2 proto-oncogenes during murine
embryogenesis.

Maroulakou IG(1), Papas TS, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

ets-1 and ets-2 genes have previously been identified by their sequence homology 
to the v-ets oncogene of the avian erythroblastosis virus, E26. These cellular
genes have been shown to function as transcription factors important in lymphoid 
differentiation and activation and cellular proliferation. In this study, we have
broadly analysed the differential expression of ets-1 and ets-2 during murine
development using in situ hybridization. Our results indicate that these
transcription factors are expressed in multiple tissues during critical stages of
embryo formation and organogenesis, suggesting that these genes may serve
multiple functions during mouse development. The patterns of expression of both
genes are quite different as early as day 8.0 of gestation. ets-1 expression is
clearly observed during a narrow developmental stage in the developing nervous
system, including the presumptive hindbrain regions, the neural tube, as well as 
neural crest and the first and second branchial arches, ets-2 expression is
limited to the developing limb buds and distal tail. At later times, ets-1
expression is observed in developing vascular structures, including the heart,
arteries, capillaries and meninges, whereas ets-2 is highly expressed in
developing bone, tooth buds, epithelial layers of the gut, nasal sinus and
uterus, and several regions of the developing brain. Both ets-1 and ets-2 are
expressed in developing lung, gut and skin. High levels of expression in both
genes is observed in adult lymphoid tissues, but in different tissue subsets.
ets-1 is expressed in the adult lung, gut mesenchyme and bone marrow. ets-2
continues to be expressed at low levels in several adult tissues, except in the
differentiated brain, where substantial levels of expression are found in
particular regions of the mature brain. These results demonstrate that ets-1 and 
ets-2 are differentially regulated, are widely expressed in many tissues during
murine embryogenesis and may play important roles in cellular proliferation and
differentiation during mouse development.

PMID: 8183549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Int J Oncol. 1994 Mar;4(3):521-31.

Expression of ets family genes in hematopoietic-cells.

Romanospica V(1), Suzuki H, Georgiou P, Chen S, Ascione R, Papas T, Bhat N.

Author information: 
(1)NCI,MOLEC ONCOL LAB,POB B,FREDERICK,MD 21702. MED UNIV S CAROLINA,HOLLINGS
CANC CTR,CTR MOLEC & STRUCT BIOL,CHARLESTON,SC 29425. FREDERICK CANC RES & DEV
CTR,DYNCORP,PROGRAM RESOURCES INC,FREDERICK,MD 21702.

We have examined the expression of the ets family of transcription factors in
different types of hematopoietic cells. Our results demonstrate that several
members of the ets gene family are expressed differentially in hematopoietic
cells. During phorbol ester induced differentiation of HL60 cells, ETS2, PEA3, as
well as GABPalpha and GABPbeta mRNAs are coordinately induced. During the
activation of T-cells, ETS2 proteins are induced; however, the expression of the 
ETS1 and ERGB gene products are reduced. These results demonstrate that the
regulation of ets family of genes is complex and depends on cell type. This
observation leads to the conclusion that the regulation of ets target genes, will
be dependent, in part, upon the type of ets genes expressed in each particular
cell type.

PMID: 21566954  [PubMed]


411. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Mar;14(3):2129-39.

Combinatorial interactions between AP-1 and ets domain proteins contribute to the
developmental regulation of the macrophage scavenger receptor gene.

Wu H(1), Moulton K, Horvai A, Parik S, Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla 92093-0656.

Macrophage development is regulated by a complex set of hormone-like molecules
and cell adhesion events that control the growth and differentiation of
progenitor cells. The macrophage scavenger receptor (SR) gene becomes markedly
upregulated during the final stages of monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation and
provides a model for the identification and characterization of transcription
factors that control this process. In this report, we have identified three
genomic regulatory elements that are required for transactivation of the SR gene 
in the THP-1 monocytic leukemia cell line following induction of macrophage
differentiation by tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate. Each of these regulatory
elements contains a near-consensus binding site for members of the AP-1 gene
family, while the two most quantitatively important elements also contain
juxtaposed binding sites for ets domain transcription factors. We demonstrate
that tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate treatment results in a marked and prolonged
increase in AP-1 binding activity on these elements, which can be accounted for
almost entirely by c-jun and junB. These proteins in turn form ternary complexes 
with additional factors that bind to the adjacent ets recognition motifs. Several
indirect lines of evidence indicate that ets2 represents a component of this
ternary complex. The combined expression of c-jun, ets2, and a constitutive form 
of ras result in synergistic increases in transcription from promoters containing
the SR regulatory elements. These observations suggest that SR gene expression is
regulated via a signal transduction pathway involving ras, AP-1, and ets domain
proteins and imply that at least some of the signalling components involved in
ras-dependent growth are also utilized to promote the expression of genes
involved in terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC358573
PMID: 8114743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Oncogene. 1994 Mar;9(3):911-21.

junB promoter regulation: Ras mediated transactivation by c-Ets-1 and c-Ets-2.

Coffer P(1), de Jonge M, Mettouchi A, Binetruy B, Ghysdael J, Kruijer W.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratorium, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The Jun gene family encode components of the AP-1 transcription factor complex
that regulate a variety of TRE-containing target promoters. Expression of family 
members is induced by a wide variety of extracellular stimuli and thought to be
important in mediating cellular proliferation and differentiation. We have
localized cis-acting DNA sequences in the murine junB promoter capable of
mediating transcriptional activation by the proto-oncogene products c-Ets-1 and
c-Ets-2. We show by promoter deletion analysis that multiple elements located
between -848 and -574, and between -196 and -91 can mediate transactivation by
ETS-family members in different cell types. In vitro DNA binding assays indicate 
that the elements identified can specifically interact with c-Ets-1 protein.
Furthermore, we show that ETS-transactivation of a variety of reporter constructs
is dramatically enhanced by introduction of oncogenic Ha-ras. The activation of
Ras by extracellular stimuli invokes a phosphorylation cascade that includes the 
downstream mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase p44ERK-1. We further show that 
addition of activated p44ERK-1 MAP kinase can also enhance ETS-transactivation of
junB promoter reporter constructs. Here we propose that ETS-family members play a
role in the activation of junB transcription by a Ras-stimulated signal
transducing pathway that includes MAP kinase(s).

PMID: 8108135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Feb 25;22(4):613-8.

One of two Ets-binding sites in the cytokeratin EndoA enhancer is essential for
enhancer activity and binds to Ets-2 related proteins.

Fujimura Y(1), Yamamoto H, Hamazato F, Nozaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Genetics, Osaka University, Japan.

Expression of the mouse cytokeratin EndoA gene is restricted in endodermal and
epithelial cells, and is regulated by an enhancer that is located 1 kilobase (kb)
3' downstream from the gene. The enhancer consists of six direct repeats, of
which each contains two predicted Ets binding sites (EBS1 and EBS2) containing
GGAA as a core. Mutation analysis showed that EBS1 is essential for the enhancer 
activity and additional effects of EBS2, suggesting that some Ets-related
proteins bind and activate the enhancer through EBS1. We also showed that Ets-2
mRNA is expressed in PYS-2 cells and that Ets-2 protein produced by E. coli
interacts with EBS1 but not with EBS2. Using co-transfection assays, we showed
that Ets-2 can trans-activate the enhancer in PYS-2 cells. Mutations that impair 
Ets-2 binding abolished the activity of the EndoA enhancer. The results obtained 
from the binding competition assay using an Ets-2 specific antibody, however,
suggest that EBS1 binds to an Ets protein which is distinct from Ets-2. These
data show that Ets-2 related protein binds and activates the EndoA enhancer in a 
sequence-specific fashion.

PMCID: PMC307851
PMID: 7510396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Oncogene. 1994 Feb;9(2):469-77.

The EndoA enhancer contains multiple ETS binding site repeats and is regulated by
ETS proteins.

Seth A(1), Robinson L, Panayiotakis A, Thompson DM, Hodge DR, Zhang XK, Watson
DK, Ozato K, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

EndoA is a type II keratin and with EndoB (type I keratin), constitutes
intermediate filaments in various simple epithelial tissues. EndoA is
developmentally regulated and has an enhancer that is located at the 3'- end of
the gene. This enhancer contains two single and five dual Ets binding sites. Thus
far, no other promoter or enhancer has been shown to contain as many potential
clustered Ets binding sites. To study the transcriptional regulation of EndoA by 
the ETS family proteins, we amplified the EndoA enhancer fragment from mouse
genomic DNA by PCR, and cloned it into the pBLCAT2 vector upstream from the CAT
reporter gene. Several pBLCAT-ENDOA clones were sequenced to verify the presence 
of all the ETS binding sites. Clones that did not show any point mutations in the
ETS binding sites were chosen to study the transcription regulation by ETS1, ETS2
and ERGB/FLI-1 gene products. EMSA results indicated that the ETS1, ETS2 and
ERGB/FLI-1 proteins bind to the enhancer sequence, and DNase I protection data
demonstrated that the ETS proteins protect all seven EBS core sequences.
Cotransfection of the COS cells with the pBLCAT-ENDOA construct, along with
increasing amounts of different ETS expression vectors, resulted in a significant
induction of CAT reporter gene expression. Previously, we have shown that the
overexpression of the ETS1 gene transforms NIH3T3, and these transformed cells
(7AQS2.1) produce high levels of ETS1 protein (Seth & Papas, 1990). In this
report, we show that the undifferentiated P19 EC cells do not express detectable 
levels of ETS1; however, an elevated level of ETS1 is expressed in differentiated
derivatives of these cells. We therefore used these two cell lines to examine the
activity of the EndoA enhancer with the ETS1 product. Transfection of the
pBLCAT-ENDOA construct alone in undifferentiated P19 EC cells results in very low
CAT gene expression; however, upon differentiation with retinoic acid the level
of CAT gene activity increases dramatically. Similarly, an increase in CAT
expression from the same construct (pBLCAT-ENDOA) was also observed in 7AQS2.1
cells. Our results therefore indicate that the EndoA enhancer is regulated by ETS
proteins via interaction with multiple ETS-binding site sequences.

PMID: 7507230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Oncogene. 1994 Jan;9(1):121-32.

Comparison of the expression and function of the transcription factor PU.1 (Spi-1
proto-oncogene) between murine macrophages and B lymphocytes.

Ross IL(1), Dunn TL, Yue X, Roy S, Barnett CJ, Hume DA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Queensland,
Australia.

The expression of mRNA encoding the DNA-binding protein PU.1 (Spi-1) is
restricted to B lymphocytes and macrophages. The role of PU.1 in tissue-specific 
transcriptional regulation in the two cell types was examined by co-transfection 
of a PU.1 expression plasmid with vectors containing B cell (IgH enhancer) or
macrophage-specific (c-fms) transcription control elements. Cotransfection of the
PU.1 expression plasmid in MOPC31C B cells trans-repressed the IgH enhancer but
trans-activated the c-fms promoter. The latter was insufficient to overcome a
block to transcription elongation that determines macrophage-specific c-fms gene 
expression. In the macrophage line RAW264, PU.1 had no effect on the c-fms
promoter, but trans-repressed the activity of a c-fms reporter plasmid containing
the transcription attenuator. The effects of PU.1 in both cell types were
distinct from those of c-ets-2, a related factor, which trans-activated the c-fms
promoter in both B cells and macrophages but also repressed the IgH enhancer.
PU.1 was shown to be one of several nuclear proteins that bound a critical
cis-acting element of the IgH enhancer, microB, but analysis of nuclear extracts 
of a wide range of B cell and macrophage lines demonstrated a strong correlation 
between macrophage phenotype and nuclear PU.1 expression. The data suggest that
differences in nuclear PU.1 expression and function between macrophages and B
cells may play a role in lineage divergence.

PMID: 8302571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993 Dec 23;1155(3):346-56.

Gene regulation by Ets proteins.

Janknecht R(1), Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

PMID: 8268191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Oncogene. 1993 Dec;8(12):3323-32.

v-raf confers CSF-1 independent growth to a macrophage cell line and leads to
immediate early gene expression without MAP-kinase activation.

Büscher D(1), Dello Sbarba P, Hipskind RA, Rapp UR, Stanley ER, Baccarini M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunbiology, Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Molecular 
Biology, Hannover, Germany.

The BAC-1.2F5 macrophage cell line depends on CSF-1 for proliferation and
survival. Phosphorylation and activation of the RAF-1 kinase are among the early 
events in CSF-1 signal transduction. To characterize the role of RAF-1 in
CSF-1-induced proliferation, we overexpressed oncogenically activated RAF-1,
cellular RAF-1 and RAF-1 kinase-defective mutant proteins in BAC-1.2F5 cells. We 
were unable to establish stable cell lines expressing either kinase-negative or
full length RAF-1 proteins, implying that expression of these molecules is not
tolerated in BAC-1.2F5 cells. Oncogenically activated RAF-1 induces
CSF-1-independent growth in the absence of autocrine growth factor production.
Autonomous growth is not associated with dedifferentiation, since
v-raf-expressing macrophages perform the same immunological functions as control 
cells. Intriguingly, autonomous growth correlates with the suppression of
CSF-1-mediated MAP-Kinase activation and with the low constitutive expression of 
a number of CSF-1-inducible genes, including fos, jun, ets2, and myc, but also
the genes for the inflammatory cytokines TNF alpha and IL-1 beta. Many of these
genes have AP-1 binding sites in their promoters, and the v-raf-expressing cells 
contain constitutive AP-1 binding activity. These data indicate that RAF-1, but
not MAP-Kinase, is a key component in CSF-1 mitogenic signal transduction, and
are consistent with a working hypothesis in which RAF-1 mediates transcriptional 
activation of genes via AP-1.

PMID: 8247534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1993 Oct;9(10):1017-23.

ETS family proteins activate transcription from HIV-1 long terminal repeat.

Seth A(1), Hodge DR, Thompson DM, Robinson L, Panayiotakis A, Watson DK, Papas
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

ets is a multigene family and its members share a common ETS DNA-binding domain. 
ETS proteins activate transcription via binding to a purine-rich GGAA core
sequence located in promoters/enhancers of various genes, including several that 
are transcriptionally active in T cells. The ETS1, ETS2, and ERBG/Hu-FLI-1 gene
expression pattern also suggests a role for these genes in cells of hematopoietic
lineage. The HIV-1 LTR core enhancer contains two 10-base pair direct repeat
sequences (left and right) that are required for regulation of HIV-1 mRNA
expression by host transcription factors, including NF kappa B. Two ETS-binding
sites are present in the core enhancer of all the HIV-1 isolates reported so far.
In our studies, we utilized HIV-1 HXB2 and HIV-1 Z2Z6 core enhancers because the 
Z2Z6 strain has a single point mutation flanking the right ETS-binding site. We
demonstrate that the ETS1, ETS2, and ERGB/Hu-FLI-1 proteins can trans-activate
transcription from both the HXB2 and Z2Z6 core enhancer when linked to a reporter
(cat) gene. In addition, we show that the DNA binding and trans-activation with
the Z2Z6 core enhancer is at least 40-fold higher than that observed with the
HXB2 core enhancer. Further, we provide evidence that the marked increase in
binding and trans-activation with Z2Z6 core enhancer sequences is due to the
substitution of a flanking T residue in HXB2 TGGAA) by a C residue in Z2Z6
(CGGAA) isolate, thus generating an optimal ETS-binding core (CGGAA) sequence.

PMID: 8280476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Aug 15;90(16):7588-92.

The Ets1 transcription factor is widely expressed during murine embryo
development and is associated with mesodermal cells involved in morphogenetic
processes such as organ formation.

Kola I(1), Brookes S, Green AR, Garber R, Tymms M, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Birth Defects Laboratory, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

The Ets family of genes encodes a class of transcription factors. Ets1 is
predominantly expressed in the lymphoid organs of neonatal and adult mice,
whereas Ets2 is expressed in every organ examined. In this study, we investigate 
the expression of Ets1 and Ets2 during murine embryonic development. Our data
show that Ets1 expression increases in embryos after implantation and during
organogenesis such that it is expressed in all the organs of day-15 embryos
studied. In later fetal stages, Ets1 expression is predominant in the lymphoid
tissues, brain, and organs that are undergoing branching morphogenesis (e.g.,
lung) but is dramatically reduced in other organs such as the stomach and
intestine. In neonatal development, Ets1 is expressed only in the lymphoid organs
and brain. In situ hybridization analysis demonstrates that expression of Ets1
occurs in mesenchymal cells of developing organs, in the nervous system, and in
forming bone. Furthermore, expression of Ets1 is upregulated in P19 cells induced
to differentiate into mesoderm-like cells. Ets2, on the other hand, is expressed 
in differentiated and undifferentiated P19 and F9 cells and in all organs of
embryonic, neonatal, and adult mice studied. These data suggest that Ets1 plays
an important role in mesodermal cells associated with morphogenetic processes
such as organ formation and tissue modeling, whereas Ets2 plays a more
fundamental role in cells.

PMCID: PMC47187
PMID: 7689222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Oncogene. 1993 Jul;8(7):1783-90.

Transactivation of GATA-1 promoter with ETS1, ETS2 and ERGB/Hu-FLI-1 proteins:
stabilization of the ETS1 protein binding on GATA-1 promoter sequences by
monoclonal antibody.

Seth A(1), Robinson L, Thompson DM, Watson DK, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

Ets family proteins activate transcription via binding to the GGAA core sequence 
located in the promoter/enhancer elements of many cellular and viral genes.
GATA-1 is an erythroid-specific transcription factor. The promoter of the chicken
GATA-1 gene contains multiple ets binding sites (EBS), two of them are present in
palindromic form. The GATA-1 promoter has been shown to be activated by the E26
virus. In this study, we have analysed whether the palidromic EBS of the chicken 
GATA-1 promoter is a target for binding and activation by members of the cellular
ets gene family products. The results herein indicate that both EBS in the
palindrome are required for DNA-binding because mutations in either site reduces 
the activity by at least 95%. Moreover, DNA binding of ETS1 to the EBS palindrome
is dramatically stabilized in the presence of a specific monoclonal antibody
whose epitope maps between amino acid positions 240-260. Although each of the
single sites bind, the efficiency of binding is extremely low. Furthermore, for
efficient binding the two sites must be in an inverted configuration because of
the fact that the oligonucleotide containing the left and right EBS in the same
orientation binds 10-fold less than the oligonucleotide containing the EBS
palindrome. Additionally, we show that the transcription of a reporter gene (CAT)
either linked to the GATA-1 EBS palindrome or GATA-1 promoter can be activated by
cotransfection with ETS1, alternatively-spliced ETS1, ETS2 or ERGB/Hu-FLI-1
expression vectors.

PMID: 8510925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Biol Chem. 1993 Apr 5;268(10):7196-204.

A polyomavirus enhancer A-binding protein-3 site and Ets-2 protein have a major
role in the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate response of the human
stromelysin gene.

Buttice G(1), Kurkinen M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, Piscataway 08854.

The expression of stromelysin, a major matrix metalloproteinase of connective
tissues, is regulated by several cytokines, growth factors, protooncogenes as
well as by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). The human stromelysin gene
promoter contains an activator protein-1 (Fos/Jun) binding site at -70, which is 
required for basal expression but is not necessary for the TPA response. In this 
study, using promoter deletion mutants in transient gene transfection
experiments, we first identify the sequence from -220 to -202 as necessary for
the TPA response of the stromelysin gene. Further, among the restriction
fragments from the 1.3-kilobase long promoter, only the proximal fragment (-274
to -101) conferred a TPA response on the heterologous thymidine kinase gene
promoter. The -220 to -202 sequence contains two copies of a motif similar to the
polyomavirus enhancer A-binding protein-3 (PEA-3) site, which binds the Ets
family of oncoproteins and transcription factors. Point mutations of either one
of the two PEA-3 sites, in the 1.3-kilobase long stromelysin promoter context,
reduced basal gene expression. However, only the mutation of the proximal, but
not the distal PEA-3 site, significantly inhibited the TPA response. In
cotransfection experiments, the Ets-2 protein transactivated the stromelysin
promoter and the promoter proximal fragment containing the PEA-3 sites but not
the promoters containing mutated PEA-3 sites. These data suggest that the PEA-3
site, but not the activator protein-1 site, and Ets-2 protein have a major role
in the TPA induction of the human stromelysin gene transcription.

PMID: 8463255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Hum Genet. 1993 Apr;91(3):245-53.

Partial physical map of human chromosome 21 from fibroblast and lymphocyte DNA.

Crété N(1), Delabar JM, Rahmani Z, Yaspo ML, Kraus J, Marks A, Sinet PM,
Créau-Goldberg N.

Author information: 
(1)URA CNRS 1335, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

A partial physical map of the human chromosome 21 including 26 genes and
anonymous sequences was established by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis analysis 
of restriction fragments obtained from lymphocyte and fibroblast DNAs. The sizes 
of the restriction fragments obtained by total digestion with eight different
enzymes were compared in these two tissues. Differences resulting from the
variations in the methylation state of the restriction sites were frequently
observed. These differences and partial digestions were used to estimate the
order and the distances between genes and sequences. Six linkage groups were
defined: D21S13-D21S16, D21S1-D21S11, D21S65-D21S17, (D21S55,ERG)-ETS2,
BCEI-D21S19-D21S42-D21S113-CBS-CRYA1, and COL6A2-S100B. For six intergenic
distances the resolution of previous maps was significantly increased.

PMID: 8478008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Virol. 1993 Apr;67(4):2421-5.

Localization of the c-ets-2 transactivation domain.

Chumakov AM(1), Chen DL, Chumakova EA, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of Medicine 90048-1869.

The human ets-2 proto-oncogene is one of the homologs of the v-ets gene, found in
avian acutely transforming retrovirus E26 (D. Leprince, A. Gegonne, J. Call, C.
de Taisne, A. Schneeberger, C. Lagrou, and D. Stehelin, Nature [London]
306:395-397, 1983; M. F. Nunn, P. H. Seeburg, C. Moscovici, and P. H. Duesberg,
Nature [London] 306:391-395, 1983), which causes leukemia in chickens. We used
the DNA-binding domain of yeast transcriptional activator GAL4 to locate the
transactivation region of human ets-2. The transactivation domain of ets-2 was
found in the N-terminal part of the protein, which is homologous to ets-1, and
can be disrupted by deletion of a stretch of acidic amino acid residues. A
transactivation-deficient mutant of ets-2 failed to transform Rat-1 cells and
suppressed the transforming activity of coexpressed wild-type ets-2. A mutation
in the putative DNA-binding region of ets-2 abolished transforming activity. We
show that the motif crucial for ets-2 transactivation capability is necessary for
transforming activity in Rat-1 cells. Mutant ets-2 protein that lacks the
transactivation domain has a dominant negative effect on transformation by
wild-type ets-2. We were unable to detect ets-2-dependent transcriptional
regulation of several enhancers containing ets-binding motifs.

PMCID: PMC240417
PMID: 8445738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Oncogene. 1993 Mar;8(3):771-80.

c-Ets-1 protein is hyperphosphorylated during mitosis.

Fleischman LF(1), Pilaro AM, Murakami K, Kondoh A, Fisher RJ, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

The ets-1 and ets-2 proto-oncogene products can serve as transcription factors
and become phosphorylated in response to Ca(2+)-mediated signals. We have
examined expression of Ets proteins during the cell cycle in cells synchronized
by centrifugal elutriation or nocodazole-induced mitotic block. Both methods
revealed the presence of a hyperphosphorylated isoform of Ets-1 during the
mitotic phase. This isoform showed a characteristic mobility shift and was
observed during mitosis in each of four cell lines (three human T-cell lines and 
a human astrocytoma) that express ets-1. In elutriated cells, only a small
portion of the Ets-1 in cells from the G2/M fractions was hyperphosphorylated,
while in nocodazole-arrested cells more of the Ets-1 was shifted. When cells were
released from nocodazole arrest, this isoform disappeared within 1-2 h as cells
completed mitosis and entered G1. This suggests that hyperphosphorylated Ets-1 is
present transiently during early mitosis, before or around the time of the
metaphase-anaphase transition. Exposure of unsynchronized cells to okadaic acid
resulted in a dramatic hyperphosphorylation of virtually all Ets-1, suggesting
that changes in cellular phosphatase activity are important for cell cycle
regulation of Ets-1. Hyperphosphorylated Ets-1 appears to arise from multiple
phosphorylations on serine in the exon 7-encoded domain of the protein and did
not appear to alter sequence-specific DNA-binding activity. Although enhanced
phosphorylation of Ets-2 was detected in nocodazole-arrested cells, no Ets-2
hyperphosphorylation was seen.

PMID: 8437861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Jan 15;190(1):8-14.

Evolution of the ets gene family.

Laudet V(1), Niel C, Duterque-Coquillaud M, Leprince D, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

Over the past few years a variety of genes have been described whose protein
products share similarity with that of the c-ets-1 proto-oncogene, the cellular
counterpart of the v-ets oncogene of the avian E26 retrovirus. This so-called
"ets family" of transcription factors includes at least a dozen members present
in several organisms. We have questioned the common evolutionary origin of these 
various gene products. By constructing phylogenetical trees with different
methods, we show that the ets family is very ancient since the duplication of the
various groups of ets related proteins occurred before the Arthropods/Vertebrates
split (ca. 500 million years).

PMID: 8422262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jan;13(1):668-76.

GATA and Ets cis-acting sequences mediate megakaryocyte-specific expression.

Lemarchandel V(1), Ghysdael J, Mignotte V, Rahuel C, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.91, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Creteil, France.

The human glycoprotein IIB (GPIIB) gene is expressed only in megakaryocytes, and 
its promoter displays cell type specificity. We show that this specificity
involved two cis-acting sequences. The first one, located at -55, contains a GATA
binding site. Point mutations that abolish protein binding on this site decrease 
the activity of the GPIIB promoter but do not affect its tissue specificity. The 
second one, located at -40, contains an Ets consensus sequence, and we show that 
Ets-1 or Ets-2 protein can interact with this -40 GPIIB sequence. Point mutations
that impair Ets binding decrease the activity of the GPIIB promoter to the same
extent as do mutations that abolish GATA binding. A GPIIB 40-bp DNA fragment
containing the GATA and Ets binding sites can confer activity to a heterologous
promoter in megakaryocytic cells. This activity is independent of the GPIIB DNA
fragment orientation, and mutations on each binding site result in decreased
activity. Using cotransfection assays, we show that c-Ets-1 and human GATA1 can
transactive the GPIIB promoter in HeLa cells and can act additively. Northern
(RNA) blot analysis indicates that the ets-1 mRNA level is increased during
megakaryocyte-induced differentiation of erythrocytic/megakaryocytic cell lines. 
Gel retardation assays show that the same GATA-Ets association is found in the
human GPIIB enhancer and the rat platelet factor 4 promoter, the other two
characterized regulatory regions of megakaryocyte-specific genes. These results
indicate that GATA and Ets cis-acting sequences are an important determinant of
megakaryocytic specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC358945
PMID: 8417360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Eur J Hum Genet. 1993;1(1):51-63.

Mapping the Down syndrome chromosome region. Establishment of a YAC contig
spanning 1.2 megabases.

Crété N(1), Gosset P, Théophile D, Duterque-Coquillaud M, Blouin JL, Vayssettes
C, Sinet PM, Créau-Goldberg N.

Author information: 
(1)URA 1335 CNRS, Hôpital, Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France.

The triplication of a region of chromosome 21 around D21S55 in 21q22.2-22.3 has
been involved in the main features of Down syndrome including mental retardation 
(Down syndrome chromosome region: DCR). To improve the physical map of this
region, we screened yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) libraries with ETS2 and ERG
sequences. Five selected clones were analyzed by AluPCR, pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis, and in situ hybridization. A 1.2-Mg contig, encompassing the
protooncogenes ETS2 and ERG, was identified, its restriction map established and 
compared to the genomic map. ERG is distal to D21S55 and proximal to ETS2. ERG
and ETS2 genes are 400 kb apart and in opposite orientations. The contig contains
the distal boundary and part of the DCR. Three putative HTF islands were
identified.

PMID: 8069651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Hum Genet. 1992 Dec;90(4):427-34.

New chromosome 21 DNA markers isolated by pulsed field gel electrophoresis from
an ETS2-containing Down syndrome chromosomal region.

Yaspo ML(1), Crété N, Chettouh Z, Blouin JL, Rahmani Z, Stehelin D, Sinet PM,
Créau-Goldberg N, Delabar JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie-Génétique URA 1335 CNRS, Hôpital Necker, Paris,
France.

To generate new chromosome 21 markers in a region that is critical for the
pathogenesis of Down syndrome (D21S55-MX1), we used pulsed field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) to isolate a 600-kb NruI DNA fragment from the WA17 hybrid
cell line, which has retained chromosome 21 as the only human material. This
fragment, which contains the oncogene ETS2, was used to construct a partial
genomic library. Among the 14 unique sequences that were isolated, 3 were
polymorphic markers and contained sequences that are conserved in mammals. Five
of these markers mapped on the ETS2-containing NruI fragment and allowed us to
define an 800-kb high-resolution PFGE map.

PMID: 1483701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Dec;12(12):5355-62.

Mitogenic signaling by colony-stimulating factor 1 and ras is suppressed by the
ets-2 DNA-binding domain and restored by myc overexpression.

Langer SJ(1), Bortner DM, Roussel MF, Sherr CJ, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710.

The activity of p21ras is required for the proliferative response to
colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1), and signals transduced by both the CSF-1
receptor (CSF-1R) and p21ras stimulate transcription from promoter elements
containing overlapping binding sites for Fos/Jun- and Ets-related proteins. A
sequence encoding the DNA-binding domain and nuclear localization signal of human
c-ets-2, which lacked portions of the c-ets-2 gene product necessary for trans
activation, was fused to the bacterial lacZ gene and expressed from an actin
promoter in NIH 3T3 cells expressing either the v-ras oncogene or human CSF-1R.
Nuclear expression of the Ets-LacZ protein, confirmed by histochemical staining
of beta-galactosidase, inhibited the activity of ras-responsive enhancer elements
and suppressed morphologic transformation by v-ras as well as CSF-1R-dependent
colony formation in semisolid medium. When CSF-1R-bearing cells expressing the
Ets-LacZ protein were stimulated by CSF-1, induction of c-ets-2, c-jun, and c-fos
ensued, but the c-myc response was impaired. Enforced expression of the c-myc
gene overrode the suppressive effect of ets-lacZ and restored the ability of
these cells to form colonies in response to CSF-1. NIH 3T3 cells engineered to
express a CSF-1R (Phe-809) mutant similarly cannot form CSF-1-dependent colonies 
in semisolid medium and exhibit an impaired c-myc response, but expression of an 
exogenous myc gene resensitizes these cells to CSF-1 [M. F. Roussel, J. L.
Cleveland, S. A. Shurtleff, and C. J. Sherr, Nature (London) 353:361-363, 1991]. 
The ability of these cells to respond to CSF-1 was also rescued by enforced
expression of an endogenous c-ets-2 gene. The ets family of transcription factors
therefore plays a central role in integrating both CSF-1R and ras-induced
mitogenic signals and in modulating the myc response to CSF-1 stimulation.

PMCID: PMC360473
PMID: 1448070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Int J Oncol. 1992 Nov;1(6):631-7.

Influence of nucleotides flanking the ggaa core sequence on ets1 and ets2
DNA-binding activity and the mechanism of ets1 autoregulation.

Ascione R(1), Thompson D, Thomas R, Panayiotakis A, Ramsay R, Tymms M, Kola I,
Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)NCI,MOLEC ONCOL LAB,FREDERICK,MD 21702. LUDWIG INST CANC RES,MELBOURNE TUMOR
BIOL BRANCH,MELBOURNE,VIC,AUSTRALIA. MONASH UNIV,CTR EARLY HUMAN DEV,MOLEC
EMBRYOL & BIRTH DEFECT LAB,CLAYTON,VIC 3168,AUSTRALIA.

The Ets family of genes encode nuclear proteins that activate transcription by
binding to a specific purine-rich (GGAA) ets binding sequence (EBS) present in
promoters/enhancers of various genes. We have previously shown that
over-expression of ets1 via transfection of ets1 expression vectors into NIH3T3
cells induced the expression of the endogenous Ets1 gene. Here we report that the
autoregulation occurs as a result of the ets1 protein binding to the EBS-core
located in its own promoter. In the present study, we have also identified Ets
binding sites in the IL-4, G-CSF (granulocyte colony stimulating factor), and the
2'5' OAS (oligoadenylate synthetase) promoters by binding with Ets1 and Ets2
proteins using electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Interestingly, we have
found that the EBS containing T nucleotides on either side of the GGAA core
sequence, does not bind Ets1 or Ets2 proteins. Our findings demonstrate that the 
sequences surrounding the purine core - GGAA- have a profound influence on the
binding of Ets proteins.

PMID: 21584592  [PubMed]


431. Exp Cell Res. 1992 Sep;202(1):199-202.

Ets-1 and Ets-2 protooncogene expression in theca cells of the adult mouse ovary.

Rowe A(1), Propst F.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St. Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, United Kingdom.

We have investigated the mRNA expression of the Ets-1 and Ets-2 genes in murine
gonads and found expression in adult ovaries. In situ hybridization experiments
show that the Ets genes are predominantly expressed in theca cells and cells of
ovarian interstitium. By gel retardation experiments we detected DNA binding
proteins in ovaries that specifically bind to the ETS motif, suggesting the
expression of Ets or Ets-related proteins. Our results raise the possibility of
Ets-2 involvement in ovarian pathology seen in patients with Down's syndrome.

PMID: 1511734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Genomics. 1992 Aug;13(4):1119-24.

The evolution of human chromosome 21: evidence from in situ hybridization in
marsupials and a monotreme.

Maccarone P(1), Watson JM, Francis D, Selwood L, Kola I, Graves JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Human Variation, La Trobe University, Bundoora,
Vic., Australia.

We have mapped five human chromosome 21 (HSA 21) markers in marsupials and a
monotreme, two major groups of mammals that diverged from eutherians 130-150 and 
150-170 million years before present (MYrBP), respectively. We have found that
these genes map to two distinct autosomal sites, one containing SOD1/CBR/BCEI and
the other containing ETS2/INFAR, in the marsupials Macropus eugenii and
Sminthopsis macroura (which belong to orders that diverged 40-80 MYrBP), as well 
as in the monotreme Ornithorhynchus anatinus (the platypus). Since marsupials and
monotremes diverged independently from eutherians, these data suggest that HSA 21
genes were originally located in two separate autosomal blocks. In another
Sminthopsis species, SOD1 is linked to TRF (a marker on HSA 3q), suggesting that 
the ancestral SOD1/CBR/BCEI region also included HSA 3 markers. We suggest that
these blocks became fused early in the eutherian evolution to form a HSA 3/21
chromosome, which has remained intact in artiodactyls, but has been independently
disrupted in both the primate and rodent lineages.

PMID: 1505947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Aug 1;89(15):6856-60.

pokkuri, a Drosophila gene encoding an E-26-specific (Ets) domain protein,
prevents overproduction of the R7 photoreceptor.

Tei H(1), Nihonmatsu I, Yokokura T, Ueda R, Sano Y, Okuda T, Sato K, Hirata K,
Fujita SC, Yamamoto D.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

Studies on sevenless and bride of sevenless genes have revealed that the R8 cell 
plays a key role in the fate of the R7 photoreceptor cell, presenting on its
surface an inductive cue to which R7 responds. sev-independent induction of R7
cells has been reported in the seven-up mutation, which appears to transform R1
and R6 cells to R7 cells. We have induced recessive mutations in a gene pokkuri
(pok; pokkuri is a Japanese word that means "dropping dead") that lead to
overproduction of R7 cells with rather minor effects on outer photoreceptors and 
R8 cells. Pok protein may function as a transcription factor, as the predicted
amino acid sequence contains a region similar to the consensus established for
the E-26-specific (Ets) domain.

PMCID: PMC49603
PMID: 1495974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1992 Jul;5(1):1-13.

Expression of the ETS2 and transferrin receptor genes in Philadelphia-positive
chronic myeloid leukemia patients with a reciprocal t(3;21).

Lafage-Pochitaloff M(1), Courcoul M, Simonetti J, Sainty D, Dastugue N, Tabilio
A, Hagemeijer A, Birg F.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 119, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Marseille, France.

The translocation t(3;21)(q26;q22) is a rare recurring clonal abnormality, either
preceding or associated with blast crisis in Philadelphia chromosome-positive
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients. We previously localized the chromosomal 
breakpoints at 3q26.2 and 21q22.2, using high resolution chromosomal analysis.
Two genes of interest are localized near the breakpoints, the transferrin
receptor gene and the ETS2 proto-oncogene. Their chromosomal localizations,
determined by in situ hybridization on normal metaphase cells, were 3q29 and
21q22.3, respectively. They underwent a reciprocal translocation in patients with
t(3;21). Their structures were not altered by the translocation, and both were
expressed to varying levels in t(3;21) patients. Southern blotting investigations
showed that the structure of other single-copy genes, including FIM3, localized
near the breakpoints, were not affected by the translocation. An analysis of ETS2
expression performed on CML patients without t(3;21) showed the presence of the
transcript in 100% of the blast crises, but only in 20% of the chronic-phase
patients. Thus ETS2 expression may either be linked to or play a role in CML
progression.

PMID: 1384656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Genes Dev. 1992 Jun;6(6):965-74.

A novel modulator domain of Ets transcription factors.

Wasylyk C(1), Kerckaert JP, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Laboratoire de Génétique
Moléculaire des Eucaryotes/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM), Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The ets gene family is composed of several oncogenes and codes for transcription 
factors. The Ets proteins have a similar sequence called the ets domain and bind 
to the core motif A/CGGAA. We show here that several members of the ets family
have different trans-activating properties. The ets domain of Ets-1 is required
for DNA binding. Adjacent to this domain there is a novel element that inhibits
DNA binding. It appears to alter the structure of the DNA-binding domain before
it interacts with DNA. There is a similar sequence in Ets-2 that also inhibits
DNA binding. This sequence is absent in alternative splice products of h-Ets-1.
PU1, the most distantly related member of the ets gene family, lacks this novel
element. It has a distinct DNA-binding specificity that is determined by DNA
sequences outside the core motif. These results have important implications for
both the oncogenic and normal functions of ets family members.

PMID: 1592263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Hybridoma. 1992 Jun;11(3):277-94.

Characterization and uses of monoclonal antibody derived against DNA binding
domain of the ets family of genes.

Bhat NK(1), Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD.

A monoclonal antibody recognizing ets proteins from a variety of species has been
developed. This antibody recognizes ets1, ets2, erg, and other related proteins. 
It has a high affinity for the ets1 protein. The epitope for the pan ets mAb
consists of about 13 amino acids. This antibody can be used to isolate and
characterize new members of ets gene family derived from a c-DNA expression
library, as well as to identify other "ets motif" binding proteins.

PMID: 1500064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 May;12(5):2213-21.

Expression of a 91-kilodalton PEA3-binding protein is down-regulated during
differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Martin ME(1), Yang XY, Folk WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia 65212.

Proteins binding to the PEA3 enhancer motif (AGGAAG) activate the polyomavirus
early promoter and help comprise the viral late mRNA initiator element (W. Yoo,
M. E. Martin, and W. R. Folk, J. Virol. 65:5391-5400, 1991). Because many
developmentally regulated cellular genes have PEA3 motifs near their promoter
sequences, and because Ets family gene products activate the PEA3 motif, we have 
studied the expression of PEA3-binding proteins and Ets-related proteins during
differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells. An approximately 91-kDa protein 
(PEA3-91) was identified in F9 cell nuclear extracts by UV cross-linking to a
radiolabeled PEA3 oligonucleotide probe, and expression of PEA3-91 was
down-regulated after differentiation of F9 cells to parietal endoderm. The
c-ets-1 gene product binds to a sequence in the murine sarcoma virus long
terminal repeat that is similar to the PEA3 motif (cGGAAG), but PEA3-91 was not
cross-linked to this Ets-1-binding motif, nor did antiserum which recognizes
murine c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 proteins have any effect on PEA3-binding activity in
mobility shift assays. Furthermore, c-ets-1 mRNA was not detected in
undifferentiated or differentiated F9 cells, and c-ets-2 mRNA levels remained
high after differentiation. Antiserum against the Drosophila Ets-related E74A
protein, however, recognized an approximately 92-kDa protein in F9 cells whose
expression during differentiation varied in a manner identical to that of
PEA3-91. These data suggest that PEA3-91 is not the product of the ets-1 or ets-2
genes but is likely to be the product of a murine homolog of the Drosophila E74
gene.

PMCID: PMC364393
PMID: 1569949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1992 May;8(5):824-33.

"Oncogenes as probes for cellular signal processes: the family of ETS genes".

Papas TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201.

PMID: 1515233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Am J Hum Genet. 1992 Mar;50(3):551-8.

A genetic linkage map of human chromosome 21: analysis of recombination as a
function of sex and age.

Tanzi RE(1), Watkins PC, Stewart GD, Wexler NS, Gusella JF, Haines JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown 02129.

A genetic linkage map of human chromosome 21 has been constructed using 22
anonymous DNA markers and five complementary DNAs (cDNAs) encoding the amyloid
beta protein precursor (APP), superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), the ets-2
proto-oncogene (ETS2), the estrogen inducible breast cancer locus (BCEI), and the
leukocyte antigen, CD18 (CD18). Segregation of RFLPs detected by these DNA
markers was traced in the Venezuelan Reference Pedigree (VRP). A comprehensive
genetic linkage map consisting of the 27 DNA markers spans 102 cM on the long arm
of chromosome 21. We have confirmed our initial findings of a dramatically
increased rate of recombination at the telomere in both females and males and of 
significantly higher recombination in females in the pericentromeric region. By
comparing patterns of recombination in specific regions of chromosome 21 with
regard to both parental sex and age, we have now identified a statistically
significant downward trend in the frequency of crossovers in the most telomeric
portion of chromosome 21 with increasing maternal age. A less significant
decrease in recombination with increasing maternal age was observed in the
pericentromeric region of the chromosome. These results may help in ultimately
understanding the physical relationship between recombination and nondisjunction 
in the occurrence of trisomy 21.

PMCID: PMC1684268
PMID: 1347193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1992 Feb;58(2):169-73.

Chromosomal abnormalities in two chordomas.

Gibas Z(1), Miettinen M, Sandberg AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107.

Cytogenetic analyses of two sacral chordomas are reported. Both tumors showed
clonal chromosome abnormalities, including numerical and structural aberrations. 
The modal chromosome numbers were 36 and 72, respectively. The hypodiploid tumor 
had a single structural abnormality identified as a der(21)t(1;21)(q21;q22). The 
near-triploid tumor had numerous structural rearrangements, including a
der(21)t(2;21)(q11;q22), which involves the same band of chromosome 21 as the
translocation in the first tumor. Prophasing was a prominent cytogenetic feature 
of this tumor. The consistent involvement of band 21q22 in translocations in two 
chordomas suggests a possible specific association of this chromosome region with
chordoma. Protooncogenes ETS2 and ERG have been mapped to this chromosome band.

PMID: 1551083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Oncogene. 1992 Feb;7(2):249-56.

Two independent activation domains in c-Ets-1 and c-Ets-2 located in
non-conserved sequences of the ets gene family.

Schneikert J(1), Lutz Y, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-LGME/INSERM-U. 184, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Faculté de Médecine,
Strasbourg, France.

The c-Ets-1 oncoprotein is a transcription activator that specifically binds to
DNA. We show, using fusion proteins with heterologous DNA-binding domains, that
chicken c-Ets-1 (p68) contains two independent activation domains. The N-terminal
activation domain is absent in c-Ets-1 (p54) that is generated from an
alternatively spliced mRNA. A closely related member of the ets gene family,
c-Ets-2, also contains two separate activation domains. They lie in the regions
of the protein that are least conserved with c-Ets-1, suggesting that the
activating function will determine the different physiological roles of these two
proteins. The activation domains of c-Ets-1 (p68) and -2 are separated by a
moderately conserved region that does not activate on its own. These sequences
appear to affect stimulation by the domains, suggesting that they regulate
transcription activation. Competition experiments show that c-Ets-1 and -2
interact with a common limiting coactivator. These studies provide important
clues about the physiological roles of closely related members of the ets gene
family.

PMID: 1549346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1992 Jan;58(1):71-5.

Amplification of ETS2 oncogene in acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia with
t(6;21;18).

Santoro A(1), Maggio A, Carbone P, Mirto S, Caronia F, Acuto S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Cellulare e dello Sviluppo A. Monroy, Università di
Palermo, Italy.

Cytogenetic and molecular studies in a case of acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia
(ANLL) are reported in this paper. Bone marrow blasts carried a hypodiploid
karyotype with a complex t(6;18;21)(6qter----6p21::21q22----21qter;18qter
----18p11::6p22----6pter; 21pter----21q22::6p21----6p22::18p11----18pte r) and
other numerical and structural changes. We studied the organization and the
expression of the ETS2 gene which is located on chromosome 21 in order to
investigate its possible involvement in the disease. DNA analysis showed a
20-fold amplification of ETS2 sequences; an increase of 3- to 4-fold in the mRNAs
level compared to normal was shown by Northern hybridization.

PMID: 1728954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1992;61(1):25-8.

Localization of four human chromosome 21 genes--SOD1, ETS2, IFNAR, and CBR--to
two different chromosomes in the marsupial species Macropus eugenii.

Brookes S(1), Maccarone P, de Haan JB, Tymms M, Forrest GL, Graves JA, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Birth Defects Laboratory, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

We have mapped the chromosomal location of four genes previously assigned to
human chromosome 21--Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1), the protooncogene ETS2,
the interferon alpha/beta receptor gene (IFNAR), and the carbonyl reductase gene 
(CBR)--in the tammar, Macropus eugenii. The genes are localized on two separate
autosomes: SOD1 and CBR map to chromosome 7 and ETS2 and IFNAR map to chromosome 
3 or 4. These results provide the first example of asynteny between SOD1/CBR and 
ETS2/IFNAR in a mammalian species. The results suggest that either this synteny
group has been disrupted in the marsupial lineage, or, alternatively, the genes
located on human chromosome 21 may have been joined after the marsupials diverged
from the eutherian mammals some 130-150 million years ago.

PMID: 1380419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Virol. 1991 Oct;65(10):5513-23.

Sequence-specific interaction of the Ets1 protein with the long terminal repeat
of the human T-lymphotropic virus type I.

Gitlin SD(1), Bosselut R, Gégonne A, Ghysdael J, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

We recently demonstrated that members of the c-ets proto-oncogene family, Ets1
and Ets2, are sequence-specific transcriptional activators of the human
T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) long terminal repeat (LTR). We now report
that the HTLV-I LTR contains two distinct Ets1-responsive regions, ERR-1 and
ERR-2. Expression of Ets1 with reporter plasmids containing ERR-1 or ERR-2
upstream of a basal promoter resulted in an increase in transcriptional activity.
By gel mobility shift assay, the interaction of Ets1 with the downstream
ERR-1-binding region was found to be more stable than its interaction with the
upstream ERR-2 region. By DNase I footprint, gel mobility shift, and methylation 
interference analyses, ERR-1 was found to contain two Ets1 binding sites, ERE-A
and ERE-B. A recombinant Ets1 protein was found to bind with higher affinity to
ERE-A than to ERE-B. Binding of Ets1 to these sites appears to result in a
specific and sequential protection of a 37-nucleotide sequence of the HTLV-I LTR 
from -154 to -118. In view of the high-level expression of Ets1 in lymphoid
cells, the c-ets proto-oncogenes encode transcription factors which could play an
important role in both basal and Tax1-mediated HTLV-I transcription.

PMCID: PMC249048
PMID: 1895400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Genomics. 1991 May;10(1):166-72.

Isolation and regional mapping of NotI and EagI clones from human chromosome 21.

Gao JZ(1), Erickson P, Patterson D, Jones C, Drabkin H.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262.

NotI and EagI boundary libraries were constructed for human chromosome 21. One
hundred forty-seven clones were isolated from the somatic cell hybrid 72532X-6
and localized using a hybrid mapping panel. After identification of those clones,
which were isolated more than once, as well as those probes derived from a
previously unrecognized integrated non-chromosome-21 fragment, 58 individual
boundary clones (plus 2 additional NotI-EcoRI clones isolated from a flow-sorted 
library) were localized to 11 separate regions. The distribution of these probes 
is highly nonrandom, with 50% of the clones located in the distal band 21q22.3.
Two probes, Not50 and Eag101, map to regions in the very proximal long arm which 
may contain the gene responsible for familial Alzheimer's disease (AD1), and
Not50 would appear to be more proximal than D21S16 (E9). Twenty-eight probes map 
to the region between superoxide dismutase (SOD1) and the ETS2 oncogene, which
appears to contain genes responsible for many of the phenotypic features of Down 
syndrome. Twenty clones contain (GT)n repeats, as determined by hybridization to 
a CA polymer, and should provide additional highly polymorphic probes. Closure of
gaps in the physical linkage map of chromosome 21 should be facilitated by the
isolation of these probes, as they identify many of the unmethylated CpG-rich
islands that have hindered pulsed-field gel analysis. They will also be useful in
identifying a set of genes in proximity to NotI and EagI restriction sites, as
well as conserved DNA sequences for comparative mapping studies.

PMID: 2045100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Cell Growth Differ. 1991 May;2(5):215-24.

Positive and negative factors regulate the transcription of the ETS2 gene via an 
oncogene-responsive-like unit within the ETS2 promoter region.

Mavrothalassitis GJ(1), Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

The DNA-protein interactions in the ETS2 promoter have been studied. Three
distinct sequence motifs have been identified, each of which interacts with at
least two distinctive protein complexes. The GC motif, possessing mirror
symmetry, interacts with two ubiquitously identifiable complexes (S and S2); the 
PEA3 motif interacts with a ubiquitous (H1) and a tissue-specific (H3) complex;
the H2 (an AP1-like) motif interacts also with a ubiquitous (H2a) and a
tissue-specific (H2b) complex. Mutational analysis and correlation of the
presence of defined complexes with the ETS2 mRNA levels indicate that the S, S2, 
H1, and H2b complexes have positive effects on ETS2 transcription, whereas the H3
and H2a have negative effects. The organization of the PEA3 with the AP1-like
motif in the ETS2 promoter resembles the oncogene-responsive unit previously
identified in the polyoma virus enhancer region. Our data suggest that
cooperation between these two motifs is vital for ETS2 promoter function.

PMID: 1888697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. EMBO J. 1991 May;10(5):1127-34.

The c-Ets oncoprotein activates the stromelysin promoter through the same
elements as several non-nuclear oncoproteins.

Wasylyk C(1), Gutman A, Nicholson R, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-LGME/INSERM U184, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Faculté de Médecine,
Strasbourg, France.

The c-ets protooncogenes have recently been shown to code for transcription
factors that activate the oncogene responsive unit of the polyoma virus enhancer.
We show that transcription of the stromelysin gene, which is highly expressed in 
transformed cells and tumours, is efficiently activated by c-Ets-1 and -2 through
two DNA elements. The distal element is a highly conserved palindrome composed of
two strong binding sites for c-Ets-1. The proximal element does not bind c-Ets-1,
but may be activated indirectly by increased synthesis of c-Jun and c-Fos. Both
ets responsive elements mediate activation by the oncoproteins Ha-Ras, v-Src and 
v-Mos. These results suggest that c-Ets participates in the mechanisms by which
stromelysin gene expression is deregulated in transformed cells and tumours.

PMCID: PMC452766
PMID: 1850695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Oncogene. 1991 Mar;6(3):357-60.

Ets1, when fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain, efficiently enhances galactose
promotor dependent gene expression in yeast.

Seneca S(1), Punyammalee B, Bailly M, Ghysdael J, Crabeel M.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, c/o CERIA-COOVI, Belgium.

Ets1, the translation product of the c-ets1 proto-oncogene and the related Ets2
protein, act as sequence-specific transcriptional factors in transient
transfection experiments in animal cells. We report here that in S. cerevisiae,
expression of a lacZ test gene placed under the control of the GAL1 promoter is
stimulated efficiently by a fusion protein in which the chicken Ets1 sequence
starting from amino acid 37, is linked to the DNA binding domain of the yeast
GAL4 transcriptional activator. This suggests that Ets1 contains one or more
intrinsic transcription activation domain(s). However, the GAL4 integral of Ets1 
fusion protein was unable to restore growth of a gal4 deletion mutant on
galactose, implying that the fusion product cannot substitute for GAL4
enhancement on all GAL genes.

PMID: 1901401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Oncogene. 1990 Oct;5(10):1521-7.

Molecular organization and differential polyadenylation sites of the human ETS2
gene.

Watson DK(1), Mavrothalassitis GJ, Jorcyk CL, Smyth FE, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21701-1013.

The human ETS2 gene is a member of the ets gene family (ETS1, ETS2, ERG, ELK1 and
ELK2) with amino acid similarity to the v-ets oncogene of the avian leukemia
virus, E26. The ETS2 gene is composed of 10 exons, nine of which contribute to
the open reading frame encoding 469 amino acids. The ETS2 gene directs the
synthesis of three RNA transcripts, which differ from each other by the length of
their 3' ends. This heterogeneity of 3' end is the major reason for the size
differences between the transcripts, presumably reflecting utilization of three
different polyadenylation signals/sites. The coding regions of all of the ETS2
RNA species are the same length and, thus, should contain the same open reading
frame.

PMID: 2250910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. EMBO J. 1990 Oct;9(10):3137-44.

The product of the c-ets-1 proto-oncogene and the related Ets2 protein act as
transcriptional activators of the long terminal repeat of human T cell leukemia
virus HTLV-1.

Bosselut R(1), Duvall JF, Gégonne A, Bailly M, Hémar A, Brady J, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U186/CNRS URA 1160 Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The c-ets-1 proto-oncogene and the related c-ets-2 gene encode related nuclear
chromatin-associated proteins which bind DNA in vitro. To investigate the
possibility that Ets1 and Ets2 are transcriptional activators, we analyzed the
ability of these proteins to trans-activate promoter/enhancer sequences in
transient co-transfection experiments. A CAT construct driven by the long
terminal repeat of the human T cell leukemia virus, HTLV-1 was found to be
trans-activated by both Ets1 and Ets2 in NIH3T3 and HeLa cells. The increased
levels of CAT activity were paralleled by increased levels of correctly initiated
CAT mRNA. Mutant Ets1 proteins unable to accumulate in the nucleus were found to 
be inactive. An ets-responsive sequence between positions -117 and -160 of the
LTR was identified by analyses of a series of 5' deletion mutants of the HTLV-1
LTR and of dimerized versions of specific motifs of the LTR enhancer region.
Using a gel shift binding assay, Ets1 was found to bind specifically to an
oligonucleotide corresponding to region -117 to -160. This sequence, which also
contributes to Tax1 responsiveness of the HTLV-1 LTR, is characterized by the
presence of four repeats of a pentanucleotide sequence of the type CC(T/A)CC.
Competition experiments show that integrity of repeats 1 and 4 is important for
Ets1 binding. These results show that Ets1 and Ets2 are sequence-specific
transcriptional activators. In view of the high level expression of Ets1 in
lymphoid cells, Ets1 could be part of the transcription complex which mediates
the response to Tax1 and the control of HTLV-1 replication. More generally, Ets1 
and Ets2 could regulate transcription of cellular genes.

PMCID: PMC552042
PMID: 2209540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Genomics. 1990 Oct;8(2):400-2.

Linkage mapping of the highly informative DNA marker D21S156 to human chromosome 
21 using a polymorphic GT dinucleotide repeat.

Lewis JG(1), Weber JL, Petersen MB, Slaugenhaupt SA, Kwitek A, May PE, Warren AC,
Chakravarti A, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

A (GT)n repeat within the anonymous DNA sequence D21S156 was shown to be highly
polymorphic in DNA from members of the 40 CEPH families. At least 12 alleles of
this locus were recognized by electrophoresis on polyacrylamide gels of DNA
amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using primers flanking the (GT)n
repeat. The polymorphism information content was 0.82. PCR amplification of DNA
from somatic cell hybrid lines mapped D21S156 to human chromosome 21 and linkage 
analysis localized this marker close to the loci ETS2, D21S3, and HMG14 on
chromosomal band 21q22.3. This polymorphism is highly informative and can serve
as an anchor locus for human chromosome 21.

PMID: 1979059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 May;87(10):3723-7.

Reciprocal expression of human ETS1 and ETS2 genes during T-cell activation:
regulatory role for the protooncogene ETS1.

Bhat NK(1), Thompson CB, Lindsten T, June CH, Fujiwara S, Koizumi S, Fisher RJ,
Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21701-1013.

The expression of the protooncogenes ETS1 and ETS2 has been studied in purified
human T cells activated either by cross-linking of the T-cell receptor-CD3
complex on their cell surface or by direct stimulation with phorbol esters and
ionomycin. Our results show that resting T cells express high levels of ETS1 mRNA
and protein, while expression of ETS2 is undetectable. Upon T-cell activation,
ETS2 mRNA and proteins are induced, while ETS1 gene expression decreases to very 
low levels. Late after stimulation, ETS1 mRNA is reinduced and maintained at a
high level, while ETS2 gene expression decreases to undetectable levels.
Therefore, it appears that in human T cells, ETS2 gene products are associated
with cellular activation and proliferation, while ETS1 gene products are
preferentially expressed in a quiescent state.

PMCID: PMC53975
PMID: 2187191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Genomics. 1990 May;7(1):136-8.

Linkage analysis of the human HMG14 gene on chromosome 21 using a GT dinucleotide
repeat as polymorphic marker.

Petersen MB(1), Economou EP, Slaugenhaupt SA, Chakravarti A, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

A (GT)n repeat in intron 4 of the functional human HMG14 gene on chromosome 21
was used as polymorphic marker to map this gene relative to the genetic linkage
map of human chromosome 21. Variation in the length of the (GT)n repeat was
detected by electrophoresis on polyacrylamide gels of DNA amplified by the
polymerase chain reaction using primers flanking the repeat. The observed
heterozygosity of this polymorphism in 40 CEPH families was 58% with six
different alleles. Linkage analysis localized the HMG14 gene close to the ETS2
gene and locus D21S3 in chromosomal band 21q22.3.

PMID: 1970797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Genes Dev. 1990 Mar;4(3):401-9.

Rapid and transient expression of Ets2 in mature macrophages following
stimulation with cMGF, LPS, and PKC activators.

Boulukos KE(1), Pognonec P, Sariban E, Bailly M, Lagrou C, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U 186/Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, UA 041160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

We reported previously that Ets2 is expressed in normal and transformed
macrophages. We show here that the expression of both c-ets-2 mRNA proteins is
induced rapidly and transiently in chicken nondividing bone marrow-derived
macrophages but not in E26-transformed myeloblasts in response to chicken
myelomonocytic growth factor (cMGF), an avian hematopoietic growth factor
required for survival, proliferation, and colony formation of avian myeloid
cells. c-ets-2 expression is also rapidly induced in chicken bone marrow-derived 
macrophages, human monocytes, and mouse peritoneal macrophages in response to LPS
and/or PKC activators. The rapid induction of Ets2 after treatment of chicken
bone marrow-derived macrophages by cMGF is blunted after down-regulation or
inactivation of PKC, suggesting a role of PKC in the cMGF-induced signal
transduction pathway. Because Ets2 is localized in the nucleus of macrophages and
binds to DNA in vitro, the kinetics of its expression suggest a role for Ets2 in 
the transduction within the nucleus of specific signals received at the cell
membrane and involved in securing the survival and/or the development of
functional competence of these cells.

PMID: 2186967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Mar;10(3):1249-53.

Phosphorylation of the ETS-2 protein: regulation by the T-cell antigen
receptor-CD3 complex.

Fujiwara S(1), Koizumi S, Fisher RJ, Bhat NK, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21701-1013.

Phosphorylation of the human ets-2 protein in response to mitogenic signals to T 
lymphocytes was investigated in Jurkat cells. Activation of the cells by
antibodies against the T-cell antigen receptor-CD3 complex or by concanavalin A
was followed within 5 min by increased phosphorylation of the protein, as shown
by a mobility shift of the protein from 54 to 56 kilodaltons in sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and increased incorporation of 32P.
The Ca2+ ionophores A23187 and ionomycin were able to mimic this effect,
suggesting that this phosphorylation is mediated by Ca2+.

PMCID: PMC361013
PMID: 2137553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Feb;87(3):1047-51.

Molecular and functional characterization of the promoter of ETS2, the human
c-ets-2 gene.

Mavrothalassitis GJ(1), Watson DK, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21701-1013.

The 5' end of the human c-ets-2 gene, ETS2, was cloned and characterized. The
major transcription initiation start sites were identified, and the pertinent
sequences surrounding the ETS2 promoter were determined. The promoter region of
ETS2 does not possess typical "TATA" and "CAAT" elements. However, this promoter 
contains several repeat regions, as well as two consensus AP2 binding sites and
three putative Sp1 sites. There is also a palindromic region similar to the serum
response element of the c-fos gene, located 1400 base pairs (bp) upstream from
the first major transcription initiation site. A G + C-rich sequence (GC element)
with dyad symmetry can be seen in the ETS2 promoter, immediately following an
unusually long (approximately 250-bp) polypurine-polypyrimidine tract. A series
of deletion fragments from the putative promoter region were ligated in front of 
the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene and tested for activity
following transfection into HeLa cells. The 5' boundary of the region needed for 
maximum promoter activity was found to be 159 bp upstream of the major initiation
site. This region of 159 bp contains putative binding sites for transcription
factors Sp1 and AP2 (one for each), the GC element, one small forward repeat, one
inverted repeat, and half of the polypurine-pyrimidine tract. The promoter of
ETS2 (within the polypyrimidine tract) serves to illustrate an alternative
structure that may be present in genes with "TATA-less" promoters.

PMCID: PMC53407
PMID: 2405393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Am J Med Genet Suppl. 1990;7:98-103.

Down syndrome critical region around D21S55 on proximal 21q22.3.

Rahmani Z(1), Blouin JL, Créau-Goldberg N, Watkins PC, Mattei JF, Poissonnier M, 
Prieur M, Chettouh Z, Nicole A, Aurias A, et al.

Author information: 
(1)URA CNRS 1335, Laboratoire de Biochimie Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, Paris, France.

We have analysed the DNA of 2 patients with many manifestations of Down syndrome 
and partial duplication of distinct regions of chromosome 21, respectively,
q11.205----q22.300 and q22.300----qter (Rahmani et al.: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 86:5958-5962, 1989).
Assessment of the copy number of five chromosome 21 sequences (SOD1, D21S17,
D21S55, ETS2, and D21S15) has shown that D21S55 was duplicated in both cases. The
size of the common duplicated region can be estimated between 400 and 3,000 Kb,
after the results of pulsed-field gel analysis and from the knowledge of regional
mapping of the probes D21S17, D21S55, and ETS2. This region, located on the
proximal part of 21q22.3, is postulated to contain genes the overexpression of
which plays a major role in the pathogenesis of Down syndrome.

PMID: 2149984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Am J Med Genet Suppl. 1990;7:251-61.

ETS family of genes in leukemia and Down syndrome.

Papas TS(1), Watson DK, Sacchi N, Fujiwara S, Seth AK, Fisher RJ, Bhat NK,
Mavrothalassitis G, Koizumi S, Jorcyk CL, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21701-1013.

The human ETS2 and ERG genes are members of the ETS gene family, with sequence
homology to the viral ets gene of the avian erythroblastosis retrovirus, E26.
These genes are located on chromosome 21 and molecular genetic analysis of Down
syndrome (DS) patients with partial trisomy 21 suggested that ETS2 may be a gene 
within the minimal DS genetic region. We have, in fact, been able to confirm the 
presence of the ETS2 gene dosage in triplicate occurring in occult human 21
chromosome abnormalities. It is known that ERG and ETS2 gene translocations occur
in certain specific leukemias associated with defined chromosome rearrangements
[e.g., t(8;21)]. Moreover, it is known that DS individuals are at greater risk
for leukemic disease than their normal familial cohorts, implying that trisomy of
that region of human chromosome 21 may play a role in the development of this
type of neoplasia. The human ETS genes, first identified in our laboratory, are
highly conserved, being found from lower organisms, like Drosophila and sea
urchin, to humans. In mammals, the ETS genes are structurally distinct, located
on separate chromosomes; they are transcriptionally active and differentially
regulated. The ETS2 protein is phosphorylated and turns over with a half-life of 
approximately 20 min. After activation with the tumor promoter, TPA, the level of
ETS2 elevates 5- to 20-fold. The properties of the ETS2 protein, such as nuclear 
localization, phosphorylation, rapid turnover, and response to protein kinase C, 
indicate that this protein belongs to a group of oncogene proteins thought to
have regulatory functions in the nucleus. In the mouse thymus ets-1 and ets-2 are
8-10-fold higher, respectively, in the CD4+ subset than in other subsets
examined, suggesting a role in T-cell development for these genes. Cells
transfected with the cellular ets-2 gene, expressing higher levels of ets-2
products, showed a stimulated proliferation response, abolished their serum
requirement and formed colonies in soft agar that could induce tumors in nude
mice. Collectively, these data suggest that this family of genes might play a
role in controlling specific steps of the signaling transduction pathway. Thus,
the ETS genes, as other genes with homology to viral oncogenes, might be
instrumental in regulating cellular growth and differentiation, as well as
organismal development.

PMID: 2149958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Crit Rev Oncog. 1990;1(4):409-36.

Molecular analysis of the ets genes and their products.

Watson DK(1), Ascione R, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland.

Organisms from human to Drosophila have been found to contain cellular sequences 
and transcripts that are homologous to the ets region of the avian retrovirus,
E26. Ets-related sequences are present on at least two distinct functional loci
in chickens and mammals, and have been designated ets-1 and ets-2. The E26 virus 
transduced sequences from the chicken ets-1 locus, which encompasses over 60 kb
of DNA. The ets genes characterized so far from sea urchin and Drosophila are
most closely related to the 3' end of the known ets genes. The predicted viral
and avian ets proteins are very similar, except at the termini. The similarity
between the predicted ets proteins so far described is discussed. The ets
proteins have been identified and localized by immunoprecipitation and
immunofluorescence. While the ets-1 proteins are found in the nuclear and
cytoplasmic fractions, the viral gag-myb-ets protein (p135) and the ets-2
proteins are nuclear. The ets-1 and ets-2 genes are differentially regulated in
different cell types, probably reflecting unique controlling elements. Because
chromosomal translocations have been associated with different human leukemias,
studies addressing the possible association with the ETS1 (11q23) or ETS2
(21q22.3) loci are reviewed.

PMID: 1964597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Dec;9(12):5718-21.

Definition of an Ets1 protein domain required for nuclear localization in cells
and DNA-binding activity in vitro.

Boulukos KE(1), Pognonec P, Rabault B, Begue A, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé de la Recherche Medicale U186/Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique UA 041160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

Ets1 and Ets2 are nuclear phosphoproteins which bind to DNA in vitro and share
two domains of strong identity. Deletion analyses of each of these conserved
regions in Ets1 demonstrated that integrity of the carboxy-terminal domain, also 
conserved in the more distantly related elk and erg gene products, is essential
for both nuclear targeting and DNA-binding activity in vitro.

PMCID: PMC363744
PMID: 2555704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Aug;86(15):5958-62.

Critical role of the D21S55 region on chromosome 21 in the pathogenesis of Down
syndrome.

Rahmani Z(1), Blouin JL, Creau-Goldberg N, Watkins PC, Mattei JF, Poissonnier M, 
Prieur M, Chettouh Z, Nicole A, Aurias A, et al.

Author information: 
(1)URA 1335 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Laboratoire de
Biochimie Génétique, Paris, France.

The duplication of a specific region of chromosome 21 could be responsible for
the main features of Down syndrome. To define and localize this region, we
analyzed at the molecular level the DNA of two patients with partial duplication 
of chromosome 21. These patients belong to two groups of Down syndrome patients
characterized by different partial trisomies 21: (i) duplication of the long arm,
proximal to 21q22.2, and (ii) duplication of the end of the chromosome, distal to
21q22.2 We assessed the copy number of five chromosome 21 sequences (SOD1,
D21S17, D21S55, ETS2, and D21S15) and found that D21S55 was duplicated in both
cases. By means of pulsed-field gel analysis and with the knowledge of regional
mapping of the probes D21S17, D21S55 and ETS2, we estimated the size of the
common duplicated region to be between 400 and 3000 kilobases. This region,
localized on the proximal part of 21q22.3, is suspected to contain genes the
overexpression of which is crucial in the pathogenesis of Down syndrome.

PMCID: PMC297750
PMID: 2527368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol. 1989;31(3):217-21.

ets-1 and ets-2 proto-oncogene expression in human leukemia cells and cell lines.

Dreyfus F(1), Picard F, Gisselbrecht S, Varet B, Tambourin PE, Fichelson S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie et Virologie des Tumeurs, INSERM U152, Hôpital
Cochin, Paris, France.

c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 are 2 proto-oncogenes known to be possibly involved in some
human myelomonocytic leukemias. However, very few studies concern c-ets-1 and
c-ets-2 RNA expression in human hematologic malignancies. We have studied 18
leukemic patients, and 10 cell lines for their ets RNA contents. c-ets-1 was
strongly expressed in 5 and c-ets-2 in 8 of the 18 patients. All the cell lines
expressed both c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 RNAs. This expression was highly variable from
one patient to another, and from one cell line to another, regardless of the
cellular leukemia subtype. The variability of this expression in patients may
reflect differences in the proliferative potential of leukemic cells.

PMID: 2694094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Oct;85(20):7675-9.

Human ETS2 gene on chromosome 21 is not rearranged in Alzheimer disease.

Sacchi N(1), Nalbantoglu J, Sergovich FR, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21701-1013.

The human ETS2 gene, a member of the ETS gene family, with sequence homology with
the retroviral ets sequence of the avian erythroblastosis retrovirus E26 is
located on chromosome 21. Molecular genetic analysis of Down syndrome (DS)
patients with partial trisomy 21 allowed us to reinforce the supposition that
ETS2 may be a gene of the minimal DS genetic region. It was originally proposed
that a duplication of a portion of the DS region represents the genetic basis of 
Alzheimer disease, a condition associated also with DS. No evidence of either
rearrangements or duplications of ETS2 could be detected in DNA from fibroblasts 
and brain tissue of Alzheimer disease patients with either the sporadic or the
familiar form of the disease. Thus, an altered ETS2 gene dosage does not seem to 
be a genetic cause or component of Alzheimer disease.

PMCID: PMC282255
PMID: 2902635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Genomics. 1988 Aug;3(2):110-6.

The ETS genes on chromosome 21 are distal to the breakpoint of the acute
myelogenous leukemia translocation (8;21).

Sacchi N(1), Cheng SV, Tanzi RE, Gusella JF, Drabkin HA, Patterson D, Haines JH, 
Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21701.

The definition of the genetic linkage map of human chromosomes may be helpful in 
the analysis of cancer-specific chromosome abnormalities. In the translocation
(8;21)(q22;q22), a nonrandom cytogenetic abnormality of acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML), we previously observed the transposition of the ETS2 gene located
at the 21q22 region from chromosome 21 to chromosome 8. However, no ETS2
rearrangements were detected in the DNA of t(8;21)-positive AML cells. Genetic
linkage analysis has allowed us to locate the ETS2 gene relative to other loci
and to establish that the breakpoint is at an approximate genetic distance of 17 
cM from ETS2. When the information from the linkage map is combined with that
from molecular studies, it is apparent that (a) the t(8;21) breakpoint does not
affect the ETS2 gene structure or the structure of the other four loci proximal
to ETS2: D21S55, D21S57, D21S17, and ERG, and ETS-related gene; and (b) the
actual DNA sequence involved in the t(8;21) must reside in a 3-cM genetic region 
between the D21S58 and the D21S55/D21S57 loci, and remains to be identified.

PMID: 3267212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Aug;85(16):6032-6.

Comparative mapping of DNA markers from the familial Alzheimer disease and Down
syndrome regions of human chromosome 21 to mouse chromosomes 16 and 17.

Cheng SV(1), Nadeau JH, Tanzi RE, Watkins PC, Jagadesh J, Taylor BA, Haines JL,
Sacchi N, Gusella JF.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.

Mouse trisomy 16 has been proposed as an animal model of Down syndrome (DS),
since this chromosome contains homologues of several loci from the q22 band of
human chromosome 21. The recent mapping of the defect causing familial Alzheimer 
disease (FAD) and the locus encoding the Alzheimer amyloid beta precursor protein
(APP) to human chromosome 21 has prompted a more detailed examination of the
extent of conservation of this linkage group between the two species. Using
anonymous DNA probes and cloned genes from human chromosome 21 in a combination
of recombinant inbred and interspecific mouse backcross analyses, we have
established that the linkage group shared by mouse chromosome 16 includes not
only the critical DS region of human chromosome 21 but also the APP gene and
FAD-linked markers. Extending from the anonymous DNA locus D21S52 to ETS2, the
linkage map of six loci spans 39% recombination in man but only 6.4%
recombination in the mouse. A break in synteny occurs distal to ETS2, with the
homologue of the human marker D21S56 mapping to mouse chromosome 17. Conservation
of the linkage relationships of markers in the FAD region suggests that the
murine homologue of the FAD locus probably maps to chromosome 16 and that
detailed comparison of the corresponding region in both species could facilitate 
identification of the primary defect in this disorder. The break in synteny
between the terminal portion of human chromosome 21 and mouse chromosome 16
indicates, however, that mouse trisomy 16 may not represent a complete model of
DS.

PMCID: PMC281899
PMID: 2901095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Jul;85(13):4794-8.

Lack of evidence for association of meiotic nondisjunction with particular DNA
haplotypes on chromosome 21.

Sacchi N(1), Gusella JF, Perroni L, Bricarelli FD, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21701-1013.

The hypothesis of a predisposition to meiotic nondisjunction for chromosome 21
carrying a specific molecular haplotype has been tested. The haplotype in
question is defined by the restriction fragment length polymorphisms for the
D21S1/D21S11 loci. Our results obtained on a sample of Northern Italian families 
with the occurrence of trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) failed to support this
hypothesis, contradicting a previous study [Antonarakis, S. E., Kittur, S. D.,
Metaxotou, C., Watkins, P. C. & Patel, A. S. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
82, 3360-3364]. These findings rule out an association between any specific
D21S1/D21S11 haplotype (as well as other haplotypes for the D21S13, ETS2, and
D21S23 loci) and a putative cis-acting genetic element favoring the meiotic
missegregation of chromosome 21. For this reason, no preventive screening for
couples at risk for trisomy 21 may be based on any of the haplotypes tested.

PMCID: PMC280522
PMID: 2898783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Brain Res. 1988 Apr 26;447(1):149-53.

Expression of ETS proto-oncogenes in astrocytes in human cortex.

Amouyel P(1), Gégonne A, Delacourte A, Défossez A, Stéhelin D.

Author information: 
(1)I.N.S.E.R.M. U.186/C.N.R.S., Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.

In order to investigate a possible function of ETS proto-oncogenes in human
brain, we incubated a polyclonal antibody raised against the viral region of E26 
homologous to ETS1 and ETS2 with human brain frontal cortex sections. Our results
show that this antibody decorates astrocytes but not neurons. By using
astrocytomas of different grades as a source of astrocytes, we demonstrate the
presence of ETS1 and ETS2 messenger RNAs and proteins. This leads to the idea
that ETS genes are expressed in cells with dividing potentialities in human
cortex and that they could provide a new marker for glial cells. Recently, a
microduplication on chromosome 21 including ETS2 locus was described in
karyotypically 'normal' Down's syndrome and suspected in Alzheimer's disease;
when testing Alzheimer's disease-affected brain cortex sections, no obvious
difference was observed with the technique used.

PMID: 3289683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 Aug;7(8):2941-6.

Levels of fos, ets2, and myb proto-oncogene RNAs correlate with segregation of
chromosome 11 of normal cells and with suppression of tumorigenicity in human
cell hybrids.

O'Hara BM(1), Klinger HP, Curran T, Zhang YD, Blair DG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Frederick Cancer Research Facility, National
Cancer Institute, Maryland 21701-1013.

The tumorigenicity in nude mice of human carcinoma-derived D98AH2 (D98) cells is 
suppressed when cell hybrids are made by fusing these cells with normal human
diploid cells. Selection for hybrids that have segregated chromosomes results in 
the recovery of tumorigenic segregants. These segregants have all lost at least
one copy of chromosome 11 of the diploid cell parent. Earlier we found that the
parental D98 cells had detectable levels of mRNA specific for 13 of 21
proto-oncogenes examined. To determine if transregulation of proto-oncogenes by
genes of the normal cell occurs in such hybrids, the steady-state levels of mRNA 
specific to 22 proto-oncogenes in the parental cells were compared with those of 
nontumorigenic D98 X human diploid hybrids as well as with those of their
tumorigenic segregants and with the cells of the resulting tumors. The only
chromosome consistently segregated in the latter was chromosome 11 of the diploid
cell. fos and ets2 RNA levels and the amount of fos protein were consistently
elevated in the segregants compared with amounts in the original hybrids. An
unexpected finding was the inverse relationship for myb RNA that was barely
detected in the parental D98 cells but was at least 10-fold elevated in hybrids
that did not have segregated chromosomes compared with those that did. These
patterns were evident in RNAs prepared from both subconfluent and confluent cell 
cultures. The findings suggest that genes of the normal cell parent can affect
proto-oncogene expression. Whether the genes affecting fos, ets2, and myb RNA
levels are on chromosome 11 and whether these alterations are causally related to
the tumorigenic phenotype of the hybrid remain to be determined.

PMCID: PMC367913
PMID: 3670301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Hum Genet. 1987 Jul;76(3):225-9.

Submicroscopic duplication of chromosome 21 and trisomy 21 phenotype (Down
syndrome).

Delabar JM, Sinet PM, Chadefaux B, Nicole A, Gegonne A, Stehelin D, Fridlansky F,
Créau-Goldberg N, Turleau C, de Grouchy J.

A patient with the phenotype of trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) was found to have a
normal karyotype in blood lymphocytes and fibroblasts. Assessment of the
chromosome 21 markers SOD1, CBS, ETS2, D21S11, and BCEI showed partial trisomy by
duplication of a chromosome segment carrying the SOD1, CBS, and ETS2 loci and
flanked by the BCEI and D21S11 loci, which are not duplicated. This
submicroscopic duplication at the interface of 21q21 and 21q22.1 reduces to about
2000-3000 kb the critical segment the trisomy of which is responsible for the
phenotype of trisomy 21.

PMID: 3036686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Mar;83(6):1792-6.

Conserved chromosomal positions of dual domains of the ets protooncogene in cats,
mice, and humans.

Watson DK, McWilliams-Smith MJ, Kozak C, Reeves R, Gearhart J, Nunn MF, Nash W,
Fowle JR 3rd, Duesberg P, Papas TS, et al.

The mammalian protooncogene homologue of the avian v-ets sequence from the E26
retrovirus consists of two sequentially distinct domains located on different
chromosomes. Using somatic cell hybrid panels, we have mapped the mammalian
homologue of the 5' v-ets-domain to chromosome 11 (ETS1) in man, to chromosome 9 
(Ets-1) in mouse, and to chromosome D1 (ETS1) in the domestic cat. The mammalian 
homologue of the 3' v-ets domain was similarly mapped to human chromosome 21
(ETS2), to mouse chromosome 16 (Ets-2), and to feline chromosome C2 (ETS2). Both 
protooncogenes fell in syntenic groups of homologous linked loci that were
conserved among the three species. The occurrence of two distinct functional
protooncogenes and their conservation of linkage positions in the three mammalian
orders indicate that these two genes have been separate since before the
evolutionary divergence of mammals.

PMCID: PMC323170
PMID: 3513188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Ann Genet. 1986;29(4):226-8.

Rearrangement of chromosome 21 in Alzheimer's disease.

Delabar JM, Lamour Y, Gegonne A, Davous P, Roudier M, Nicole A, Ceballos I,
Amouyel P, Stehelin D, Sinet PM.

We have analyzed the DNA from four patients suffering from a dementia of the
Alzheimer type and of four controls of identical age. Estimates of the copy
numbers of two genes located on chromosome 21, SOD1 and ETS2, gave the following 
results: in all the cases there was duplication of ETS2 whereas SOD1 was normal. 
These preliminary results indicate that the segment of chromosome
21(q21----q22.1) is rearranged in all the four patients who were investigated.

PMID: 3495222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


