
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Mar 3. pii: mbc.E15-07-0476. [Epub ahead of print]

Reciprocal Auto-Regulation by NFI Occupancy and ETV1 Promotes the Developmental
Expression of Dendrite-Synapse Genes in Cerebellar Granule Neurons.

Ding B(1), Cave JW(2), Dobner PR(1), Mullikin-Kilpatrick D(1), Bartzokis M(1),
Zhu H(3), Chow CW(3), Gronostajski RM(4), Kilpatrick DL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Microbiology and Physiological Systems and Program in Neuroscience,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, 368 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 
01605-2324. (2)Burke Medical Research Institute, 785 Mamaroneck Ave, White
Plains, NY, 10605 and Weill Cornell Medical College, Brain & Mind Research
Institute, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065. (3)Dept. of Molecular
Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Ave, Bronx,
NY 10461, USA. (4)Department of Biochemistry, Program in Neuroscience and
Developmental Genomics Group, New York State Center of Excellence in
Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, University at Buffalo, 701 Ellicott St, Buffalo
NY. 14203. (5)Dept. of Microbiology and Physiological Systems and Program in
Neuroscience, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 368 Plantation Street, 
Worcester, MA 01605-2324 Daniel.kilpatrick@umassmed.edu.

NFI transcription factors regulate temporal gene expression required for
dendritogenesis and synaptogenesis via delayed occupancy of target promoters in
developing cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs). Mechanisms that promote NFI
temporal occupancy have not been previously defined. We show here that the
transcription factor ETV1 directly binds to and is required for expression and
NFI occupancy of a cohort of NFI-dependent genes in CGNs maturing in vivo.
Expression of ETV1 is low in early postnatal cerebellum and increases with
maturation, mirroring NFI temporal occupancy of co-regulated target genes.
Precocious expression of ETV1 in mouse CGNs accelerated onset of expression and
NFI temporal occupancy of late target genes and enhanced Map2(+) neurite
outgrowth. ETV1 also activated expression and NFI occupancy of the Etv1 gene
itself, and this auto-regulatory loop preceded ETV1 binding and activation of
other co-regulated target genes in vivo. These findings suggest a potential model
in which ETV1 activates NFI temporal binding to a subset of late-expressed genes 
in a stepwise manner by initial positive feedback regulation of the Etv1 gene
itself followed by activation of downstream co-regulated targets as ETV1
expression increases. Sequential transcription factor auto-regulation and
subsequent binding to downstream promoters may provide an intrinsic developmental
timer for dendrite/synapse gene expression.

© 2016 by The American Society for Cell Biology.

PMID: 26941328  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 2. pii: clincanres.2748.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

KIT exon 11 codons 557-558 deletion mutation promotes liver metastasis through
the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis in gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Wang HC(1), Li TY(2), Chao YJ(3), Hou YC(4), Hsueh YS(5), Hsu KH(6), Shan YS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Surgery, Institute of Clinical Medicine,College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University. (2)Surgery, Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University. (3)Division of General Surgery, Department of
Surgery, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Surgery, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences. (5)National Institute of Cancer 
Research, National Health Research Institutes. (6)Institute of Clinical Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University, College of Medicine. (7)Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Department of Surgery, National Cheng Kung University, College of
Medicine ysshan@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

PURPOSE: KIT mutations, the most prevalent genetic event in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GISTs), are associated with malignant features and poor
prognosis. Aggressive GISTs possess a high propensity to spread to the liver.
This study aimed to explore the role of KIT mutations in GIST liver metastasis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: 170 GISTs were used to determine the association between KIT
mutations and liver metastasis. Immunohistochemistry was performed to assess the 
correlation of KIT mutations with CXCR4 and ETV1 expression. Genetic and
pharmacological methods were used to study the regulation of CXCR4 and ETV1 by
KIT mutations.
RESULTS: Codons 557 and 558 in KIT exon 11 were deletion hot spots in GISTs. KIT 
exon 11 deletions involving codons 557-558 were highly associated with liver
metastasis. Overexpression of mutant KIT with exon 11 codons 557-558 deletion
(KIT <U+25B3>557-558) increased GIST cell motility and liver metastasis.
Mechanistically, overexpression of KIT <U+25B3>557-558 in GIST cells increased ETV1 and 
CXCR4 expression. CXCR4 knockdown counteracted KIT <U+25B3>557-558-mediated cell
migration. Moreover, KIT <U+25B3>557-558-induced CXCR4 expression could be abolished by 
silencing ETV1. The chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that ETV1 directly
bound to the CXCR4 promoter. After ERK inhibitor PD325901 treatment, the
upregulation of ETV1 by KIT <U+25B3>557-558 was prevented. In addition, KIT exon 11
codons 557-558 deletion enhanced CXCL12-mediated GIST cell migration and
invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: KIT exon 11 557-558 deletion upregulates CXCR4 through increased
binding of ETV1 to the CXCR4 promoter in GIST cells, which thus promotes liver
metastasis. These findings highlighted the potential therapeutic targets for
metastatic GISTs.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26936919  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Neurophysiol. 2016 Feb 10:jn.01028.2015. doi: 10.1152/jn.01028.2015. [Epub
ahead of print]

Roles of specific Kv channel types in repolarization of the action potential in
genetically-identified subclasses of pyramidal neurons in mouse neocortex.

Pathak D(1), Guan D(2), Foehring RC(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Tennessee Health Science Center. (2)University of Tennessee.
(3)University of Tennessee rfoehrin@uthsc.edu.

The action potential (AP) is a fundamental feature of excitable cells that serves
as the basis for long distance signaling in the nervous system. There is
considerable diversity in the appearance of APs and the underlying repolarization
mechanisms in different neuronal types (reviewed by Bean, 2007), including among 
pyramidal cell subtypes. In the present work, we used specific pharmacological
blockers to test for contributions of Kv1, Kv2, or Kv4 channels to repolarization
of single APs in two genetically-defined subpopulations of pyramidal cells in
layer 5 of mouse somatosensory cortex (etv1 and glt), as well as pyramidal cells 
from layer 2/3. These three subtypes differ in AP properties (Groh et al. 2010;
Guan et al. 2015) as well as laminar position, morphology and projection targets.
We asked what the roles of Kv1, Kv2, or Kv4 channels are in AP repolarization,
and whether the underlying mechanisms are pyramidal cell subtype-dependent. We
found that Kv4 channels are critically involved in repolarizing neocortical
pyramidal cells. There are also pyramidal cell subtype-specific differences in
the role for Kv1 channels. Only Kv4 channels were involved in repolarizing the
narrow APs of glt cells. In contrast, in etv1 cells and layer 2/3 cells, the
broader APs are partially repolarized by Kv1 channels in addition to Kv4
channels. Consistent with their activation in the subthreshold range, Kv1
channels also regulate AP voltage threshold in all pyramidal cell subtypes.

Copyright © 2015, Journal of Neurophysiology.

PMID: 26864770  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Clin Invest. 2016 Feb 1;126(2):706-20. doi: 10.1172/JCI78132. Epub 2016 Jan 5.

Histone demethylase JMJD2A drives prostate tumorigenesis through transcription
factor ETV1.

Kim TD, Jin F, Shin S, Oh S, Lightfoot SA, Grande JP, Johnson AJ, van Deursen JM,
Wren JD, Janknecht R.

Histone demethylase upregulation has been observed in human cancers, yet it is
unknown whether this is a bystander event or a driver of tumorigenesis. We found 
that overexpression of lysine-specific demethylase 4A (KDM4A, also known as
JMJD2A) was positively correlated with Gleason score and metastasis in human
prostate tumors. Overexpression of JMJD2A resulted in the development of
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia in mice, demonstrating that JMJD2A can
initiate prostate cancer development. Moreover, combined overexpression of JMJD2A
and the ETS transcription factor ETV1, a JMJD2A-binding protein, resulted in
prostate carcinoma formation in mice haplodeficient for the phosphatase and
tensin homolog (Pten) tumor-suppressor gene. Additionally, JMJD2A cooperated with
ETV1 to increase expression of yes associated protein 1 (YAP1), a Hippo pathway
component that itself was associated with prostate tumor aggressiveness. ETV1
facilitated the recruitment of JMJD2A to the YAP1 promoter, leading to changes in
histone lysine methylation in a human prostate cancer cell line. Further, YAP1
expression largely rescued the growth inhibitory effects of JMJD2A depletion in
prostate cancer cells, indicating that YAP1 is a downstream effector of JMJD2A.
Taken together, these data reveal a JMJD2A/ETV1/YAP1 axis that promotes prostate 
cancer initiation and that may be a suitable target for therapeutic inhibition.

PMCID: PMC4731184 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26731476  [PubMed - in process]


5. Genome Med. 2015 Dec 18;7:129. doi: 10.1186/s13073-015-0252-1.

Landscape of gene fusions in epithelial cancers: seq and ye shall find.

Kumar-Sinha C(1,)(2), Kalyana-Sundaram S(3,)(4), Chinnaiyan
AM(3,)(4,)(5,)(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. chakumar@umich.edu. (2)Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
chakumar@umich.edu. (3)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. arul@umich.edu. (4)Department
of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
arul@umich.edu. (5)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. arul@umich.edu.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. arul@umich.edu. (7)Department of Urology, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. arul@umich.edu.
(8)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI, 48109, USA. arul@umich.edu.

Enabled by high-throughput sequencing approaches, epithelial cancers across a
range of tissue types are seen to harbor gene fusions as integral to their
landscape of somatic aberrations. Although many gene fusions are found at high
frequency in several rare solid cancers, apart from fusions involving the ETS
family of transcription factors which have been seen in approximately 50% of
prostate cancers, several other common solid cancers have been shown to harbor
recurrent gene fusions at low frequencies. On the other hand, many gene fusions
involving oncogenes, such as those encoding ALK, RAF or FGFR kinase families,
have been detected across multiple different epithelial carcinomas.
Tumor-specific gene fusions can serve as diagnostic biomarkers or help define
molecular subtypes of tumors; for example, gene fusions involving oncogenes such 
as ERG, ETV1, TFE3, NUT, POU5F1, NFIB, PLAG1, and PAX8 are diagnostically useful.
Tumors with fusions involving therapeutically targetable genes such as ALK, RET, 
BRAF, RAF1, FGFR1-4, and NOTCH1-3 have immediate implications for precision
medicine across tissue types. Thus, ongoing cancer genomic and transcriptomic
analyses for clinical sequencing need to delineate the landscape of gene fusions.
Prioritization of potential oncogenic "drivers" from "passenger" fusions, and
functional characterization of potentially actionable gene fusions across diverse
tissue types, will help translate these findings into clinical applications.
Here, we review recent advances in gene fusion discovery and the prospects for
medicine.

PMCID: PMC4683719
PMID: 26684754  [PubMed - in process]


6. Gastrointest Tumors. 2015 Sep;2(2):83-8. doi: 10.1159/000430881. Epub 2015 May
29.

Unusual Clinical Presentation of Gastrointestinal Clear Cell Sarcoma.

Raskin GA(1), Pozharisski KM(1), Iyevleva AG(2), Rikov IV(3), Orlova RV(3),
Imyanitov EN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Russian Research Center for Radiology and Surgical Technologies, Saint
Petersburg, Russia. (2)N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, Saint Petersburg,
Russia ; Saint Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint Petersburg,
Russia. (3)Saint Petersburg State University, Medical Faculty, Saint Petersburg, 
Russia. (4)N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; Saint
Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; Saint
Petersburg State University, Medical Faculty, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; I.I.
Mechnikov North-Western State Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Use of molecular assays is gradually becoming a mandatory part of the
clinical management of soft tissue tumors, however the choice and the
interpretation of these tests may present a challenge.
SUMMARY: This report demonstrates an unusual presentation of sarcoma, which was
initially diagnosed as a tumor of unknown primary site. Given the presence of
vimentin, Fli-1, CD99 and S100 markers, lack of immunostaining for melan A,
HMB45, MITF, synaptophysin, CD56, myf4, CKAE1/3 and WT-1, as well as the presence
of EWSR1 translocation determined by a break-apart FISH assay, Ewing's sarcoma
(ES) diagnosis seemed to be well justified. However, polymerase chain reaction
testing for ES-specific rearrangements (EWSR1/FLI1, EWSR1/ERG, EWSR1/ETV1,
EWSR1/ETV4, EWS/FEV) failed to confirm the ES origin of the neoplastic tissue. We
further considered clinical, morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular
diagnostic features of other types of EWSR1-rearranged sarcomas and performed
molecular testing for gastrointestinal clear cell sarcoma. The polymerase chain
reaction assay revealed EWSR1ex7/ATF1ex5 fusion, thus confirming the latter
diagnosis. Subsequent high-precision computed tomography of the abdominal cavity 
revealed a 5-cm tumor of the small bowel, which was subjected to surgical
resection.
KEY MESSAGE: This report exemplifies that the use of anonymous cytogenetic
assays, such as break-apart FISH EWSR1 testing, may not be sufficient even in
case of a perfect match with relevant morphological and immunohistochemical tumor
features.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: Explicit identification of the translocation gene
partners is indeed important for proper sarcoma diagnosis management.

PMCID: PMC4668799
PMID: 26675070  [PubMed]


7. Mamm Genome. 2016 Feb;27(1-2):8-16. doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9615-6. Epub 2015 Dec
12.

Novel genetic tools facilitate the study of cortical neuron migration.

Cionni M(1), Menke C(1), Stottmann RW(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
3333 Burnet Ave., MLC 7016, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. (2)Division of Human
Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., MLC
7016, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. rolf.stottmann@cchmc.org. (3)Division of
Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
OH, 45229, USA. rolf.stottmann@cchmc.org.

Key facets of mammalian forebrain cortical development include the radial
migration of projection neurons and subsequent cellular differentiation into
layer-specific subtypes. Inappropriate regulation of these processes can lead to 
a number of congenital brain defects in both mouse and human, including
lissencephaly and intellectual disability. The genes regulating these processes
are still not all identified, suggesting genetic analyses will continue to be a
powerful tool in mechanistically studying the development of the cerebral cortex.
Reelin is a molecule which we have understood to be critical for proper cortical 
development for many years. The precise mechanism of Reelin, however, is not
fully understood. To address both of these unresolved issues, we report here the 
creation of a novel conditional allele of the Reelin gene and showcase the use of
an Etv1-GFP transgenic line highlighting a subpopulation of the cortex: layer V
pyramidal neurons. Together, these represent genetic tools which may facilitate
the study of cortical development in a number of different ways.

PMCID: PMC4732900 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26662625  [PubMed - in process]


8. Cell. 2015 Dec 3;163(6):1457-67. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.076. Epub 2015 Nov
25.

ß-Cell Insulin Secretion Requires the Ubiquitin Ligase COP1.

Suriben R(1), Kaihara KA(2), Paolino M(1), Reichelt M(3), Kummerfeld SK(4),
Modrusan Z(5), Dugger DL(1), Newton K(1), Sagolla M(3), Webster JD(3), Liu J(4), 
Hebrok M(2), Dixit VM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (2)Diabetes Center, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143 USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Genentech, 1 
DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (4)Department of Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. 
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. (6)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South
San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. Electronic address: dixit@gene.com.

A variety of signals finely tune insulin secretion by pancreatic ß cells to
prevent both hyper-and hypoglycemic states. Here, we show that post-translational
regulation of the transcription factors ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 by the ubiquitin
ligase COP1 (also called RFWD2) in ß cells is critical for insulin secretion.
Mice lacking COP1 in ß cells developed diabetes due to insulin granule docking
defects that were fully rescued by genetic deletion of Etv1, Etv4, and Etv5.
Genes regulated by ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 in the absence of mouse COP1 were enriched
in human diabetes-associated genes, suggesting that they also influence human
ß-cell pathophysiology. In normal ß cells, ETV4 was stabilized upon membrane
depolarization and limited insulin secretion under hyperglycemic conditions.
Collectively, our data reveal that ETVs negatively regulate insulin secretion for
the maintenance of normoglycemia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26627735  [PubMed - in process]


9. Neuron. 2015 Dec 2;88(5):1040-53. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.041. Epub 2015
Nov 19.

Molecularly Defined Circuitry Reveals Input-Output Segregation in Deep Layers of 
the Medial Entorhinal Cortex.

Sürmeli G(1), Marcu DC(1), McClure C(1), Garden DL(1), Pastoll H(1), Nolan MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. (2)Centre for Integrative Physiology,
University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. Electronic
address: mattnolan@ed.ac.uk.

Deep layers of the medial entorhinal cortex are considered to relay signals from 
the hippocampus to other brain structures, but pathways for routing of signals to
and from the deep layers are not well established. Delineating these pathways is 
important for a circuit level understanding of spatial cognition and memory. We
find that neurons in layers 5a and 5b have distinct molecular identities, defined
by the transcription factors Etv1 and Ctip2, and divergent targets, with
extensive intratelencephalic projections originating in layer 5a, but not 5b.
This segregation of outputs is mirrored by the organization of glutamatergic
input from stellate cells in layer 2 and from the hippocampus, with both
preferentially targeting layer 5b over 5a. Our results suggest a molecular and
anatomical organization of input-output computations in deep layers of the MEC,
reveal precise translaminar microcircuitry, and identify molecularly defined
pathways for spatial signals to influence computation in deep layers.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4675718
PMID: 26606996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Urol. 2016 Mar;195(3):619-26. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2015.10.172. Epub 2015 Nov 6.

Development of Castration Resistant Prostate Cancer can be Predicted by a DNA
Hypermethylation Profile.

Angulo JC(1), Andrés G(2), Ashour N(3), Sánchez-Chapado M(4), López JI(5), Ropero
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Departamento Clínico, 
Facultad de Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad Europea de Madrid, Laureate
Universities, Getafe, Spain. Electronic address: javier.angulo@salud.madrid.org. 
(2)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Departamento Clínico, 
Facultad de Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad Europea de Madrid, Laureate
Universities, Getafe, Spain. (3)Departamento de Biología de Sistemas, Unidad
Docente de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Alcalá, Alcalá de
Henares, Bilbao, Spain. (4)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario Príncipe 
de Asturias, Universidad de Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, Bilbao, Spain. (5)Servicio
de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitario de Cruces, Instituto BioCruces,
Universidad del País Vasco, Bilbao, Spain.

PURPOSE: Detection of DNA hypermethylation has emerged as a novel molecular
biomarker for prostate cancer diagnosis and evaluation of prognosis. We sought to
define whether a hypermethylation profile of patients with prostate cancer on
androgen deprivation would predict castrate resistant prostate cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genome-wide methylation analysis was performed using a
methylation cancer panel in 10 normal prostates and 45 tumor samples from
patients placed on androgen deprivation who were followed until castrate
resistant disease developed. Castrate resistant disease was defined according to 
EAU (European Association of Urology) guideline criteria. Two pathologists
reviewed the Gleason score, Ki-67 index and neuroendocrine differentiation.
Hierarchical clustering analysis was performed and relationships with outcome
were investigated by Cox regression and log rank analysis.
RESULTS: We found 61 genes that were significantly hypermethylated in greater
than 20% of tumors analyzed. Three clusters of patients were characterized by a
DNA methylation profile, including 1 at risk for earlier castrate resistant
disease (log rank p = 0.019) and specific mortality (log rank p = 0.002).
Hypermethylation of ETV1 (HR 3.75) and ZNF215 (HR 2.89) predicted disease
progression despite androgen deprivation. Hypermethylation of IRAK3 (HR 13.72),
ZNF215 (HR 4.81) and SEPT9 (HR 7.64) were independent markers of prognosis.
Prostate specific antigen greater than 25 ng/ml, Gleason pattern 5, Ki-67 index
greater than 12% and metastasis at diagnosis also predicted a negative response
to androgen deprivation. Study limitations included the retrospective design
and limited number of cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Epigenetic silencing of the mentioned genes could be novel molecular
markers for the prognosis of advanced prostate cancer. It might predict castrate 
resistance during hormone deprivation and, thus, disease specific mortality. Gene
hypermethylation is associated with disease progression in patients who receive
hormone therapy. It could serve as a marker of the treatment response.

Copyright © 2016 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26551297  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):1011-25. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.025.

The Molecular Taxonomy of Primary Prostate Cancer.

Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network.

Collaborators: Abeshouse A, Ahn J, Akbani R, Ally A, Amin S, Andry CD, Annala M, 
Aprikian A, Armenia J, Arora A, Auman JT, Balasundaram M, Balu S, Barbieri CE,
Bauer T, Benz CC, Bergeron A, Beroukhim R, Berrios M, Bivol A, Bodenheimer T,
Boice L, Bootwalla MS, Borges dos Reis R, Boutros PC, Bowen J, Bowlby R, Boyd J, 
Bradley RK, Breggia A, Brimo F, Bristow CA, Brooks D, Broom BM, Bryce AH, Bubley 
G, Burks E, Butterfield YS, Button M, Canes D, Carlotti CG, Carlsen R, Carmel M, 
Carroll PR, Carter SL, Cartun R, Carver BS, Chan JM, Chang MT, Chen Y, Cherniack 
AD, Chevalier S, Chin L, Cho J, Chu A, Chuah E, Chudamani S, Cibulskis K,
Ciriello G, Clarke A, Cooperberg MR, Corcoran NM, Costello AJ, Cowan J, Crain D, 
Curley E, David K, Demchok JA, Demichelis F, Dhalla N, Dhir R, Doueik A, Drake B,
Dvinge H, Dyakova N, Felau I, Ferguson ML, Frazer S, Freedland S, Fu Y, Gabriel
SB, Gao J, Gardner J, Gastier-Foster JM, Gehlenborg N, Gerken M, Gerstein MB,
Getz G, Godwin AK, Gopalan A, Graefen M, Graim K, Gribbin T, Guin R, Gupta M,
Hadjipanayis A, Haider S, Hamel L, Hayes DN, Heiman DI, Hess J, Hoadley KA,
Holbrook AH, Holt RA, Holway A, Hovens CM, Hoyle AP, Huang M, Hutter CM, Ittmann 
M, Iype L, Jefferys SR, Jones CD, Jones SJ, Juhl H, Kahles A, Kane CJ, Kasaian K,
Kerger M, Khurana E, Kim J, Klein RJ, Kucherlapati R, Lacombe L, Ladanyi M, Lai
PH, Laird PW, Lander ES, Latour M, Lawrence MS, Lau K, LeBien T, Lee D, Lee S,
Lehmann KV, Leraas KM, Leshchiner I, Leung R, Libertino JA, Lichtenberg TM, Lin
P, Linehan WM, Ling S, Lippman SM, Liu J, Liu W, Lochovsky L, Loda M, Logothetis 
C, Lolla L, Longacre T, Lu Y, Luo J, Ma Y, Mahadeshwar HS, Mallery D, Mariamidze 
A, Marra MA, Mayo M, McCall S, McKercher G, Meng S, Mes-Masson AM, Merino MJ,
Meyerson M, Mieczkowski PA, Mills GB, Mills Shaw KR, Minner S, Moinzadeh A, Moore
RA, Morris S, Morrison C, Mose LE, Mungall AJ, Murray BA, Myers JB, Naresh R,
Nelson J, Nelson MA, Nelson PS, Newton Y, Noble MS, Noushmehr H, Nykter M,
Pantazi A, Parfenov M, Park PJ, Parker JS, Paulauskis J, Penny R, Perou CM, Piché
A, Pihl T, Pinto PA, Prandi D, Protopopov A, Ramirez NC, Rao A, Rathmell WK,
Rätsch G, Ren X, Reuter VE, Reynolds SM, Rhie SK, Rieger-Christ K, Roach J,
Robertson AG, Robinson B, Rubin MA, Saad F, Sadeghi S, Saksena G, Saller C,
Salner A, Sanchez-Vega F, Sander C, Sandusky G, Sauter G, Sboner A, Scardino PT, 
Scarlata E, Schein JE, Schlomm T, Schmidt LS, Schultz N, Schumacher SE, Seidman
J, Neder L, Seth S, Sharp A, Shelton C, Shelton T, Shen H, Shen R, Sherman M,
Sheth M, Shi Y, Shih J, Shmulevich I, Simko J, Simon R, Simons JV, Sipahimalani
P, Skelly T, Sofia HJ, Soloway MG, Song X, Sorcini A, Sougnez C, Stepa S, Stewart
C, Stewart J, Stuart JM, Sullivan TB, Sun C, Sun H, Tam A, Tan D, Tang J,
Tarnuzzer R, Tarvin K, Taylor BS, Teebagy P, Tenggara I, Têtu B, Tewari A,
Thiessen N, Thompson T, Thorne LB, Tirapelli DP, Tomlins SA, Trevisan FA,
Troncoso P, True LD, Tsourlakis MC, Tyekucheva S, Van Allen E, Van Den Berg DJ,
Veluvolu U, Verhaak R, Vocke CD, Voet D, Wan Y, Wang Q, Wang W, Wang Z, Weinhold 
N, Weinstein JN, Weisenberger DJ, Wilkerson MD, Wise L, Witte J, Wu CC, Wu J, Wu 
Y, Xu AW, Yadav SS, Yang L, Yang L, Yau C, Ye H, Yena P, Zeng T, Zenklusen JC,
Zhang H, Zhang J, Zhang J, Zhang W, Zhong Y, Zhu K, Zmuda E.

There is substantial heterogeneity among primary prostate cancers, evident in the
spectrum of molecular abnormalities and its variable clinical course. As part of 
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we present a comprehensive molecular analysis of 
333 primary prostate carcinomas. Our results revealed a molecular taxonomy in
which 74% of these tumors fell into one of seven subtypes defined by specific
gene fusions (ERG, ETV1/4, and FLI1) or mutations (SPOP, FOXA1, and IDH1).
Epigenetic profiles showed substantial heterogeneity, including an IDH1 mutant
subset with a methylator phenotype. Androgen receptor (AR) activity varied widely
and in a subtype-specific manner, with SPOP and FOXA1 mutant tumors having the
highest levels of AR-induced transcripts. 25% of the prostate cancers had a
presumed actionable lesion in the PI3K or MAPK signaling pathways, and DNA repair
genes were inactivated in 19%. Our analysis reveals molecular heterogeneity among
primary prostate cancers, as well as potentially actionable molecular defects.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4695400 [Available on 2016-11-05]
PMID: 26544944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Dec;58:175-85. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.10.002. Epub 2015
Oct 19.

High-throughput alternative splicing detection using dually constrained
correspondence analysis (DCCA).

Baty F(1), Klingbiel D(2), Zappa F(3), Brutsche M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, Switzerland.
Electronic address: florent.baty@kssg.ch. (2)Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer
Research (SAKK), Bern, Switzerland. (3)Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, Regional Hospital San Giovanni, Bellinzona, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, Switzerland.

Alternative splicing is an important component of tumorigenesis. Recent advent of
exon array technology enables the detection of alternative splicing at a
genome-wide scale. The analysis of high-throughput alternative splicing is not
yet standard and methodological developments are still needed. We propose a novel
statistical approach-Dually Constrained Correspondence Analysis-for the detection
of splicing changes in exon array data. Using this methodology, we investigated
the genome-wide alteration of alternative splicing in patients with non-small
cell lung cancer treated by bevacizumab/erlotinib. Splicing candidates reveal a
series of genes related to carcinogenesis (SFTPB), cell adhesion (STAB2, PCDH15, 
HABP2), tumor aggressiveness (ARNTL2), apoptosis, proliferation and
differentiation (PDE4D, FLT3, IL1R2), cell invasion (ETV1), as well as tumor
growth (OLFM4, FGF14), tumor necrosis (AFF3) or tumor suppression (TUSC3, CSMD1, 
RHOBTB2, SERPINB5), with indication of known alternative splicing in a majority
of genes. DCCA facilitates the identification of putative biologically relevant
alternative splicing events in high-throughput exon array data.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26483173  [PubMed - in process]


13. Science. 2015 Sep 11;349(6253):1216-20. doi: 10.1126/science.aab3415.

Tuning of fast-spiking interneuron properties by an activity-dependent
transcriptional switch.

Dehorter N(1), Ciceri G(2), Bartolini G(1), Lim L(1), del Pino I(1), Marín O(3).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council, New
Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK. Instituto 
de Neurociencias, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad
Miguel Hernández, 03550 Sant Joan d'Alacant, Spain. (2)Instituto de
Neurociencias, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad
Miguel Hernández, 03550 Sant Joan d'Alacant, Spain. (3)MRC Centre for
Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council, New Hunt's House, Guy's
Campus, King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK. Instituto de Neurociencias,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad Miguel Hernández,
03550 Sant Joan d'Alacant, Spain. oscar.marin@kcl.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015 Nov;16(11):643.

The function of neural circuits depends on the generation of specific classes of 
neurons. Neural identity is typically established near the time when neurons exit
the cell cycle to become postmitotic cells, and it is generally accepted that,
once the identity of a neuron has been established, its fate is maintained
throughout life. Here, we show that network activity dynamically modulates the
properties of fast-spiking (FS) interneurons through the postmitotic expression
of the transcriptional regulator Er81. In the adult cortex, Er81 protein levels
define a spectrum of FS basket cells with different properties, whose relative
proportions are, however, continuously adjusted in response to neuronal activity.
Our findings therefore suggest that interneuron properties are malleable in the
adult cortex, at least to a certain extent.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4702376
PMID: 26359400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. BMC Genomics. 2015 Aug 12;16:592. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1783-y.

Cell cycle control, DNA damage repair, and apoptosis-related pathways control
pre-ameloblasts differentiation during tooth development.

Liu C(1), Niu Y(2), Zhou X(3), Xu X(4), Yang Y(5), Zhang Y(6), Zheng L(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China. liuchengcheng519@163.com. (2)Key
Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College
of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China. yulong.niu@aol.com.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China. zhouxd@scu.edu.cn. (4)State Key Laboratory
of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, PR China. nixux1982@hotmail.com. (5)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and 
Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, PR China. yangyi528@scu.edu.cn. (6)Department of Orofacial
Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
yan.zhang2@ucsf.edu. (7)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China
Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China.
zhenglw399@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Ameloblast differentiation is the most critical stepwise process in
amelogenesis, and it is controlled by precise molecular events. To better
understand the mechanism controlling pre-ameloblasts (PABs) differentiation into 
secretory ameloblasts (SABs), a more precise identification of molecules and
signaling networks will elucidate the mechanisms governing enamel formation and
lay a foundation for enamel regeneration.
RESULTS: We analyzed transcriptional profiles of human PABs and SABs. From a
total of 28,869 analyzed transcripts, we identified 923 differentially expressed 
genes (DEGs) with p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 and Fold-change<U+2009>><U+2009>2. Among the DEGs, 647 genes showed 
elevated expression in PABs compared to SABs. Notably, 38 DEGs displayed greater 
than eight-fold changes. Comparative analysis revealed that highly expressed
genes in PABs were involved in cell cycle control, DNA damage repair and
apoptosis, while highly expressed genes in SABs were related to cell adhesion and
extracellular matrix. Moreover, coexpression network analysis uncovered two
highly conserved sub-networks contributing to differentiation, containing
transcription regulators (RUNX2, ETV1 and ETV5), solute carrier family members
(SLC15A1 and SLC7A11), enamel matrix protein (MMP20), and a polymodal excitatory 
ion channel (TRPA1).
CONCLUSIONS: By combining comparative analysis and coexpression networks, this
study provides novel biomarkers and research targets for ameloblast
differentiation and the potential for their application in enamel regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4534026
PMID: 26265206  [PubMed - in process]


15. Virchows Arch. 2015 Oct;467(4):393-403. doi: 10.1007/s00428-015-1813-9. Epub 2015
Aug 5.

ETV1 mRNA is specifically expressed in gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Jang BG(1), Lee HE(2), Kim WH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jeju National University Hospital, Jeju, Korea.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, USA. 
(3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28
Yeongeon-dong, Seoul, 110-799, Korea. woohokim@snu.ac.kr.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) develop from interstitial cells of Cajal 
(ICCs) mainly by activating mutations in the KIT or PDGFRA genes.
Immunohistochemical analysis for KIT, DOG1, and PKC-<U+03B8> is used for the diagnosis
of GIST. Recently, ETV1 has been shown to be a lineage survival factor for ICCs
and required for tumorigenesis of GIST. We investigated the diagnostic value of
ETV1expression in GIST. On fresh-frozen tissue samples, RT-PCR analysis showed
that ETV1 as well as KIT, DOG1, and PKC-<U+03B8> are highly expressed in GISTs. On
tissue microarrays containing 407 GISTs and 120 non-GIST mesenchymal tumors of GI
tract, we performed RNA in situ hybridization (ISH) for ETV1 together with
immunohistochemical analysis for KIT, DOG1, PKC-<U+03B8>, CD133, and CD44. Overall, 387 
(95 %) of GISTs were positive for ETV1, while KIT and DOG1 were positive in 381
(94 %) and 392 (96 %) cases, respectively, showing nearly identical overall
sensitivity of ETV1, KIT, and DOG1 for GISTs. In addition, ETV1 expression was
positively correlated with that of KIT. Notably, ETV1 was positive in 15 of 26
(58 %) KIT-negative GISTs and even positive in 2 cases of GIST negative for KIT
and DOG1, whereas only 6 (5 %) non-GIST mesenchymal GI tumors expressed ETV1. We 
conclude that ETV1 is specifically expressed in the majority of GISTs, even in
some KIT-negative cases, suggesting that ETV1 may be useful as ancillary marker
in diagnostically difficult select cases of GIST.

PMID: 26243012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Oncol. 2015 Nov;9(9):1852-67. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2015.07.001. Epub 2015
Jul 15.

PEA3 transcription factors are downstream effectors of Met signaling involved in 
migration and invasiveness of Met-addicted tumor cells.

Kherrouche Z(1), Monte D(2), Werkmeister E(3), Stoven L(1), De Launoit Y(1),
Cortot AB(4), Tulasne D(5), Chotteau-Lelievre A(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, SIRIC ONCOLille, Lille 59021, France. (2)CNRS USR 3078,
Institut de Recherche Interdisciplinaire, Université de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq 
59658, France. (3)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur 
de Lille, Université de Lille, SIRIC ONCOLille, Lille 59021, France; BioImaging
Center Lille Nord de France, Lille 59021, France. (4)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de
Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille, SIRIC
ONCOLille, Lille 59021, France; Thoracic Oncology Department, Lille University
Hospital, Université de Lille, France. (5)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de 
Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille, SIRIC ONCOLille, Lille
59021, France. Electronic address: david.tulasne@ibl.cnrs.fr.

Various solid tumors including lung or gastric carcinomas display aberrant
activation of the Met receptor which correlates with aggressive phenotypes and
poor prognosis. Although downstream signaling of Met is well described, its
integration at the transcriptional level is poorly understood. We demonstrate
here that in cancer cells harboring met gene amplification, inhibition of Met
activity with tyrosine kinase inhibitors or specific siRNA drastically decreased 
expression of ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5, three transcription factors constituting the
PEA3 subgroup of the ETS family, while expression of the other members of the
family were less or not affected. Similar link between Met activity and PEA3
factors expression was found in lung cancer cells displaying resistance to EGFR
targeted therapy involving met gene amplification. Using silencing experiments,
we demonstrate that the PEA3 factors are required for efficient migration and
invasion mediated by Met, while other biological responses such as proliferation 
or unanchored growth remain unaffected. PEA3 overexpression or silencing revealed
that they participated in the regulation of the MMP2 target gene involved in
extracellular matrix remodeling. Our results demonstrated that PEA3-subgroup
transcription factors are key players of the Met signaling integration involved
in regulation of migration and invasiveness.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26238631  [PubMed - in process]


17. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 7;6(22):19006-16.

miR-17 regulates melanoma cell motility by inhibiting the translation of ETV1.

Cohen R(1,)(2), Greenberg E(1,)(2), Nemlich Y(1,)(2), Schachter J(1), Markel
G(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ella Institute of Melanoma Research, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel. 
(2)Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. (3)Talpiot Medical Leadership Program, Sheba
Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel.

Melanoma is an aggressive malignancy with a high metastatic potential.
microRNA-17 (miR-17) is a member of the oncogenic miR-17/92 cluster. Here we
study the effect of miR-17 on melanoma cell motility. Over expression of the
mature or pri-microRNA form of miR-17 in WM-266-4 and 624mel melanoma lines
enhances cell motility, evident in both wound healing and transwell migration
assays. TargetScan algorithm predicts the PEA3-subfamily member ETV1 as a direct 
target of miR-17. Indeed, a 3-4-fold decrease of ETV1 protein levels are observed
following miR-17 transfection into the various melanoma lines, with no
significant change in ETV1 mRNA expression. Dual luciferase experiments
demonstrate direct binding of miR-17 to the 3'-untranslated region of ETV1,
confirmed by abolishing point mutations in the putative binding site. These
combined results suggest regulation of ETV1 by miR-17 by a direct translational
repression. Further, in both melanoma cell lines ETV1 knockdown by selective
siRNA successfully pheno-copies the facilitated cell migration, while
overexpression of ETV1 inhibits cell motility and migration. Altered ETV1
expression does not affect melanoma net-proliferation. In conclusion, we show a
new role for miR-17 in melanoma, facilitating cell motility, by targeting the
translation of ETV1 protein, which may support the development of metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4662471
PMID: 26158900  [PubMed - in process]


18. Peptides. 2016 Mar;77:21-7. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2015.06.006. Epub 2015 Jul 3.

High fat diet impairs the function of glucagon-like peptide-1 producing L-cells.

Richards P(1), Pais R(1), Habib AM(1), Brighton CA(1), Yeo GS(1), Reimann F(2),
Gribble FM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Laboratories and MRC Metabolic Diseases Unit, WT-MRC
Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(2)Metabolic Research Laboratories and MRC Metabolic Diseases Unit, WT-MRC
Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
Electronic address: fr222@cam.ac.uk. (3)Metabolic Research Laboratories and MRC
Metabolic Diseases Unit, WT-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. Electronic address: fmg23@cam.ac.uk.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) acts as a satiety signal and enhances insulin
release. This study examined how GLP-1 production from intestinal L-cells is
modified by dietary changes.METHODS: Transgenic mouse models were utilized in
which L-cells could be purified by cell specific expression of a yellow
fluorescent protein, Venus. Mice were fed on chow or 60% high fat diet (HFD) for 
2 or 16 weeks. L-cells were purified by flow cytometry and analysed by microarray
and quantitative RT-PCR. Enteroendocrine cell populations were examined by FACS
analysis, and GLP-1 secretion was assessed in primary intestinal cultures.
RESULTS: Two weeks HFD reduced the numbers of GLP-1 positive cells in the colon, 
and of GIP positive cells in the small intestine. Purified small intestinal
L-cells showed major shifts in their gene expression profiles. In mice on HFD for
16 weeks, significant reductions were observed in the expression of L-cell
specific genes, including those encoding gut hormones (Gip, Cck, Sct, Nts),
prohormone processing enzymes (Pcsk1, Cpe), granins (Chgb, Scg2), nutrient
sensing machinery (Slc5a1, Slc15a1, Abcc8, Gpr120) and enteroendocrine-specific
transcription factors (Etv1, Isl1, Mlxipl, Nkx2.2 and Rfx6). A corresponding
reduction in the GLP-1 secretory responsiveness to nutrient stimuli was observed 
in primary small intestinal cultures.
CONCLUSION: Mice fed on HFD exhibited reduced expression in L-cells of many
L-cell specific genes, suggesting an impairment of enteroendocrine cell function.
Our results suggest that a western style diet may detrimentally affect the
secretion of gut hormones and normal post-prandial signaling, which could impact 
on insulin secretion and satiety.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788507
PMID: 26145551  [PubMed - in process]


19. Oncoscience. 2015 Mar 17;2(5):497-507. eCollection 2015.

Uncovering potential downstream targets of oncogenic GRPR overexpression in
prostate carcinomas harboring ETS rearrangements.

Santos J(1), Mesquita D(1), Barros-Silva JD(1), Jerónimo C(2), Henrique R(3),
Morais A(4), Paulo P(1), Teixeira MR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cancer Genetics Group - CI-IPOP, Portuguese
Oncology Institute-Porto, Rua Dr. António Bernardino de Almeida, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Cancer Biology and Epigenetics Group - CI-IPOP, Portuguese Oncology
Institute-Porto, Rua Dr. António Bernardino de Almeida, Porto, Portugal ;
Department of Pathology and Molecular Immunology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo
Ferreira, Porto, Portugal. (3)Cancer Biology and Epigenetics Group - CI-IPOP,
Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Rua Dr. António Bernardino de Almeida,
Porto, Portugal ; Department of Pathology, Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto,
Rua Dr. António Bernardino de Almeida, Porto, Portugal ; Department of Pathology 
and Molecular Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS), 
University of Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo Ferreira, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Department of Urology, Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Rua Dr. António
Bernardino de Almeida, Porto, Portugal. (5)Department of Genetics and Cancer
Genetics Group - CI-IPOP, Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Rua Dr. António
Bernardino de Almeida, Porto, Portugal ; Department of Pathology and Molecular
Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of 
Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo Ferreira, Porto, Portugal.

Gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR) is known to be overexpressed in several
human malignancies, including prostate cancer, and has been implicated in
multiple important neoplastic signaling pathways. We recently have shown that
GRPR is an ERG and ETV1 target gene in prostate cancer, using a genome-wide scale
and exon-level expression microarray platform. Due to its cellular localization, 
the relevance of its function and the availability of blocking agents, GRPR seems
to be a promising candidate as therapeutic target. Our present work shows that
effective knockdown of GRPR in LNCaP and VCaP cells attenuates their malignant
phenotype by decreasing proliferation, invasion and anchorage-independent growth,
while increasing apoptosis. Using an antibody microarray we were able to validate
known and identify new targets of GRPR pathway, namely AKT1, PKCe, TYK2 and MST1.
Finally, we show that overexpression of these GRPR targets is restricted to
prostate carcinomas harboring ERG and/or ETV1 rearrangements, establishing their 
potential as therapeutic targets for these particular molecular subsets of the
disease.

PMCID: PMC4468336
PMID: 26097883  [PubMed]


20. Biotechnol Biotechnol Equip. 2015 Jan 2;29(1):111-118. Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Whole genome microarray analysis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Al Zeyadi M(1), Dimova I(1), Ranchich V(1), Rukova B(1), Nesheva D(1), Hamude
Z(1), Georgiev S(1), Petrov D(2), Toncheva D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of
Sofia , Sofia , Bulgaria. (2)Clinic of Thoracic Surgery, Medical University of
Sofia , Sofia , Bulgaria.

Lung cancer is a serious health problem, since it is one of the leading causes
for death worldwide. Molecular-cytogenetic studies could provide reliable data
about genetic alterations which could be related to disease pathogenesis and be
used for better prognosis and treatment strategies. We performed whole genome
oligonucleotide microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization in 10 samples 
of non-small cell lung cancer. Trisomies were discovered for chromosomes 1, 13,
18 and 20. Chromosome arms 5p, 7p, 11q, 20q and <U+0425>q were affected by genetic
gains, and 1p, 5q, 10q and 15q, by genetic losses. Microstructural (<5 Mbp)
genomic aberrations were revealed: gains in regions 7p (containing the epidermal 
growth factor receptor gene) and 12p (containing KRAS) and losses in 3p26 and
4q34. Based on high amplitude of alterations and small overlapping regions, new
potential oncogenes may be suggested: NBPF4 (1p13.3); ETV1, AGR3 and TSPAN13
(7p21.3-7p21.1); SOX5 and FGFR1OP2 (12p12.1-12p11.22); GPC6 (13q32.1).
Significant genetic losses were assumed to contain potential tumour-suppressor
genes: DPYD (1p21.3); CLDN22, CLDN24, ING2, CASP3, SORBS2 (4q34.2-q35.1); DEFB
(8p23.1). Our results complement the picture of genomic characterization of
non-small cell lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4433918
PMID: 26019623  [PubMed]


21. Ann Neurol. 2015 Sep;78(3):355-74. doi: 10.1002/ana.24443. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

CIC inactivating mutations identify aggressive subset of 1p19q codeleted gliomas.

Gleize V(1), Alentorn A(1,)(2), Connen de Kérillis L(1), Labussière M(1),
Nadaradjane AA(1), Mundwiller E(3), Ottolenghi C(4), Mangesius S(1), Rahimian
A(5), Ducray F(6); POLA network, Mokhtari K(1,)(5,)(7), Villa C(7), Sanson
M(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Université, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Inserm, CNRS, UM 75, U 1127, UMR
7225, ICM, Paris, France. (2)AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service
de Neurologie 2, Paris, France. (3)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, 
Plateforme de Génotypage et Séquençage, Paris, France. (4)Biochimie Métabolique, 
Université Paris Descartes et Inserm U1124, Paris, France. (5)AP-HP,
Onconeurothèque, Paris, France. (6)Hôpital Neurologique, Service de Neurologie B,
Lyon, France. (7)AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Laboratoire de
Neuropathologie R Escourolle, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: CIC gene is frequently mutated in oligodendroglial tumors with 1p19q
codeletion. However, clinical and biological impact remain poorly understood.
METHODS: We sequenced the CIC gene on 127 oligodendroglial tumors (109 with the
1p19q codeletion) and analyzed patients' outcome. We compared magnetic resonance 
imaging, transcriptomic profile, and CIC protein expression of CIC wild-type (WT)
and mutant gliomas. We compared the level of expression of CIC target genes on
Hs683-IDH1(R132H) cells transfected with lentivirus encoding mutant and WT CIC.
RESULTS: We found 63 mutations affecting 60 of 127 patients, virtually all 1p19q 
codeleted and IDH mutated (59 of 60). In the 1p19q codeleted gliomas, CIC
mutations were associated with a poorer outcome by uni- (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001) and
multivariate analysis (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.016). CIC mutation prognostic impact was validated
on the TCGA cohort. CIC mutant grade II codeleted gliomas spontaneously grew
faster than WTs. Transcriptomic analysis revealed an enrichment of proliferative 
pathways and oligodendrocyte precursor cell gene expression profile in CIC mutant
gliomas, with upregulation of normally CIC repressed genes ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and 
CCND1. Various missense mutations resulted in CIC protein expression loss.
Moreover, a truncating CIC mutation resulted in a defect of nuclear targeting of 
CIC protein to the nucleus in a human glioma cell line expressing IDH1(R132H) and
overexpression of CCND1 and other new target genes of CIC, such as DUSP4 and
SPRED1.
INTERPRETATION: CIC mutations result in protein inactivation with upregulation of
CIC target genes, activation of proliferative pathways, inhibition of
differentiation, and poorer outcome in patients with a 1p19q codeleted glioma.

© 2015 American Neurological Association.

PMID: 26017892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. BMC Cancer. 2015 Mar 15;15:132. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1151-y.

COP1, the negative regulator of ETV1, influences prognosis in triple-negative
breast cancer.

Ouyang M(1,)(2), Wang H(3), Ma J(4), Lü W(5), Li J(6), Yao C(7), Chang G(8), Bi
J(9), Wang S(10), Wang W(11).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Department of Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, 58 Zhongshan Rd II, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic
of China. wyb714@aliyun.com. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First
Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58 Zhongshan Rd II, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic of China. wyb714@aliyun.com. (3)Laboratory
of Department of Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58
Zhongshan Rd II, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic of China.
wh_hua225@163.com. (4)Laboratory of Department of Surgery, First Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58 Zhongshan Rd II, Guangzhou, Guangdong,
510080, People's Republic of China. nurch@126.com. (5)Department of Vascular,
Thyroid and Breast Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58
Zhongshan Rd II, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic of China.
21746238@qq.com. (6)Department of Vascular, Thyroid and Breast Surgery, First
Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58 Zhongshan Rd II, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic of China. lijie3218@sina.com. (7)Department 
of Vascular, Thyroid and Breast Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, 58 Zhongshan Rd II, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic
of China. yaochen_sums@163.com. (8)Department of Vascular, Thyroid and Breast
Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58 Zhongshan Rd II,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic of China. 13922231628@163.com.
(9)Laboratory of Department of Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, 58 Zhongshan Rd II, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic
of China. bijiong2000@hotmail.com. (10)Department of Vascular, Thyroid and Breast
Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58 Zhongshan Rd II,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic of China. shenminggz@126.com.
(11)Laboratory of Department of Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, 58 Zhongshan Rd II, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, People's Republic
of China. w166w2000@aliyun.com.

BACKGROUND: ETS variant 1 (ETV1) and E3 ubiquitin ligase constitutive
photomorphogenetic 1 (COP1) have been proposed to be a pair of oncogene and tumor
suppressor. However, the co-existing status of ETV1 and COP1 in triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) and their predictive role in determining the patient's
outcome are uncertain.
METHODS: We examined the abundance of COP1 and ETV1 proteins and their
clinicopathologic significance in archival TNBC tissues from 105 patients by
tissue microarray. The potential function link between COP1 and ETV1 was observed
in MDA-MB-231 cells by cell proliferation, invasion and migration assays.
RESULTS: ETV1 expression was higher in TNBC tissues compared to normal tissues,
while COP1 was lower. ETV1 expression was negatively associated with COP1
abundance in TNBCs. Overexpression of COP1 led to significant reduction of ETV1
in MDA-MB-231 cells, and suppressed the cells migration and invasion. Rescue of
ETV1 expression in the presence of COP1 notably regained the cells behaviors.
ETV1-positive group was associated with a markedly poor overall survival.
Meanwhile, we had observed favourable prognosis in COP1-positive cases for the
first time. Multivariate analysis showed that COP1 together with ETV1 were
independent risk factors in the prognosis of TNBC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: COP1 might be a tumor suppressor by negative regulating ETV1 in
patients with TNBCs. COP1 and ETV1 are a pair of independent predictors of
prognosis for TNBC cases. Thus, targeting them might be a potential strategy for 
personalized TNBC treatment.

PMCID: PMC4381371
PMID: 25884720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 29;290(22):13692-709. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.646737. Epub
2015 Apr 12.

Structures of the Ets Protein DNA-binding Domains of Transcription Factors Etv1, 
Etv4, Etv5, and Fev: DETERMINANTS OF DNA BINDING AND REDOX REGULATION BY
DISULFIDE BOND FORMATION.

Cooper CD(1), Newman JA(1), Aitkenhead H(1), Allerston CK(1), Gileadi O(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus
Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom. (2)From the
Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research
Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom
opher.gileadi@sgc.ox.ac.uk.

Ets transcription factors, which share the conserved Ets DNA-binding domain,
number nearly 30 members in humans and are particularly involved in developmental
processes. Their deregulation following changes in expression, transcriptional
activity, or by chromosomal translocation plays a critical role in
carcinogenesis. Ets DNA binding, selectivity, and regulation have been
extensively studied; however, questions still arise regarding binding specificity
outside the core GGA recognition sequence and the mode of action of Ets
post-translational modifications. Here, we report the crystal structures of Etv1,
Etv4, Etv5, and Fev, alone and in complex with DNA. We identify previously
unrecognized features of the protein-DNA interface. Interactions with the DNA
backbone account for most of the binding affinity. We describe a highly
coordinated network of water molecules acting in base selection upstream of the
GGAA core and the structural features that may account for discrimination against
methylated cytidine residues. Unexpectedly, all proteins crystallized as
disulfide-linked dimers, exhibiting a novel interface (distant to the DNA
recognition helix). Homodimers of Etv1, Etv4, and Etv5 could be reduced to
monomers, leading to a 40-200-fold increase in DNA binding affinity. Hence, we
present the first indication of a redox-dependent regulatory mechanism that may
control the activity of this subset of oncogenic Ets transcription factors.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4447949
PMID: 25866208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Gastroenterology. 2015 Aug;149(2):420-32.e16. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.04.006. 
Epub 2015 Apr 9.

Platelet-Derived Growth Factor Receptor-a Regulates Proliferation of
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor Cells With Mutations in KIT by Stabilizing ETV1.

Hayashi Y(1), Bardsley MR(1), Toyomasu Y(1), Milosavljevic S(1), Gajdos GB(1),
Choi KM(2), Reid-Lombardo KM(3), Kendrick ML(3), Bingener-Casey J(3), Tang CM(4),
Sicklick JK(4), Gibbons SJ(2), Farrugia G(5), Taguchi T(6), Gupta A(7), Rubin
BP(7), Fletcher JA(8), Ramachandran A(9), Ordog T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Enteric Neuroscience Program, Department of Physiology and Biomedical
Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; Gastroenterology Research Unit,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (2)Enteric Neuroscience Program, Department of
Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (4)Division of
Surgical Oncology, Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego,
California. (5)Enteric Neuroscience Program, Department of Physiology and
Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; Center for
Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (6)Division of Human 
Health and Medical Science, Graduate School of Kuroshio Science, Kochi
University, Kochi, Japan. (7)Departments of Pathology and Molecular Genetics,
Lerner Research Institute and Taussig Cancer Center, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
Ohio. (8)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (9)AROG Pharmaceuticals, LLC, Dallas,
Texas. (10)Enteric Neuroscience Program, Department of Physiology and Biomedical 
Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; Gastroenterology Research Unit,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. Electronic address: ordog.tamas@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In gastrointestinal muscles, v-kit Hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline
sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KIT) is predominantly expressed by interstitial
cells of Cajal (ICC) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor-a (PDGFRA)
polypeptide is expressed by so-called fibroblast-like cells. KIT and PDGFRA have 
been reported to be coexpressed in ICC precursors and gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (GISTs), which originate from the ICC lineage. PDGFRA signaling has been
proposed to stimulate growth of GISTs that express mutant KIT, but the effects
and mechanisms of selective blockade of PDGFRA are unclear. We investigated
whether inhibiting PDGFRA could reduce proliferation of GIST cells with mutant
KIT via effects on the KIT-dependent transcription factor ETV1.
METHODS: We studied 53 gastric, small intestinal, rectal, or abdominal GISTs
collected immediately after surgery or archived as fixed blocks at the Mayo
Clinic and University of California, San Diego. In human GIST cells carrying
imatinib-sensitive and imatinib-resistant mutations in KIT, PDGFRA was reduced by
RNA interference (knockdown) or inhibited with crenolanib besylate (a selective
inhibitor of PDGFRA and PDGFRB). Mouse ICC precursors were retrovirally
transduced to overexpress wild-type Kit. Cell proliferation was analyzed by
methyltetrazolium, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation, and Ki-67
immunofluorescence assays; we also analyzed growth of xenograft tumors in mice.
Gastric ICC and ICC precursors, and their PDGFRA(+) subsets, were analyzed by
flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry in wild-type, Kit(+/copGFP),
Pdgfra(+/eGFP), and NOD/ShiLtJ mice. Immunoblots were used to quantify protein
expression and phosphorylation.
RESULTS: KIT and PDGFRA were coexpressed in 3%-5% of mouse ICC, 35%-44% of ICC
precursors, and most human GIST samples and cell lines. PDGFRA knockdown or
inhibition with crenolanib efficiently reduced proliferation of
imatinib-sensitive and imatinib-resistant KIT(+)ETV1(+)PDGFRA(+) GIST cells (50% 
maximal inhibitory concentration = 5-32 nM), but not of cells lacking KIT, ETV1, 
or PDGFRA (50% maximal inhibitory concentration >230 nM). Crenolanib inhibited
phosphorylation of PDGFRA and PDGFRB, but not KIT. However, Kit overexpression
sensitized mouse ICC precursors to crenolanib. ETV1 knockdown reduced KIT
expression and GIST proliferation. Crenolanib down-regulated ETV1 by inhibiting
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent stabilization of ETV1
protein and also reduced expression of KIT and PDGFRA.
CONCLUSIONS: In KIT-mutant GIST, inhibition of PDGFRA disrupts a KIT-ERK-ETV1-KIT
signaling loop by inhibiting ERK activation. The PDGFRA inhibitor crenolanib
might be used to treat patients with imatinib-resistant, KIT-mutant GIST.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4516576 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25865047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Prostate. 2015 Jul 1;75(10):1051-62. doi: 10.1002/pros.22989. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Molecular profiling of ETS and non-ETS aberrations in prostate cancer patients
from northern India.

Ateeq B(1), Kunju LP(2,)(3,)(4), Carskadon SL(2,)(3), Pandey SK(1), Singh G(5),
Pradeep I(5), Tandon V(6), Singhai A(7), Goel A(8), Amit S(9), Agarwal A(9),
Dinda AK(5), Seth A(10), Tsodikov A(11), Chinnaiyan AM(2,)(3,)(4,)(12),
Palanisamy N(2,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kanpur, India. (2)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan. (4)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (5)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. (6)Digdarshika Pathology Laboratory, Lucknow,
India. (7)Department of Pathology, King George's Medical University, Lucknow,
India. (8)Department of Urology, King George's Medical University, Lucknow,
India. (9)Department of Pathology, GSVM Medical College, Kanpur, India.
(10)Department of Urology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India. (11)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. (12)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (13)Department of Urology, Henry Ford Health System,
Detroit, Michigan.

BACKGROUND: Molecular stratification of prostate cancer (PCa) based on genetic
aberrations including ETS or RAF gene-rearrangements, PTEN deletion, and SPINK1
over-expression show clear prognostic and diagnostic utility. Gene rearrangements
involving ETS transcription factors are frequent pathogenetic somatic events
observed in PCa. Incidence of ETS rearrangements in Caucasian PCa patients has
been reported, however, occurrence in Indian population is largely unknown. The
aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of the ETS and RAF kinase gene 
rearrangements, SPINK1 over-expression, and PTEN deletion in this cohort.
METHODS: In this multi-center study, formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) PCa 
specimens (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>121) were procured from four major medical institutions in India. 
The tissues were sectioned and molecular profiling was done using
immunohistochemistry (IHC), RNA in situ hybridization (RNA-ISH) and/or
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
RESULTS: ERG over-expression was detected in 48.9% (46/94) PCa specimens by IHC, 
which was confirmed in a subset of cases by FISH. Among other ETS family members,
while ETV1 transcript was detected in one case by RNA-ISH, no alteration in ETV4 
was observed. SPINK1 over-expression was observed in 12.5% (12/96) and PTEN
deletion in 21.52% (17/79) of the total PCa cases. Interestingly, PTEN deletion
was found in 30% of the ERG-positive cases (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.017) but in only one case with 
SPINK1 over-expression (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.67). BRAF and RAF1 gene rearrangements were
detected in ~1% and ~4.5% of the PCa cases, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report on comprehensive molecular profiling of the
major spectrum of the causal aberrations in Indian men with PCa. Our findings
suggest that ETS gene rearrangement and SPINK1 over-expression patterns in North 
Indian population largely resembled those observed in Caucasian population but
differed from Japanese and Chinese PCa patients. The molecular profiling data
presented in this study could help in clinical decision-making for the pursuit of
surgery, diagnosis, and in selection of therapeutic intervention.

© 2015 The Authors. The Prostate, published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25809148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 17;10(3):e0120628. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120628.
eCollection 2015.

Genetic interaction between Tmprss2-ERG gene fusion and Nkx3.1-loss does not
enhance prostate tumorigenesis in mouse models.

Linn DE(1), Bronson RT(2), Li Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, United States of America; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States of America. (2)Rodent Histopathology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States of America.

Gene fusions involving ETS family transcription factors (mainly TMPRSS2-ERG and
TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusions) have been found in ~50% of human prostate cancer cases.
Although expression of TMPRSS2-ERG or TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusion alone is insufficient
to initiate prostate tumorigenesis, they appear to sensitize prostate epithelial 
cells for cooperation with additional oncogenic mutations to drive frank prostate
adenocarcinoma. To search for such ETS-cooperating oncogenic events, we focused
on a well-studied prostate tumor suppressor NKX3.1, as loss of NKX3.1 is another 
common genetic alteration in human prostate cancer. Previous studies have shown
that deletions at 8p21 (harboring NKX3.1) and 21q22 (resulting in TMPRSS2-ERG
fusion) were both present in a subtype of prostate cancer cases, and that ERG can
lead to epigenetic silencing of NKX3.1 in prostate cancer cells, whereas NKX3.1
can in turn negatively regulate TMPRSS2-ERG fusion expression via suppression of 
the TMPRSS2 promoter activity. We recently generated knockin mouse models for
TMPRSS2-ERG and TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusions, utilizing the endogenous Tmprss2 promoter. 
We crossed these knockin models to an Nkx3.1 knockout mouse model. In
Tmprss2-ERG;Nkx3.1+/- (or -/-) male mice, although we observed a slight but
significant upregulation of Tmprss2-ERG fusion expression upon Nkx3.1 loss, we
did not detect any significant cooperation between these two genetic events to
enhance prostate tumorigenesis in vivo. Furthermore, retrospective analysis of a 
previously published human prostate cancer dataset revealed that within
ERG-overexpressing prostate cancer cases, NKX3.1 loss or deletion did not predict
biochemical relapse after radical prostatectomy. Collectively, these data suggest
that although TMPRSS2-ERG fusion and loss of NKX3.1 are among the most common
mutational events found in prostate cancer, and although each of them can
sensitize prostate epithelial cells for cooperating with other oncogenic events, 
these two events themselves do not appear to cooperate at a significant level in 
vivo to enhance prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4364018
PMID: 25780911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Discov. 2015 Mar;5(3):231-3. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0116.

Targeting ETV1 in gastrointestinal stromal tumors: tripping the circuit breaker
in GIST?

Duensing A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Department of Pathology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
aduensin@pitt.edu.

Comment on
    Cancer Discov. 2015 Mar;5(3):304-15.

Activating mutations in the KIT or PDGFRA receptor tyrosine kinase genes are the 
key oncogenic drivers in the majority of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), 
but novel results now show that aberrant kinase signaling is potentiated by a
positive feedback circuit that involves the ETS transcription factor ETV1.
Targeting ETV1 can disrupt this circuit and represents a promising new
therapeutic approach for the treatment of GISTs.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25749973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 May;77:106-16. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.02.021. Epub 2015 Mar 
5.

Disruption of neurogenesis and cortical development in transgenic mice
misexpressing Olig2, a gene in the Down syndrome critical region.

Liu W(1), Zhou H(2), Liu L(2), Zhao C(3), Deng Y(3), Chen L(2), Wu L(3),
Mandrycky N(4), McNabb CT(5), Peng Y(5), Fuchs PN(5), Lu J(6), Sheen V(6), Qiu
M(7), Mao M(8), Lu QR(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, 610041, PR China; Department of Pediatrics, Brain Tumor Center, Division
of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cancer and Blood Diseases
Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 25229,
USA; Key Laboratory of Obstetrics & Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth 
Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, 610041, PR China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, West China Second
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, PR China. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Brain Tumor Center, Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer
Biology, Cancer and Blood Diseases Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 25229, USA. (4)Department of Developmental
Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, TX 75390, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Arlington, TX 76019, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (7)Institute of Developmental and Regenerative
Biology, Key Laboratory of Organ Development and Regeneration of Zhejiang
Province, College of Life Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, 310029,
PR China; Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA. (8)Department of Pediatrics, West China
Second Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, PR China; Key Laboratory of
Obstetrics & Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of 
Education, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, PR
China. (9)Department of Pediatrics, Brain Tumor Center, Division of Experimental 
Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cancer and Blood Diseases Institute, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 25229, USA; Key Laboratory of 
Obstetrics & Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of 
Education, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, PR
China; Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
Shanghai, 201102, PR China. Electronic address: richard.lu@cchmc.org.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Olig2 is crucial for
mammalian central nervous system development. Human ortholog OLIG2 is located in 
the Down syndrome critical region in trisomy 21. To investigate the effect of
Olig2 misexpression on brain development, we generated a developmentally
regulated Olig2-overexpressing transgenic line with a Cre/loxP system. The
transgenic mice with Olig2 misexpression in cortical neural stem/progenitor cells
exhibited microcephaly, cortical dyslamination, hippocampus malformation, and
profound motor deficits. Ectopic misexpression of Olig2 impaired cortical
progenitor proliferation and caused precocious cell cycle exit. Massive neuronal 
cell death was detected in the developing cortex of Olig2-misexpressing mice. In 
addition, Olig2 misexpression led to a significant downregulation of neuronal
specification factors including Ngn1, Ngn2 and Pax6, and a defect in cortical
neurogenesis. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation and sequencing (ChIP-Seq) analysis
indicates that Olig2 directly targets the promoter and/or enhancer regions of
Nfatc4, Dscr1/Rcan1 and Dyrk1a, the critical neurogenic genes that contribute to 
Down syndrome phenotypes, and inhibits their expression. Together, our study
suggests that Olig2 misexpression in neural stem cells elicits neurogenesis
defects and neuronal cell death, which may contribute to developmental disorders 
including Down syndrome, where OLIG2 is triplicated on chromosomal 21.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4428323 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25747816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cancer Genet. 2015 Mar;208(3):55-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.12.007. Epub
2015 Jan 6.

Expression of Kit and Etv1 in restricted brain regions supports a brain-cell
progenitor as an origin for cranial germinomas.

Tan C(1), Scotting P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Queen's Medical Centre Medical School, Nottingham, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: ccl.tan@outlook.com. (2)Queen's Medical Centre Medical School,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Mismigrating germ-cell progenitors have historically been accepted as the cell of
origin for central nervous system (CNS) germinomas. However, an alternative
hypothesis suggests that CNS germinomas arise from a brain-cell progenitor.
Germinomas often acquire Kit signaling pathway mutations, and there is evidence
for an oncogenic relationship between KIT and the ETV1 transcription factor. KIT 
appears to be necessary to stabilize ETV1, and ETV1 then activates
oncogenesis-associated genes. ETV1 expression is not increased by KIT, so ETV1
already needs to be expressed in order for KIT to have an oncogenic function.
Therefore, if brain-cell progenitors are the cell of origin for germinomas, those
cells would already need to coexpress ETV1 and KIT. We examined Kit and Etv1 in
situ hybridization data from the Allen Brain Atlas, for mouse brain tissue at
various stages of development. Both Kit and Etv1 were expressed in the regions
where germinomas most commonly arise, and in the medulla oblongata. All human
cases of germinomas correlated to the regions where ETV1 and KIT are coexpressed.
We therefore postulate that germinomas in the brain share a similar mechanism
with other KIT-driven cancers, which supports the hypothesis that germinomas
arise from a brain-cell progenitor.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25736805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Discov. 2015 May;5(5):550-63. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-1050. Epub 2015
Feb 4.

Suppression of CHK1 by ETS Family Members Promotes DNA Damage Response Bypass and
Tumorigenesis.

Lunardi A(1), Varmeh S(1), Chen M(1), Taulli R(1), Guarnerio J(1), Ala U(1),
Seitzer N(1), Ishikawa T(1), Carver BS(2), Hobbs RM(1), Quarantotti V(1), Ng
C(1), Berger AH(1), Nardella C(1), Poliseno L(1), Montironi R(3), Castillo-Martin
M(4), Cordon-Cardo C(4), Signoretti S(5), Pandolfi PP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Department of 
Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan
Kettering Institute, Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (3)Institute of Pathological Anatomy
and Histopathology, Polytechnic University of the Marche Region (Ancona), United 
Hospitals, Ancona, Italy. (4)Department of Pathology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York. (5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (6)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center,
Department of Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. ppandolf@bidmc.harvard.edu.

The ETS family of transcription factors has been repeatedly implicated in
tumorigenesis. In prostate cancer, ETS family members, such as ERG, ETV1, ETV4,
and ETV5, are frequently overexpressed due to chromosomal translocations, but the
molecular mechanisms by which they promote prostate tumorigenesis remain largely 
undefined. Here, we show that ETS family members, such as ERG and ETV1, directly 
repress the expression of the checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1), a key DNA damage
response cell-cycle regulator essential for the maintenance of genome integrity. 
Critically, we find that ERG expression correlates with CHK1 downregulation in
human patients and demonstrate that Chk1 heterozygosity promotes the progression 
of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia into prostatic invasive
carcinoma in Pten(+) (/-) mice. Importantly, CHK1 downregulation sensitizes
prostate tumor cells to etoposide but not to docetaxel treatment. Thus, we
identify CHK1 as a key functional target of the ETS proto-oncogenic family with
important therapeutic implications.SIGNIFICANCE: Genetic translocation and
aberrant expression of ETS family members is a common event in different types of
human tumors. Here, we show that through the transcriptional repression of CHK1, 
ETS factors may favor DNA damage accumulation and consequent genetic instability 
in proliferating cells. Importantly, our findings provide a rationale for testing
DNA replication inhibitor agents in ETS-positive TP53-proficient tumors.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25653093  [PubMed - in process]


31. Horm Cancer. 2015 Jun;6(2-3):67-86. doi: 10.1007/s12672-014-0215-9. Epub 2015 Jan
29.

Interaction of the Androgen Receptor, ETV1, and PTEN Pathways in Mouse Prostate
Varies with Pathological Stage and Predicts Cancer Progression.

Higgins J(1), Brogley M, Palanisamy N, Mehra R, Ittmann MM, Li JZ, Tomlins SA,
Robins DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

To examine the impact of common somatic mutations in prostate cancer (PCa) on
androgen receptor (AR) signaling, mouse models were designed to perturb
sequentially the AR, ETV1, and PTEN pathways. Mice with "humanized" AR (hAR)
alleles that modified AR transcriptional strength by varying polyglutamine tract 
(Q-tract) length were crossed with mice expressing a prostate-specific,
AR-responsive ETV1 transgene (ETV1(Tg)). While hAR allele did not grossly affect 
ETV1-induced neoplasia, ETV1 strongly antagonized global AR regulation and
repressed critical androgen-induced differentiation and tumor suppressor genes,
such as Nkx3-1 and Hoxb13. When Pten was varied to determine its impact on
disease progression, mice lacking one Pten allele (Pten(+/-) ) developed more
frequent prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). Yet, only those with the ETV1
transgene progressed to invasive adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, progression was
more frequent with the short Q-tract (stronger) AR, suggesting that the AR, ETV1,
and PTEN pathways cooperate in aggressive disease. On the Pten(+/-) background,
ETV1 had markedly less effect on AR target genes. However, a strong inflammatory 
gene expression signature, notably upregulation of Cxcl16, was induced by ETV1.
Comparison of mouse and human patient data stratified by the presence of E26
transformation-specific ETS fusion genes highlighted additional factors, some not
previously associated with prostate cancer but for which targeted therapies are
in development for other diseases. In sum, concerted use of these mouse models
illuminates the complex interplay of AR, ETV1, and PTEN pathways in pre-cancerous
neoplasia and early tumorigenesis, disease stages difficult to analyze in man.

PMCID: PMC4414739 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25631336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nature. 2015 Apr 16;520(7547):349-52. doi: 10.1038/nature14108. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Thirst driving and suppressing signals encoded by distinct neural populations in 
the brain.

Oka Y(1), Ye M(1), Zuker CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Columbia University,
New York, New York 10032, USA [2] Department of Neuroscience, Columbia College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Columbia University,
New York, New York 10032, USA.

Thirst is the basic instinct to drink water. Previously, it was shown that
neurons in several circumventricular organs of the hypothalamus are activated by 
thirst-inducing conditions. Here we identify two distinct, genetically separable 
neural populations in the subfornical organ that trigger or suppress thirst. We
show that optogenetic activation of subfornical organ excitatory neurons, marked 
by the expression of the transcription factor ETV-1, evokes intense drinking
behaviour, and does so even in fully water-satiated animals. The light-induced
response is highly specific for water, immediate and strictly locked to the laser
stimulus. In contrast, activation of a second population of subfornical organ
neurons, marked by expression of the vesicular GABA transporter VGAT, drastically
suppresses drinking, even in water-craving thirsty animals. These results reveal 
an innate brain circuit that can turn an animal's water-drinking behaviour on and
off, and probably functions as a centre for thirst control in the mammalian
brain.

PMCID: PMC4401619
PMID: 25624099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 10;6(7):5217-36.

Specific and redundant activities of ETV1 and ETV4 in prostate cancer
aggressiveness revealed by co-overexpression cellular contexts.

Mesquita D(1), Barros-Silva JD(1), Santos J(1), Skotheim RI(2,)(3), Lothe
RA(2,)(3), Paulo P(1,)(2,)(3), Teixeira MR(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cancer Genetics Group - CI-IPOP, Portuguese
Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal. (2)Department of Cancer Prevention,
Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Nydalen, Oslo, Norway. (3)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (4)Department of Pathology and
Molecular Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS),
University of Porto, Portugal.

Genomic rearrangements involving ETS transcription factors are found in 50-70% of
prostate carcinomas. While the large majority of the rearrangements involve ERG, 
around 10% involve members of the PEA3 subfamily (ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5). Using a
panel of prostate cancer cell lines we found co-overexpression of ETV1 and ETV4
in two cell line models of advanced prostate cancer (MDA-PCa-2b and PC3) and
questioned whether these PEA3 family members would cooperate in the acquisition
of oncogenic properties or show functional redundancy. Using shRNAs we found that
ETV1 and ETV4 have partially overlapping functions, with ETV1 being more relevant
for cell invasion and ETV4 for anchorage-independent growth. In vitro expression 
signatures revealed the regulation of both specific and shared candidate targets 
that may resemble cellular mechanisms in vivo by interaction with the same
intermediate partners. By combining the phenotypic impact data and the gene
expression profiles of in vitro models with clinico-pathological features and
gene expression profiles of ETS-subtyped tumors, we identified a set of eight
genes associated with advanced stage and a set of three genes associated with
higher Gleason score, supporting an oncogenic role of ETV1 and ETV4
overexpression and revealing gene sets that may be useful as prognostic markers.

PMCID: PMC4467144
PMID: 25595908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Discov. 2015 Mar;5(3):304-15. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0985. Epub 2015
Jan 8.

Combined inhibition of MAP kinase and KIT signaling synergistically destabilizes 
ETV1 and suppresses GIST tumor growth.

Ran L(1), Sirota I(1), Cao Z(1), Murphy D(1), Chen Y(1), Shukla S(1), Xie Y(1),
Kaufmann MC(2), Gao D(1), Zhu S(1), Rossi F(3), Wongvipat J(1), Taguchi T(4), Tap
WD(5), Mellinghoff IK(6), Besmer P(3), Antonescu CR(7), Chen Y(8), Chi P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York. (2)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Department of Pharmacology,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. (3)Developmental Biology
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (4)Division 
of Human Health and Medical Science, Graduate School of Kuroshio Science, Kochi
University, Nankoku, Kochi, Japan. (5)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. (6)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Department
of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. Department of
Neurology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
(7)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. (8)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York. Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York. Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical 
College, New York, New York. Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, New York. chip@mskcc.org cheny1@mskcc.org.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2015 Mar;5(3):231-3.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), originating from the interstitial cells of
Cajal (ICC), is characterized by frequent activating mutations of the KIT
receptor tyrosine kinase. Despite the clinical success of imatinib, which targets
KIT, most patients with advanced GIST develop resistance and eventually die of
the disease. The ETS family transcription factor ETV1 is a master regulator of
the ICC lineage. Using mouse models of Kit activation and Etv1 ablation, we
demonstrate that ETV1 is required for GIST initiation and proliferation in vivo, 
validating it as a therapeutic target. We further uncover a positive feedback
circuit where MAP kinase activation downstream of KIT stabilizes the ETV1
protein, and ETV1 positively regulates KIT expression. Combined targeting of ETV1
stability by imatinib and MEK162 resulted in increased growth suppression in
vitro and complete tumor regression in vivo. The combination strategy to target
ETV1 may provide an effective therapeutic strategy in GIST clinical
management.SIGNIFICANCE: ETV1 is a lineage-specific oncogenic transcription
factor required for the growth and survival of GIST. We describe a novel strategy
of targeting ETV1 protein stability by the combination of MEK and KIT inhibitors 
that synergistically suppress tumor growth. This strategy has the potential to
change first-line therapy in GIST clinical management.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4355391
PMID: 25572173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Apr 1;113(7):2014-32. doi: 10.1152/jn.00524.2014. Epub 2015 
Jan 7.

Electrophysiological properties of genetically identified subtypes of layer 5
neocortical pyramidal neurons: Ca²<U+207A> dependence and differential modulation by
norepinephrine.

Guan D(1), Armstrong WE(1), Foehring RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, Memphis, Tennessee. (2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University
of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee rfoehrin@uthsc.edu.

We studied neocortical pyramidal neurons from two lines of bacterial artificial
chromosome mice (etv1 and glt; Gene Expression Nervous System Atlas: GENSAT
project), each of which expresses enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) in a 
different subpopulation of layer 5 pyramidal neurons. In barrel cortex, etv1 and 
glt pyramidal cells were previously reported to differ in terms of their laminar 
distribution, morphology, thalamic inputs, cellular targets, and receptive field 
size. In this study, we measured the laminar distribution of etv1 and glt cells. 
On average, glt cells were located more deeply; however, the distributions of
etv1 and glt cells extensively overlap in layer 5. To test whether these two cell
types differed in electrophysiological properties that influence firing behavior,
we prepared acute brain slices from 2-4-wk-old mice, where EGFP-positive cells in
somatosensory cortex were identified under epifluorescence and then studied using
whole cell current- or voltage-clamp recordings. We studied the details of action
potential parameters and repetitive firing, characterized by the larger slow
afterhyperpolarizations (AHPs) in etv1 neurons and larger medium AHPs (mAHPS) in 
glt cells, and compared currents underlying the mAHP and slow AHP (sAHP) in etv1 
and glt neurons. Etv1 cells exhibited lower dV/dt for spike polarization and
repolarization and reduced direct current (DC) gain (lower f-I slope) for
repetitive firing than glt cells. Most importantly, we found that 1) differences 
in the expression of Ca(2+)-dependent K(+) conductances (small-conductance
calcium-activated potassium channels and sAHP channels) determine major
functional differences between etv1 and glt cells, and 2) there is differential
modulation of etv1 and glt neurons by norepinephrine.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4416592
PMID: 25568159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3565-72. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2993-7. Epub 2014
Dec 28.

Overexpression of ETV4 is associated with poor prognosis in prostate cancer:
involvement of uPA/uPAR and MMPs.

Qi M(1), Liu Z, Shen C, Wang L, Zeng J, Wang C, Li C, Fu W, Sun Y, Han B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shandong University Medical School, Jinan, 250012,
China.

ETS gene fusions involving ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and FLI1 define a distinct
class of prostate cancer (PCa), and this might have a bearing on diagnosis,
prognosis, and rational therapeutic targeting. In the current study, we focused
on the clinicopathological significance of ETV4 in Chinese PCa patients and the
mechanisms whereby ETV4 overexpression mediates tumor invasion in the prostate.
Overall, ETV4 overexpression was identified in 30.4 % (45/148) of PCa cases by
immunohistochemistry. Accordingly, ETV4 was rearranged in only 1.6 % (2/128) of
PCa patients. Clinically, ETV4 overexpression was significantly correlated with
Gleason score (P = 0.045) and pathological tumor stage (P = 0.041). Multivariate 
Cox regression analysis indicated that ETV4 is an unfavorable independent
prognostic factor (P = 0.040). Functional studies further showed that small
interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of ETV4 significantly decreases proliferation
and invasion of PC-3 cell and partially reverses epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in vitro. Notably, ETV4 knockdown significantly downregulated
expression of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor (uPAR) at
messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that ETV4 regulates uPA expression through direct binding to its
promoter region. Additionally, ETV4 knockdown was also observed to significantly 
inhibit expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9. In conclusion, 
for the first time, our study suggested that ETV4 is an independent poor
prognostic factor in Chinese PCa patients. Silencing of ETV4 suppresses invasion 
of PCa cells by inhibiting the expression of uPA/uPAR as well as MMPs. Further
studies will be needed to determine whether ETV4 could be regarded as a potential
target for the management and prevention of PCa.

PMID: 25544710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Rep. 2014 Dec 24;9(6):2001-10. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.022. Epub 2014 
Dec 11.

Genomic and functional overlap between somatic and germline chromosomal
rearrangements.

van Heesch S(1), Simonis M(1), van Roosmalen MJ(2), Pillalamarri V(3), Brand
H(3), Kuijk EW(1), de Luca KL(1), Lansu N(1), Braat AK(4), Menelaou A(2), Hao
W(1), Korving J(1), Snijder S(5), van der Veken LT(2), Hochstenbach R(2), Knegt
AC(5), Duran K(2), Renkens I(2), Alekozai N(2), Jager M(2), Vergult S(6), Menten 
B(6), de Bruijn E(1), Boymans S(1), Ippel E(2), van Binsbergen E(2), Talkowski
ME(3), Lichtenbelt K(2), Cuppen E(7), Kloosterman WP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 
3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, Center for
Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584
CG Utrecht, the Netherlands. (3)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (4)Department of Cell Biology, Center
for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100,
3584 CX Utrecht, the Netherlands. (5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic
Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (6)Center for
Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium. (7)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands; Department of Medical Genetics, 
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
e.cuppen@hubrecht.eu. (8)Department of Medical Genetics, Center for Molecular
Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG
Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address: w.kloosterman@umcutrecht.nl.

Genomic rearrangements are a common cause of human congenital abnormalities.
However, their origin and consequences are poorly understood. We performed
molecular analysis of two patients with congenital disease who carried de novo
genomic rearrangements. We found that the rearrangements in both patients hit
genes that are recurrently rearranged in cancer (ETV1, FOXP1, and microRNA
cluster C19MC) and drive formation of fusion genes similar to those described in 
cancer. Subsequent analysis of a large set of 552 de novo germline genomic
rearrangements underlying congenital disorders revealed enrichment for genes
rearranged in cancer and overlap with somatic cancer breakpoints. Breakpoints of 
common (inherited) germline structural variations also overlap with cancer
breakpoints but are depleted for cancer genes. We propose that the same genomic
positions are prone to genomic rearrangements in germline and soma but that
timing and context of breakage determines whether developmental defects or cancer
are promoted.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25497101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 5;9(12):e114260. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114260.
eCollection 2014.

A small molecule inhibitor of ETV1, YK-4-279, prevents prostate cancer growth and
metastasis in a mouse xenograft model.

Rahim S(1), Minas T(1), Hong SH(1), Justvig S(1), Çelik H(1), Kont YS(1), Han
J(1), Kallarakal AT(1), Kong Y(1), Rudek MA(2), Brown ML(1), Kallakury B(1),
Toretsky JA(1), Üren A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, DC, United States of America. (2)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The erythroblastosis virus E26 transforming sequences (ETS) family of
transcription factors consists of a highly conserved group of genes that play
important roles in cellular proliferation, differentiation, migration and
invasion. Chromosomal translocations fusing ETS factors to promoters of androgen 
responsive genes have been found in prostate cancers, including the most
clinically aggressive forms. ERG and ETV1 are the most commonly translocated ETS 
proteins. Over-expression of these proteins in prostate cancer cells results in a
more invasive phenotype. Inhibition of ETS activity by small molecule inhibitors 
may provide a novel method for the treatment of prostate cancer.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We recently demonstrated that the small molecule YK-4-279
inhibits biological activity of ETV1 in fusion-positive prostate cancer cells
leading to decreased motility and invasion in-vitro. Here, we present data from
an in-vivo mouse xenograft model. SCID-beige mice were subcutaneously implanted
with fusion-positive LNCaP-luc-M6 and fusion-negative PC-3M-luc-C6 tumors.
Animals were treated with YK-4-279, and its effects on primary tumor growth and
lung metastasis were evaluated. YK-4-279 treatment resulted in decreased growth
of the primary tumor only in LNCaP-luc-M6 cohort. When primary tumors were grown 
to comparable sizes, YK-4-279 inhibited tumor metastasis to the lungs. Expression
of ETV1 target genes MMP7, FKBP10 and GLYATL2 were reduced in YK-4-279 treated
animals. ETS fusion-negative PC-3M-luc-C6 xenografts were unresponsive to the
compound. Furthermore, YK-4-279 is a chiral molecule that exists as a racemic
mixture of R and S enantiomers. We established that (S)-YK-4-279 is the active
enantiomer in prostate cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that YK-4-279 is a potent inhibitor of ETV1
and inhibits both the primary tumor growth and metastasis of fusion positive
prostate cancer xenografts. Therefore, YK-4-279 or similar compounds may be
evaluated as a potential therapeutic tool for treatment of human prostate cancer 
at different stages.

PMCID: PMC4257561
PMID: 25479232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Acta Odontol Scand. 2015 Feb;73(2):93-100. doi: 10.3109/00016357.2014.956143.
Epub 2014 Nov 7.

Genome-wide gene expression profiles of dental follicle stem cells.

Vollkommer T(1), Gosau M, Felthaus O, Reichert TE, Morsczeck C, Götz W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery , Regensburg , Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Dental stem cells (SCs) will be increasingly used for bone
regeneration in the future. Recently, dental follicle cells (DFCs) from retained 
human third molars have been isolated and characterized as osteogenic
progenitors. Although these results are promising for regenerative dentistry,
molecular processes during osteogenic differentiation are not yet well
understood.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study compared DFCs before and during osteogenic
differentiation. ALP activity was measured and cells were stained with alizarin
red. Real-time RT-PCRs for osteogenic markers were done. The genome-wide
expression profile was evaluated using a microarray.
RESULTS: DFCs showed strong mineralization and increased expression of osteogenic
marker genes during osteogenic differentiation. A microarray analysis showed
regulated genes before and in the process of osteogenic differentiation (day 7). 
Several regulated genes in DFCs were associated with skeletal development.
Bioinformatic analysis revealed a number of factors associated with dental
follicle osteogenic differentiation. Osteogenic differentiation affected
expression levels of the transcriptional regulators FOXC2 and ZNF219.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, the results yielded new objectives for further studies
on transcription factors like FOXC2 or ETV1 and their role in dental SCs during
osteogenic differentiation.

PMID: 25376664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 16;10(10):e1004645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004645.
eCollection 2014.

An integrated cell purification and genomics strategy reveals multiple regulators
of pancreas development.

Benitez CM(1), Qu K(2), Sugiyama T(1), Pauerstein PT(1), Liu Y(1), Tsai J(1), Gu 
X(1), Ghodasara A(1), Arda HE(1), Zhang J(2), Dekker JD(3), Tucker HO(3), Chang
HY(4), Kim SK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, United States of America. (2)Program in Epithelial Biology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of
America. (3)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology and Department of
Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United
States of America. (4)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School
of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America; Department of
Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine,, Stanford, California,
United States of America; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America. (5)Department
of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America;
Department of Medicine (Oncology Division), Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.

The regulatory logic underlying global transcriptional programs controlling
development of visceral organs like the pancreas remains undiscovered. Here, we
profiled gene expression in 12 purified populations of fetal and adult pancreatic
epithelial cells representing crucial progenitor cell subsets, and their
endocrine or exocrine progeny. Using probabilistic models to decode the general
programs organizing gene expression, we identified co-expressed gene sets in cell
subsets that revealed patterns and processes governing progenitor cell
development, lineage specification, and endocrine cell maturation. Purification
of Neurog3 mutant cells and module network analysis linked established regulators
such as Neurog3 to unrecognized gene targets and roles in pancreas development.
Iterative module network analysis nominated and prioritized transcriptional
regulators, including diabetes risk genes. Functional validation of a subset of
candidate regulators with corresponding mutant mice revealed that the
transcription factors Etv1, Prdm16, Runx1t1 and Bcl11a are essential for pancreas
development. Our integrated approach provides a unique framework for identifying 
regulatory genes and functional gene sets underlying pancreas development and
associated diseases such as diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC4199491
PMID: 25330008  [PubMed - in process]


41. Br J Cancer. 2014 Nov 11;111(10):2024-32. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.538. Epub 2014
Oct 14.

TERT promoter mutations in gliomas, genetic associations and clinico-pathological
correlations.

Labussière M(1), Di Stefano AL(2), Gleize V(1), Boisselier B(3), Giry M(1),
Mangesius S(1), Bruno A(1), Paterra R(4), Marie Y(5), Rahimian A(6), Finocchiaro 
G(4), Houlston RS(7), Hoang-Xuan K(8), Idbaih A(8), Delattre JY(9), Mokhtari
K(10), Sanson M(9).

Author information: 
(1)1] Sorbonne Universités, UMPC Univ Paris 06, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut
du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris 75013, France [2] INSERM U 1127, Paris
75013, France [3] CNRS, UMR 7225, Paris 75013, France. (2)1] Sorbonne
Universités, UMPC Univ Paris 06, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et 
de la Moelle épinière, Paris 75013, France [2] INSERM U 1127, Paris 75013, France
[3] CNRS, UMR 7225, Paris 75013, France [4] National Neurological Institute C.
Mondino, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy. (3)1] Sorbonne Universités,
UMPC Univ Paris 06, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle 
épinière, Paris 75013, France [2] INSERM U 1127, Paris 75013, France [3] CNRS,
UMR 7225, Paris 75013, France [4] Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière
(ICM), Plateforme de Génotypage Séquençage, Paris 75013, France. (4)Dipartimento 
di Neuro Oncologia Molecolare Fondazione I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Neurologico C.
Besta, Milano 20134, Italy. (5)1] Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière
(ICM), Plateforme de Génotypage Séquençage, Paris 75013, France [2]
Onconeurothèque, Paris 75013, France. (6)1] Sorbonne Universités, UMPC Univ Paris
06, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris 
75013, France [2] INSERM U 1127, Paris 75013, France [3] CNRS, UMR 7225, Paris
75013, France [4] Onconeurothèque, Paris 75013, France. (7)Division of Genetics
and Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK. (8)1]
Sorbonne Universités, UMPC Univ Paris 06, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du
Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris 75013, France [2] INSERM U 1127, Paris
75013, France [3] CNRS, UMR 7225, Paris 75013, France [4] AP-HP, Groupe
Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service de Neurologie 2, Paris 75013, France.
(9)1] Sorbonne Universités, UMPC Univ Paris 06, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut
du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris 75013, France [2] INSERM U 1127, Paris
75013, France [3] CNRS, UMR 7225, Paris 75013, France [4] Onconeurothèque, Paris 
75013, France [5] AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service de
Neurologie 2, Paris 75013, France. (10)1] Sorbonne Universités, UMPC Univ Paris
06, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris 
75013, France [2] INSERM U 1127, Paris 75013, France [3] CNRS, UMR 7225, Paris
75013, France [4] Onconeurothèque, Paris 75013, France [5] AP-HP, Groupe
Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Laboratoire de Neuropathologie R. Escourolle,
Paris 75013, France.

BACKGROUND: The role of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) in gliomagenesis 
has been recently further strengthened by the frequent occurrence of TERT
promoter mutations (TERTp-mut) in gliomas and evidence that the TERT SNP genetic 
rs2736100 influences glioma risk. TERTp-mut creates a binding site for Ets/TCF
transcription factors, whereas the common rs2853669 polymorphism disrupts another
Ets/TCF site on TERT promoter.
METHODS: We sequenced for TERTp-mut in 807 glioma DNAs and in 235 blood DNAs and 
analysed TERT expression by RT-PCR in 151 samples. TERTp-mut status and TERTp
polymorphism rs2853669 were correlated with histology, genomic profile, TERT mRNA
expression, clinical outcome and rs2736100 genotype.
RESULTS: TERTp-mut identified in 60.8% of gliomas (491 out of 807) was globally
associated with poorer outcome (Hazard ratio (HR)=1.50). We defined, based on
TERTp-mut and IDH mutation status, four prognostic groups: (1) TERTp-mut and
IDH-mut associated with 1p19q codeletion, overall survival (OS)>17 years; (2)
TERTp-wt and IDH-mut, associated with TP53 mutation, OS=97.5 months; (3) TERTp-wt
and IDH-wt, with no specific association, OS=31.6 months; (4) TERTp-mut and
IDH-wt, associated with EGFR amplification, OS=15.4 months. TERTp-mut was
associated with higher TERT mRNA expression, whereas the rs2853669 variant was
associated with lower TERT mRNA expression. The mutation of CIC (a repressor of
ETV1-5 belonging to the Ets/TCF family) was also associated with TERT mRNA
upregulation.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to IDH mutation status, defining the TERTp-mut status of
glial tumours should afford enhanced prognostic stratification of patients with
glioma. We also show that TERTp-mut, rs2853669 variant and CIC mutation influence
Tert expression. This effect could be mediated by Ets/TCF transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4229642
PMID: 25314060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Anticancer Drugs. 2015 Feb;26(2):160-6. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000171.

Zerumbone inhibits growth of hormone refractory prostate cancer cells by
inhibiting JAK2/STAT3 pathway and increases paclitaxel sensitivity.

Jorvig JE(1), Chakraborty A.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Roseman University of Health Sciences, Henderson, Nevada,
USA.

Zerumbone, a phytochemical isolated from Zingiber zerumbet has been shown
previously to exhibit antineoplastic activity. But, the effect of zerumbone in
prostate cancer has not been evaluated. Prostate cancer is frequently associated 
with elevated levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), which exerts its oncogenic effects 
through activation of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) followed by activation of the
transcription factor STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3). 
Here, we investigated whether the anticancer effects of zerumbone are mediated
through inhibition of the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway and whether zerumbone can 
increase the paclitaxel (PTX) sensitivity of prostate cancer cells. Zerumbone
exerted significant cytotoxicity of DU145 versus PC3 prostate cancer cells
through cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase followed by apoptosis. Zerumbone
selectively inhibited JAK2 in both DU145 and PC3 cells. However, the biological
axis of IL-6/JAK2/STAT3 was inhibited only in DU145 cells as no STAT3
phosphorylation was detected in PC3 cells even after IL-6 stimulation. Other
signaling pathways in DU145 cells remained unaffected. The expression of prostate
cancer-associated genes, including cyclin D1, IL-6, COX2, and ETV1, was blocked. 
Zerumbone also synergistically increased the sensitivity to PTX. Further
preclinical study might reveal the potential use of zerumbone as a
chemotherapeutic agent for hormone refractory prostate cancer where
IL-6/JAK2/STAT3 signaling is aberrantly active and may be combined with PTX.

PMID: 25243457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Sep;22(8):e32-40. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000095.

Novel RNA hybridization method for the in situ detection of ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 
gene fusions in prostate cancer.

Kunju LP(1), Carskadon S, Siddiqui J, Tomlins SA, Chinnaiyan AM, Palanisamy N.

Author information: 
(1)*Michigan Center for Translational Pathology Departments of Pathology
§Urology Comprehensive Cancer Center <U+2225>Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

The genetic basis of 50% to 60% of prostate cancer (PCa) is attributable to
rearrangements in E26 transformation-specific (ETS) (ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5), 
BRAF, and RAF1 genes and overexpression of SPINK1. The development and validation
of reliable detection methods are warranted to classify various molecular
subtypes of PCa for diagnostic and prognostic purposes. ETS gene rearrangements
are typically detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction methods. Recently, monoclonal
antibodies against ERG have been developed that detect the truncated ERG protein 
in immunohistochemical assays where staining levels are strongly correlated with 
ERG rearrangement status by fluorescence in situ hybridization. However, specific
antibodies for ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 are unavailable, challenging their clinical
use. We developed a novel RNA in situ hybridization-based assay for the in situ
detection of ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues
from prostate needle biopsies, prostatectomy, and metastatic PCa specimens using 
RNA probes. Further, with combined RNA in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry we identified a rare subset of PCa with dual ETS gene
rearrangements in collisions of independent tumor foci. The high specificity and 
sensitivity of RNA in situ hybridization provides an alternate method enabling
bright-field in situ detection of ETS gene aberrations in routine clinically
available PCa specimens.

PMCID: PMC4159774
PMID: 25203299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Urol Oncol. 2015 Mar;33(3):108.e5-13. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2014.07.015. Epub
2014 Aug 28.

Molecular profiling of ETS gene rearrangements in patients with prostate cancer
registered in REDEEM clinical trial.

Palanisamy N(1), Tsodikov A(2), Yan W(3), Suleman K(3), Rittmaster R(4), Lucia
SM(5), Chinnaiyan AM(6), Fleshner N(7), Kunju LP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI. (2)Department 
of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO. (6)Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; University of Michigan
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI; Department of Urology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. (7)Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI. Electronic
address: lkunju@med.umich.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Androgen-induced E26 transformation-specific (ETS) gene
fusion-positive tumors have been associated with aggressive prostate cancer. The 
aim is to evaluate the ETS gene rearrangement status on initial biopsy of
patients registered in the Reduction by Dutasteride of Clinical Progression
Events in Expectant Management trial study and determine if gene fusion status
was associated with disease progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Initial biopsy material from 146 men registered in
Reduction by Dutasteride of Clinical Progression Events in Expectant Management
trial study treated with dutasteride (73/146, 50%) and as placebo (73/146, 50%)
were reviewed, and ERG and SPINK1 immunohistochemistry was performed. ERG- and
SPINK1-negative cancer samples were evaluated for ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5
rearrangements by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Frequency of ETS gene
aberrations in both groups was correlated with cancer progression including
prostate-specific antigen progression, Gleason progression, and progression-free 
survival by logistic analysis, pairwise differences, and chunk likelihood ratio
tests for the genotype groups.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Of the 146 patients, 99 (67.8%) (placebo, 51;
dutasteride, 48) samples displayed the following Gleason patterns: 3+3 = 6 in 80 
(54.8%) (placebo, 39; dutasteride, 41), 3+4 = 7 in 18 (12.3%) (placebo, 11;
dutasteride, 7), and 4+4 = 8 in 1(0.68%) (placebo, 1). The remaining 47 samples
showed atypical glands in 5 (3.4%) (placebo, 2; dutasteride, 3), HGPIN in 9
(6.1%) (placebo, 5; dutasteride, 4), and benign in 33 (22.6%) (placebo, 15;
dutasteride, 18). Immunohistochemistry findings were positive for ERG and SPINK1 
in 56 (56%) (placebo, 31; dutasteride, 25) and 9 (6.1%) (placebo, 5; dutasteride,
4) cases, respectively. ETV1 and ETV4 rearrangements were noted in 2 cases (1.4%)
(placebo, 1; dutasteride, 1) and 1 (0.7%) (placebo, 1) case, respectively. No
significant differences in the incidence of prostate cancer molecular aberrations
between the groups were observed. There was no evidence that ETS fusion status
was associated with disease progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25175425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Biol. 2014 Oct 1;394(1):181-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.07.022. Epub 2014
Aug 7.

Etv1 and Ewsr1 cooperatively regulate limb mesenchymal Fgf10 expression in
response to apical ectodermal ridge-derived fibroblast growth factor signal.

Yamamoto-Shiraishi Y(1), Higuchi H(1), Yamamoto S(1), Hirano M(1), Kuroiwa A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan. (2)Division of Biological Science, 
Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
464-8602, Japan. Electronic address: akuro@nagoya-u.jp.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) expressed in the apical ectodermal ridge (AER)
and FGF10 expressed in the underlying mesoderm are essential for limb bud
outgrowth. Their expression is maintained through a positive feedback loop. We
identified the cis-regulatory element and trans-acting factors involved in the
AER-FGF-dependent transactivation of Fgf10. Etv1 and Ewsr1 stimulated
transcription from the Fgf10 promoter in the sub-AER mesenchyme of mouse and
chick limb buds in a conserved AGAAAR cluster-dependent manner. We found that
both Etv1 and Ewsr1 were necessary for Fgf10 expression and elongation of the
limb bud. In addition, Etv1 and AER-FGF synergistically stimulated Fgf10 promoter
activity in an Ewsr1-dependent manner. We also found that Etv1 and Ewsr1 bound to
the segment of DNA containing the AGAAAR cluster in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, 
Etv1 directly bound to the AGAAAR sequence in vitro. Our results suggest that
Etv1 and Ewsr1 transactivate Fgf10 directly and cooperatively in response to
AER-FGFs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25109552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Arch Dermatol Res. 2014 Dec;306(10):873-84. doi: 10.1007/s00403-014-1490-6. Epub 
2014 Jul 30.

MAP kinase activity supported by BRAF (V600E) mutation rather than gene
amplification is associated with ETV1 expression in melanoma brain metastases.

Birner P(1), Berghoff AS, Dinhof C, Pirker C, Capper D, Schoppmann SF,
Petzelbauer P, von Deimling A, Berger W, Preusser M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology,
Ruprecht-Karls-University, Heidelberg, Germany, peter.birner@meduniwien.ac.at.

In primary melanoma, ETV1 transcription factor was suggested to be activated
mainly by gene amplification and to promote tumor growth in cooperation with BRAF
(V600E) . Aim of this study was to investigate ETV1 expression in human melanoma 
with a focus on brain metastases. We investigated ETV1 in 68 human melanoma brain
metastases using FISH for ETV1 gene (located at chromosome 7p21) and centromere
chromosome 7 and immunohistochemistry for ETV1, BRAF (V600E) , and ETV1/BRAF
associated proteins pMSK1, pRSK1, pp38, pMEK1/2, MAPKAP kinase 2, CIC, HIF-1alpha
and Ki-67. We further studied ETV1 copy number variations in 32 melanoma cell
lines from primary and metastatic lesions using array CGH. The influence of the
MAP kinase pathway activity on ETV1 mRNA and protein expression under BRAF
wild-type and BRAF (V600E) conditions were determined in melanoma cell lines
using qRT-PCR and Western Blot. No ETV1 high grade amplifications were observed
in tissue samples, but low grade ETV1 gene amplifications were found in 7
(10.3 %) melanoma brain metastases. ETV1 protein expression in tissue samples
(15 %) correlated with BRAF (V600E) status (p = 0.007) and HIF-1alpha expression 
(p = 0.049), but not with ETV1 gene dose. Application of the BRAF(V600E)-specific
inhibitor vemurafenib and the BRAF(V6ooE/V600K)-inhibitor dabrafenib revealed
predominant regulation of ETV-1 mRNA and protein via MAPK-pathway. ETV1
expression is a rare event in human melanoma and seems to be rather based on
hyperactivation of MAPK signals, by BRAF (V600E) mutation, than on ETV1 gene
amplification. Consequently, therapeutic inhibition of BRAF and the downstream
MAPK pathway also down-regulates oncogenic ETV1 expression.

PMID: 25073704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Oct;15(10):1293-5. doi: 10.4161/cbt.29694. Epub 2014 Jul
9.

Prostate tumor development and androgen receptor function alterations in a new
mouse model with ERG overexpression and PTEN inactivation.

Srivastava A(1), Price DK(1), Figg WD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genitourinary Malignancies Branch; Center for Cancer Research; National Cancer
Institute; Bethesda, MD USA.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2013 Aug;19(8):1023-9.

Gene fusions involving ETS transcription factors (predominantly ERG and ETV1) and
PTEN deletions are prevalent in the prostate cancer genome. This report describes
a novel mouse model that overexpresses ERG and lacks PTEN with the majority of
mice developing prostate tumors by 6 mo. Biological mechanisms suggest
increased/altered binding of the male hormone receptor in the genome. This model 
will be useful in pre-clinical evaluation of new drugs targeting these common
prostate cancer genomic alterations.

PMCID: PMC4130720
PMID: 25007053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Oncol Rep. 2014 Sep;32(3):927-34. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3281. Epub 2014 Jun 23.

Altered expression of ETV1 and its contribution to tumorigenic phenotypes in
gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Zhang Y(1), Gu ML(1), Zhou XX(1), Ma H(1), Yao HP(2), Ji F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, P.R. China. (2)Viral
Oncogenesis Section of the State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of
Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, P.R. China.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is the most common mesenchymal neoplasm of 
the gastrointestinal tract. ETV1 is a unique transcription factor specific to
GIST that has been reported to date. The present study aimed to determine
aberrant ETV1 expression and its contribution to tumorigenesis in GISTs. Altered 
expression levels of ETV1 and its relevant signaling pathways were assessed using
western blotting and quantitative real-time PCR in 72 paired patient tissue
samples. In addition, immunochemistry was performed on 156 GISTs using tissue
microarray to analyze the correlation between ETV1 and clinical parameters. The
results revealed that ETV1 was highly expressed in the GISTs at both the
transcription and protein levels. Immunochemical analysis revealed that increased
expression of ETV1 was correlated with KIT in the 156 patients. In addition, the 
frequency of ETV1 positivity was higher when compared with KIT [50.0% (9/18) vs
38.9% (7/18)] particularly in high-risk GISTs. Analysis of western blotting data 
showed that total protein isoforms of Raf, MEK and ERK were similar in the GIST
tissues as well as in the uninvolved normal tissues. In contrast, the level of
phospho-Raf, phospho-MEK and phospho-ERK were decreased in the tumor group.
Moreover, enhanced signaling molecules such as Bcl-2 and
Dvl2/GSK-3ß/ß-catenin/Smad2 were detected, showing a significant difference in
comparison with the uninvolved normal cases. We conclude that ETV1, a member of
the ETS family, is upregulated in GISTs, and its signaling is integrated into a
cellular signaling network for resistance to apoptosis, tumor cell invasion and
survival.

PMID: 24970355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cancer Invest. 2014 Aug;32(7):363-7. doi: 10.3109/07357907.2014.919304. Epub 2014
Jun 4.

Downregulation of CIC does not associate with overexpression of ETV1 or MAP
kinase pathway activation in gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Schoppmann SF(1), Ricken G, Ilhan-Mutlu A, Nirtl N, Streubel B, Preusser M,
Birner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery,1.

ETV1 is a key factor in gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), and is promoted
by CIC downregulation in melanoma. We investigated CIC, ETV1, and the MAPK
pathway in GIST. Downregulation of CIC protein levels as assessed by
immunostaining was seen in 17/144 GIST, but was not associated with ETV1 or
pMEK1/2 expression, KIT and PDGFRA mutations, copy number variations (CNV) of
19q13, and clinical factors. However, the data indicate that the incidence of CIC
downregulation may differ for GISTs in different locations in the
gastrointestinal tract, and that CNV of 19q13 is associated with shorter
disease-free survival.

PMID: 24897389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(7):3099-103.

TMPRSS2:ETS fusions and clinicopathologic characteristics of prostate cancer
patients from Eastern China.

Dong J(1), Xiao L, Sheng L, Xu J, Sun ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Huadong Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
E-mail : drzhongquan@sina.com.

TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusions in prostate cancer have a dominant prevalence of
approximately 50.0%, but infomration is limited on differences among ethnic and
geographical groups. Some studies focusing on Japanese and Korean patients
reported a lower incidence. Investigations concerning Chinese revealed
controversial results. We evaluated TMPRSS2:ERG, TMPRSS2:ETV1 and TMPRSS2:ETV4
fusions in more than 100 Eastern Chinese prostate cancer patients. Paraffin
blocks of needle biopsy and radical prostatectomy were collected from 91 and 18
patients respectively. All patients' clinicopathologic factors were gathered.
TMPRSS2:ERG, TMPRSS2:ETV1 and TMPRSS2:ETV4 fusions were tested by multi-probe
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay. TMPRSS2:ERG fusions was present 
in 14.3% biopsy specimens and 11.1% radical prostatectomy patients. Neither
TMPRSS2:ETV1 nor TMPRSS2:ETV4 fusion was found in any case. Altogether, 13
(86.7%) TMPRSS2:ERG fusion positive cases possessed deletion pattern and 7
(46.6%) and insertion pattern. Some 5 cases had both deletion and insertion
patterns. While 38.5% (5/13) patients with deletion pattern had distant
metastasis, except for one metastatic case harboring both deletion and insertion,
there were no patients with insertion pattern accompanied with metastasis. There 
were no differences between fusion positive and negative cases in the
distribution of age, PSA, Gleason score and TNM stage. Eastern Chinese prostate
cancer patients have a significantly low incidence of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion. They
also lack TMPRSS2:ETV1 and TMPRSS2:ETV4 fusion. There are more deletion pattern
than insertion pattern in TMPRSS2:ERG positive cases. Fusion positive and
negative patients have no clinicopathologic factor differences.

PMID: 24815454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(10):6256-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku281. Epub 2014
Apr 21.

The ETS family member GABPa modulates androgen receptor signalling and mediates
an aggressive phenotype in prostate cancer.

Sharma NL(1), Massie CE(2), Butter F(3), Mann M(3), Bon H(2), Ramos-Montoya A(2),
Menon S(4), Stark R(4), Lamb AD(2), Scott HE(2), Warren AY(5), Neal DE(6), Mills 
IG(7).

Author information: 
(1)Uro-oncology Research Group, CRUK Cambridge Institute, University of
Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK Department of 
Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.
(2)Uro-oncology Research Group, CRUK Cambridge Institute, University of
Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. (3)Department
of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am
Klopferspitz 18, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany. (4)Department of Bioinformatics,
Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2
0RE, UK. (5)Department of Pathology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK. (6)Uro-oncology Research Group, CRUK Cambridge Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK 
Department of Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK 
Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills
Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK den22@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (7)Uro-oncology Research
Group, CRUK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre,
Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK Prostate Cancer Research Group, Centre for
Molecular Medicine (Norway), Nordic EMBL Partnership, University of Oslo and Oslo
University Hospital, Gaustadalleen 21, Oslo N-0349, Norway Department of Cancer
Prevention and Department of Urology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo N-0349,
Norway.

In prostate cancer (PC), the androgen receptor (AR) is a key transcription factor
at all disease stages, including the advanced stage of castrate-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). In the present study, we show that GABPa, an ETS factor
that is up-regulated in PC, is an AR-interacting transcription factor. Expression
of GABPa enables PC cell lines to acquire some of the molecular and cellular
characteristics of CRPC tissues as well as more aggressive growth phenotypes.
GABPa has a transcriptional role that dissects the overlapping cistromes of the
two most common ETS gene fusions in PC: overlapping significantly with ETV1 but
not with ERG target genes. GABPa bound predominantly to gene promoters, regulated
the expression of one-third of AR target genes and modulated sensitivity to AR
antagonists in hormone responsive and castrate resistant PC models. This study
supports a critical role for GABPa in CRPC and reveals potential targets for
therapeutic intervention.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4041454
PMID: 24753418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Jun;13(6):1492-502. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0689.
Epub 2014 Apr 15.

A small molecule that binds and inhibits the ETV1 transcription factor
oncoprotein.

Pop MS(1), Stransky N(2), Garvie CW(2), Theurillat JP(1), Hartman EC(2), Lewis
TA(2), Zhong C(2), Culyba EK(2), Lin F(2), Daniels DS(2), Pagliarini R(2), Ronco 
L(2), Koehler AN(3), Garraway LA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston; Broad Institute; 
Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research; Department of Biological Engineering;
and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, MIT, Cambridge,
MassachusettsAuthors' Affiliations: Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston; Broad
Institute; Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research; Department of Biological
Engineering; and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, MIT, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston;
Broad Institute; Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research; Department of
Biological Engineering; and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, MIT, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. (3)Authors' Affiliations: Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston; Broad Institute; Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research; Department
of Biological Engineering; and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research,
MIT, Cambridge, MassachusettsAuthors' Affiliations: Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston; Broad Institute; Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research; Department
of Biological Engineering; and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research,
MIT, Cambridge, MassachusettsAuthors' Affiliations: Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston; Broad Institute; Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research; Department
of Biological Engineering; and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research,
MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts. (4)Authors' Affiliations: Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston; Broad Institute; Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research;
Department of Biological Engineering; and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer
Research, MIT, Cambridge, MassachusettsAuthors' Affiliations: Dana Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston; Broad Institute; Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research;
Department of Biological Engineering; and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer
Research, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts levi_garraway@dfci.harvard.edu.

Members of the ETS transcription factor family have been implicated in several
cancers, where they are often dysregulated by genomic derangement. ETS variant 1 
(ETV1) is an ETS factor gene that undergoes chromosomal translocation in prostate
cancers and Ewing sarcomas, amplification in melanomas, and lineage dysregulation
in gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Pharmacologic perturbation of ETV1 would be
appealing in these cancers; however, oncogenic transcription factors are often
deemed "undruggable" by conventional methods. Here, we used small-molecule
microarray screens to identify and characterize drug-like compounds that modulate
the biologic function of ETV1. We identified the 1,3,5-triazine small molecule
BRD32048 as a top candidate ETV1 perturbagen. BRD32048 binds ETV1 directly,
modulating both ETV1-mediated transcriptional activity and invasion of
ETV1-driven cancer cells. Moreover, BRD32048 inhibits p300-dependent acetylation 
of ETV1, thereby promoting its degradation. These results point to a new avenue
for pharmacologic ETV1 inhibition and may inform a general means to discover
small molecule perturbagens of transcription factor oncoproteins.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4154495
PMID: 24737027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Apr 15;2:45. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-45.

Layer-specific gene expression in epileptogenic type II focal cortical dysplasia:
normal-looking neurons reveal the presence of a hidden laminar organization.

Rossini L, Medici V, Tassi L, Cardinale F, Tringali G, Bramerio M, Villani F,
Spreafico R, Garbelli R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epileptology and Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, Istituto
Neurologico "C, Besta", Via Amadeo 42, 20133 Milano, Italy.
garbelli.r@istituto-besta.it.

BACKGROUND: Type II focal cortical dysplasias (FCDs) are malformations of
cortical development characterised by the disorganisation of the normal
neocortical structure and the presence of dysmorphic neurons (DNs) and balloon
cells (BCs). The pathogenesis of FCDs has not yet been clearly established,
although a number of histopathological patterns and molecular findings suggest
that they may be due to abnormal neuronal and glial proliferation and migration
processes.In order to gain further insights into cortical layering disruption and
investigate the origin of DNs and BCs, we used in situ RNA hybridisation of human
surgical specimens with a neuropathologically definite diagnosis of Type IIa/b
FCD and a panel of layer-specific genes (LSGs) whose expression covers all
cortical layers. We also used anti-phospho-S6 ribosomal protein antibody to
investigate mTOR pathway hyperactivation.
RESULTS: LSGs were expressed in both normal and abnormal cells (BCs and DNs) but 
their distribution was different. Normal-looking neurons, which were visibly
reduced in the core of the lesion, were apparently located in the appropriate
cortical laminae thus indicating a partial laminar organisation. On the contrary,
DNs and BCs, labelled with anti-phospho-S6 ribosomal protein antibody, were
spread throughout the cortex without any apparent rule and showed a highly
variable LSG expression pattern. Moreover, LSGs did not reveal any differences
between Type IIa and IIb FCD.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest the existence of hidden cortical lamination
involving normal-looking neurons, which retain their ability to migrate correctly
in the cortex, unlike DNs which, in addition to their morphological abnormalities
and mTOR hyperactivation, show an altered migratory pattern.Taken together these 
data suggest that an external or environmental hit affecting selected precursor
cells during the very early stages of cortical development may disrupt normal
cortical development.

PMCID: PMC4023625
PMID: 24735483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Jul;53(7):622-33. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22172. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

Distinct transcriptional signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 fusion-positive 
round cell tumors compared to EWSR1-rearranged Ewing sarcomas: further evidence
toward distinct pathologic entities.

Specht K(1), Sung YS, Zhang L, Richter GH, Fletcher CD, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Round cell sarcomas harboring CIC-DUX4 fusions have recently been described as
highly aggressive soft tissue tumors of children and young adults. Due to partial
morphologic and immunohistochemical overlap with Ewing sarcoma (ES),
CIC-DUX4-positive tumors have generally been classified as ES-like and managed
similarly; however, a systematic comparison at the molecular and
immunohistochemical levels between these two groups has not yet been conducted.
Based on an initial observation that CIC-DUX4-positive tumors show nuclear
immunoreactivity for WT1 and ETS transcription factors, FLI1 and ERG, we
performed a detailed immunohistochemical and molecular analysis including these
markers, to further investigate the relationship between CIC-DUX4 tumors and ES. 
The study group included 21 CIC-DUX4-positive sarcomas and 20 EWSR1-rearranged
ES. Immunohistochemically, CIC-DUX4 sarcomas showed membranous CD99 positivity in
18 (86%) cases, but only 5 (24%) with a diffuse pattern, while WT1 and FLI1 were 
strongly positive in all cases. ERG was positive in 18% of cases. All ES
expressed CD99 and FLI1, while ERG positivity was only seen in EWSR1-ERG fusion
positive ES. WT1 was negative in all ES. Expression profiling validated by q-PCR 
revealed a distinct gene signature associated with CIC-DUX4 fusion, with
upregulation of ETS transcription factors (ETV4, ETV1, and ETV5) and WT1, among
top overexpressed genes compared to ES, other sarcomas and normal tissue. In
conclusion, the distinct gene signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 sarcomas
suggest a distinct pathogenesis from ES. The consistent WT1 expression may
provide a useful clue in the diagnosis in the context of round cell sarcomas
negative for EWSR1 rearrangement. © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4108073
PMID: 24723486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 May 6;21(3):R143-52. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0390. Print
2014 Jun.

ETS fusion genes in prostate cancer.

Gasi Tandefelt D(1), Boormans J, Hermans K, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology Urology, Erasmus University Medical Centre, PO Box
2040, 2000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Prostate cancer is very common in elderly men in developed countries. Unravelling
the molecular and biological processes that contribute to tumor development and
progressive growth, including its heterogeneity, is a challenging task. The
fusion of the genes ERG and TMPRSS2 is the most frequent genomic alteration in
prostate cancer. ERG is an oncogene that encodes a member of the family of ETS
transcription factors. At lower frequency, other members of this gene family are 
also rearranged and overexpressed in prostate cancer. TMPRSS2 is an
androgen-regulated gene that is preferentially expressed in the prostate. Most of
the less frequent ETS fusion partners are also androgen-regulated and
prostate-specific. During the last few years, novel concepts of the process of
gene fusion have emerged, and initial experimental results explaining the
function of the ETS genes ERG and ETV1 in prostate cancer have been published. In
this review, we focus on the most relevant ETS gene fusions and summarize the
current knowledge of the role of ETS transcription factors in prostate cancer.
Finally, we discuss the clinical relevance of TMRPSS2-ERG and other ETS gene
fusions in prostate cancer.

PMID: 24659477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Sep 1;522(13):3106-19. doi: 10.1002/cne.23572. Epub 2014 Apr 
8.

Inversion of layer-specific cadherin expression profiles and maintenance of
cytoarchitectonic areas in the allocortex of the reeler mutant mouse.

Stoya G(1), Redies C, Schmid-Hertel N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, Friedrich Schiller University School of Medicine, Jena
University Hospital, 07743, Jena, Germany.

Cadherins are calcium-depending cell adhesion proteins that play critical roles
in brain morphogenesis and wiring. They provide an adhesive code for the
development of cortical layers, due to their homophilic interactions and their
restricted spatiotemporal expression patterns. In the adult organism, cadherins
are involved in the maintenance and plasticity of neuronal circuits that play a
role in learning. A well-known model for studying corticogenesis is the reeler
mouse model. Numerous investigations of neocortical development suggest that, in 
the reeler mutant mouse, the lack of the protein Reelin results in cell-type and 
region-dependent changes of the neocortical layers. To investigate in detail how 
layer formation and regionalization is perturbed in the phylogenetically older
archicortex of the adult reeler mutant mouse, we studied the expression of 11
different cadherins (Cdh4, Cdh7, Cdh8, Cdh11, Pcdh1, Pcdh7, Pcdh8, Pcdh9, Pcdh10,
Pcdh17, and Pcdh19) and of the transcription factors ER81 and Cux2 by in situ
hybridization in the (peri-)archicortex. All cadherins studied show a
layer-specific expression in the (peri-)archicortex of the wildtype brain. In the
archicortex of the reeler mutant, the cadherin-expressing cell layers are
dispersed in the radial dimension, whereas in the periarchicortex the superficial
and deep layers are inverted, both in the adult and during development. Possibly,
this inversion relates to the histoarchitectural division of the reeler
entorhinal cortex into an external and an internal zone. The regionalized,
gradient-like expression of the cadherins is preserved in the reeler mutant
mouse.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24591110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 27;9(1):e86784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086784. eCollection
2014.

Plakophilin-3 catenin associates with the ETV1/ER81 transcription factor to
positively modulate gene activity.

Munoz WA(1), Lee M(1), Miller RK(2), Ahmed Z(3), Ji H(2), Link TM(3), Lee GR(3), 
Kloc M(4), Ladbury JE(5), McCrea PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Program in
Genes & Development, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical
Science - Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
Texas, United States of America ; Center for Biomolecular Structure and Function,
The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United
States of America. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of
America ; Department of Surgery, Houston Methodist, Houston Methodist Research
Institute, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (5)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Program in Genes &
Development, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Science -
Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Center for Biomolecular Structure and 
Function, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas,
United States of America.

Members of the plakophilin-catenin sub-family (Pkp-1, -2, and -3) facilitate the 
linkage of desmosome junctional components to each other (e.g. desmosomal
cadherins to desmoplakin) and the intermediate-filament cytoskeleton. Pkps also
contribute to desmosomal stabilization and the trafficking of its components. The
functions of Pkps outside of the desmosome are less well studied, despite
evidence suggesting their roles in mRNA regulation, small-GTPase modulation (e.g.
mid-body scission) during cell division, and cell survival following DNA damage. 
Pkp-catenins are further believed to have roles in the nucleus given their
nuclear localization in some contexts and the known nuclear roles of structurally
related catenins, such as beta-catenin and p120-catenin. Further, Pkp-catenin
activities in the nuclear compartment have become of increased interest with the 
identification of interactions between Pkp2-catenin and RNA Pol III and Pkp1 with
single-stranded DNA. Consistent with earlier reports suggesting possible nuclear 
roles in development, we previously demonstrated prominent nuclear localization
of Pkp3 in Xenopus naïve ectoderm ("animal cap") cells and recently resolved a
similar localization in mouse embryonic stem cells. Here, we report the
association and positive functional interaction of Pkp3 with a transcription
factor, Ets variant gene 1 (ETV1), which has critical roles in neural development
and prominent roles in human genetic disease. Our results are the first to report
the interaction of a sequence-specific transcription factor with any Pkp. Using
Xenopus laevis embryos and mammalian cells, we provide evidence for the Pkp3:ETV1
complex on both biochemical and functional levels.

PMCID: PMC3903613
PMID: 24475179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Urol Oncol. 2014 Feb;32(2):213. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2013.08.016.

Commentary on "ETV1 directs androgen metabolism and confers aggressive prostate
cancer in targeted mice and patients." Baena E, Shao Z, Linn DE, Glass K, Hamblen
MJ, Fujiwara Y, Kim J, Nguyen M, Zhang X, Godinho FJ, Bronson RT, Mucci LA, Loda 
M, Yuan GC, Orkin SH, Li Z, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.: Genes Dev 2013;27(6):683-98.

Olumi AF.

Comment on
    Genes Dev. 2013 Mar 15;27(6):683-98.

Distinguishing aggressive from indolent disease and developing effective therapy 
for advanced disease are the major challenges in prostate cancer research.
Chromosomal rearrangements involving ETS transcription factors, such as ERG and
ETV1, occur frequently in prostate cancer. How they contribute to tumorigenesis
and whether they play similar or distinct in vivo roles remain elusive. Here we
show that in mice with ERG or ETV1 targeted to the endogenous Tmprss2 locus,
either factor cooperated with loss of a single copy of Pten, leading to localized
cancer, but only ETV1 appeared to support development of invasive adenocarcinoma 
under the background of full Pten loss. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that ERG
and ETV1 control a common transcriptional network but largely in an opposing
fashion. In particular, while ERG negatively regulates the androgen receptor (AR)
transcriptional program, ETV1 cooperates with AR signaling by favoring activation
of the AR transcriptional program. Furthermore, we found that ETV1 expression,
but not that of ERG, promotes autonomous testosterone production. Last, we
confirmed the association of an ETV1 expression signature with aggressive disease
and poorer outcome in patient data. The distinct biology of ETV1-associated
prostate cancer suggests that this disease class may require new therapies
directed to underlying programs controlled by ETV1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24445296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mech Dev. 2014 Feb;131:57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2013.10.003. Epub 2013 Nov 9.

The ETS transcription factor Etv1 mediates FGF signaling to initiate proneural
gene expression during Xenopus laevis retinal development.

Willardsen M(1), Hutcheson DA(1), Moore KB(1), Vetter ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. (2)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. Electronic 
address: monica.vetter@neuro.utah.edu.

Fibroblast growth factor signaling plays a significant role in the developing
eye, regulating both patterning and neurogenesis. Members of the
Pea3/Etv4-subfamily of ETS-domain transcription factors (Etv1, Etv4, and Etv5)
are transcriptional activators that are downstream targets of FGF/MAPK signaling,
but whether they are required for eye development is unknown. We show that in the
developing Xenopus laevis retina, etv1 is transiently expressed at the onset of
retinal neurogenesis. We found that etv1 is not required for eye specification,
but is required for the expression of atonal-related proneural bHLH transcription
factors, and is also required for retinal neuron differentiation. Using
transgenic reporters we show that the distal atoh7 enhancer, which is required
for the initiation of atoh7 expression in the Xenopus retina, is responsive to
both FGF signaling and etv1 expression. Thus, we conclude that Etv1 acts
downstream of FGF signaling to regulate the initiation of neurogenesis in the
Xenopus retina.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3959783
PMID: 24219979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):19348-53. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1319280110. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Dysregulation of synaptogenesis genes antecedes motor neuron pathology in spinal 
muscular atrophy.

Zhang Z(1), Pinto AM, Wan L, Wang W, Berg MG, Oliva I, Singh LN, Dengler C, Wei
Z, Dreyfuss G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6148.

The motor neuron (MN) degenerative disease, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is
caused by deficiency of SMN (survival motor neuron), a ubiquitous and
indispensable protein essential for biogenesis of snRNPs, key components of
pre-mRNA processing. However, SMA's hallmark MN pathology, including
neuromuscular junction (NMJ) disruption and sensory-motor circuitry impairment,
remains unexplained. Toward this end, we used deep RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to
determine if there are any transcriptome changes in MNs and surrounding spinal
cord glial cells (white matter, WM) microdissected from SMN-deficient SMA mouse
model at presymptomatic postnatal day 1 (P1), before detectable MN pathology
(P4-P5). The RNA-seq results, previously unavailable for SMA at any stage,
revealed cell-specific selective mRNA dysregulations (~300 of 11,000 expressed
genes in each, MN and WM), many of which are known to impair neurons. Remarkably,
these dysregulations include complete skipping of agrin's Z exons, critical for
NMJ maintenance, strong up-regulation of synapse pruning-promoting complement
factor C1q, and down-regulation of Etv1/ER81, a transcription factor required for
establishing sensory-motor circuitry. We propose that dysregulation of such
specific MN synaptogenesis genes, compounded by many additional transcriptome
abnormalities in MNs and WM, link SMN deficiency to SMA's signature pathology.

PMCID: PMC3845193
PMID: 24191055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 Dec;14(12):1167-73. doi: 10.4161/cbt.26883. Epub 2013 Oct 
23.

ETV1 positively regulates transcription of tumor suppressor ARF.

Zynda E(1), Jackson MW(2), Bhattacharya P(1), Kandel ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Stress Biology; Roswell Park Cancer Institute; Buffalo, NY 
USA. (2)Department of Pathology; Case Western Reserve University; Cleveland, OH
USA.

ETV1 (ETS variant 1) is a transcription factor from the ETS family and an
oncogene in several types of human malignancies. Paradoxically, a predicted
inactivating mutation in ETV1 was previously found in a clone of HT1080 cells
with reduced activity of p53. We report that elevated expression of ETV1 makes
p53-null tumor cells hypersensitive to restoration of said tumor suppressor.
Furthermore, elevated levels of either wild-type ETV1 or its truncated
derivative, dETV1, which mimics the product of an oncogenic rearrangement in
certain tumors, results in increased expression of mRNA for p14ARF, a known
activator of p53. Accordingly, expression of a luciferase reporter, which is
driven by a putative ARF promoter, was elevated by concomitant expression of
either ETV1 or dETV1. Our observations point to yet another example of a tumor
suppressor gene being activated by a potentially oncogenic signal. A better
understanding of the mechanisms that allow a cell to bypass such safeguards is
needed in order to predict and prevent the development of an oncogene-tolerant
state during cancer evolution.

PMCID: PMC3912040
PMID: 24157551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Oncol Rep. 2013 Dec;30(6):2859-63. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2776. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

ETV1 induces epithelial to mesenchymal transition in human gastric cancer cells
through the upregulation of Snail expression.

Li Z(1), Zhang L, Ma Z, Yang M, Tang J, Fu Y, Mao Y, Hong X, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The Affiliated Cancer
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, P.R. China.

The ETS family of transcription factors is involved in several physiological and 
pathological processes including tumor progression. The ETS transcription factors
are divided into subfamilies based on the sequence and location of the ETS
domain. ETV1 (Ets variant gene 1; also known as ER81), is a member of the PEA3
subfamily, which has been found to promote metastatic progression in several
types of human cancer. Previous findings demonstrated that ETV1 expression is
upregulated in gastric adenocarcinomas; however, the underlying mechanisms of
ETV1-induced metastatic progression in gastric cancer remain elusive. In the
present study, we found that the overexpression of ETV1 in normal gastric
epithelial cells resulted in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
increased invasiveness. Conversely, knockdown of ETV1 resulted in decreased
aggressiveness of the invasive gastric cancer cells. Mechanistically, ETV1
transcriptionally upregulates Snail expression. Of note, ETV1 expression is
significantly correlated with Snail expression in human gastric tumor samples. In
summary, we present data that ETV1 promotes Snail expression to induce EMT-like
metastatic progression in gastric cancer.

PMID: 24100634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Sci Rep. 2013 Sep 30;3:2792. doi: 10.1038/srep02792.

Nuclear targeting of dystroglycan promotes the expression of androgen regulated
transcription factors in prostate cancer.

Mathew G(1), Mitchell A, Down JM, Jacobs LA, Hamdy FC, Eaton C, Rosario DJ, Cross
SS, Winder SJ.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Firth Court,
Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK [2].

Dystroglycan is frequently lost in adenocarcinoma, but the mechanisms and
consequences are poorly understood. We report an analysis of ß-dystroglycan in
prostate cancer in human tissue samples and in LNCaP cells in vitro. There is
progressive loss of ß-dystroglycan immunoreactivity from basal and lateral
surfaces of prostate epithelia which correlates significantly with increasing
Gleason grade. In about half of matched bone metastases there is significant
dystroglycan re-expression. In tumour tissue and in LNCaP cells there is also a
tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent translocation of ß-dystroglycan to the
nucleus. Analysis of gene expression data by microarray, reveals that nuclear
targeting of ß-dystroglycan in LNCaP cells alters the transcription of relatively
few genes, the most unregulated being the transcription factor ETV1. These data
suggest that proteolysis, tyrosine phosphorylation and translocation of
dystroglycan to the nucleus resulting in altered gene transcription could be
important mechanisms in the progression of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3786294
PMID: 24077328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 19;8(8):e73896. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073896. eCollection
2013.

Gene expression network analysis of ETV1 reveals KCTD10 as a novel prognostic
biomarker in gastrointestinal stromal tumor.

Kubota D(1), Yoshida A, Tsuda H, Suehara Y, Okubo T, Saito T, Orita H, Sato K,
Taguchi T, Yao T, Kaneko K, Katai H, Kawai A, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacoproteomics, National Cancer Centre Research Institute,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Prognostic biomarkers are required for risk stratification therapy in
the patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). In this study, we aimed 
to identify prognostic biomarkers in GIST. We assessed the prognostic value of E 
twenty-six variant 1 (ETV1), a recently identified transcription factor unique to
GIST. We also examined the clinical utility and functions of its downstream gene,
potassium channel tetramerization domain containing protein 10 (KCTD10).
METHODS: The levels of ETV1 and KCTD10 were evaluated immunohistochemically in
112 patients with GIST treated at two hospitals. The functional properties of
KCTD10 were examined by gene silencing assay in cultured GIST cells.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry revealed that ETV1 expression in GIST had no
prognostic significance. In contrast, the disease-free survival rate was 88.5% in
patients with KCTD10-positive tumors and 55.8% in those with KCTD10-negative
tumors (p <0.0001). KCTD10 was an independent prognostic factor (p <0.05). In the
low-risk classification group, KCTD10 was significantly associated with favorable
prognosis (p = 0.0008). Gene silencing of KCTD10 increased cell proliferation and
invasion, suggesting that KCTD10 has a tumor-suppressive function.
CONCLUSIONS: The GIST-specific transcription factor ETV1 may have no prognostic
potential, whereas its downstream gene KCTD10 is associated with a favorable
prognosis. Our study indicated the novel prognostic utility of KCTD10 in GIST,
and suggested its tumor-suppressive effects on GIST cells. Further validation
studies of KCTD10 for clinical applications, and functional verification of
KCTD10 for better understanding of molecular basis of malignant phenotypes are
worth challenging in GIST.

PMCID: PMC3747077
PMID: 23977394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Br J Cancer. 2013 Sep 17;109(6):1625-35. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.483. Epub 2013 Aug
22.

MiR-17-92 and miR-221/222 cluster members target KIT and ETV1 in human
gastrointestinal stromal tumours.

Gits CM(1), van Kuijk PF, Jonkers MB, Boersma AW, van Ijcken WF, Wozniak A, Sciot
R, Rutkowski P, Schöffski P, Taguchi T, Mathijssen RH, Verweij J, Sleijfer S,
Debiec-Rychter M, Wiemer EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus University Medical Center - Erasmus MC
Cancer Institute, Dr Molewaterplein 50, 3015 GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST) are characterised by high
expression of KIT and ETV1, which cooperate in GIST oncogenesis. Our aim was to
identify microRNAs that are deregulated in GIST, have a role in GIST
pathogenesis, and could potentially be used as therapeutic tool.
METHODS: Differentially expressed microRNAs between primary GIST (n=50) and
gastrointestinal leiomyosarcomas (GI-LMS, n=10) were determined using
microarrays. Selected microRNA mimics were transfected into GIST-882 and GIST-T1 
cell lines to study the effects of microRNA overexpression on GIST cells.
Luciferase reporter assays were used to establish regulation of target genes by
selected microRNAs.
RESULTS: MiR-17-92 and miR-221/222 cluster members were significantly (P<0.01)
lower expressed in GIST vs GI-LMS and normal gastrointestinal control tissues.
MiR-17/20a/222 overexpression in GIST cell lines severely inhibited cell
proliferation, affected cell cycle progression, induced apoptosis and strongly
downregulated protein and--to a lesser extent--mRNA levels of their predicted
target genes KIT and ETV1. Luciferase reporter assays confirmed direct regulation
of KIT and ETV1 by miR-222 and miR-17/20a, respectively.
CONCLUSION: MicroRNAs that may have an essential role in GIST pathogenesis were
identified, in particular miR-17/20a/222 that target KIT and ETV1. Delivering
these microRNAs therapeutically could hold great potential for GIST management,
especially in imatinib-resistant disease.

PMCID: PMC3776993
PMID: 23969726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Transl Oncol. 2013 Aug 1;6(4):405-12. Print 2013 Aug.

Comprehensive Analysis of ETS Family Members in Melanoma by Fluorescence In Situ 
Hybridization Reveals Recurrent ETV1 Amplification.

Mehra R(1), Dhanasekaran SM, Palanisamy N, Vats P, Cao X, Kim JH, Kim DS, Johnson
T, Fullen DR, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI ; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI ; The Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI.

E26 transformation-specific (ETS) transcription factors are known to be involved 
in gene aberrations in various malignancies including prostate cancer; however,
their role in melanoma oncogenesis has yet to be fully explored. We have
completed a comprehensive fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)-based screen 
for all 27 members of the ETS transcription factor family on two melanoma tissue 
microarrays, representing 223 melanomas, 10 nevi, and 5 normal skin tissues. None
of the melanoma cases demonstrated ETS fusions; however, 6 of 114 (5.3%)
melanomas were amplified for ETV1 using a break-apart FISH probe. For the six
positive cases, locus-controlled FISH probes revealed that two of six cases were 
amplified for the ETV1 region, whereas four cases showed copy gains of the entire
chromosome 7. The remaining 26 ETS family members showed no chromosomal
aberrations by FISH. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction showed an average
3.4-fold (P value = .00218) increased expression of ETV1 in melanomas, including 
the FISH ETV1-amplified cases, when compared to other malignancies (prostate,
breast, and bladder carcinomas). These data suggest that a subset of melanomas
overexpresses ETV1 and amplification of ETV1 may be one mechanism for achieving
high gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3730015
PMID: 23908683  [PubMed]


67. Nat Med. 2013 Aug;19(8):1023-9. doi: 10.1038/nm.3216. Epub 2013 Jun 30.

ETS factors reprogram the androgen receptor cistrome and prime prostate
tumorigenesis in response to PTEN loss.

Chen Y(1), Chi P, Rockowitz S, Iaquinta PJ, Shamu T, Shukla S, Gao D, Sirota I,
Carver BS, Wongvipat J, Scher HI, Zheng D, Sawyers CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York, USA. cheny1@mskcc.org

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Oct;15(10):1293-5.
    Nat Med. 2013 Aug;19(8):966-7.

Studies of ETS-mediated prostate oncogenesis have been hampered by a lack of
suitable experimental systems. Here we describe a new conditional mouse model
that shows robust, homogenous ERG expression throughout the prostate. When
combined with homozygous Pten loss, the mice developed accelerated, highly
penetrant invasive prostate cancer. In mouse prostate tissue, ERG markedly
increased androgen receptor (AR) binding. Robust ERG-mediated transcriptional
changes, observed only in the setting of Pten loss, included the restoration of
AR transcriptional output and upregulation of genes involved in cell death,
migration, inflammation and angiogenesis. Similarly, ETS variant 1 (ETV1)
positively regulated the AR cistrome and transcriptional output in
ETV1-translocated, PTEN-deficient human prostate cancer cells. In two large
clinical cohorts, expression of ERG and ETV1 correlated with higher AR
transcriptional output in PTEN-deficient prostate cancer specimens. We propose
that ETS factors cause prostate-specific transformation by altering the AR
cistrome, priming the prostate epithelium to respond to aberrant upstream signals
such as PTEN loss.

PMCID: PMC3737318
PMID: 23817021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Neoplasia. 2013 Jul;15(7):720-6.

Novel 5' fusion partners of ETV1 and ETV4 in prostate cancer.

Barros-Silva JD(1), Paulo P, Bakken AC, Cerveira N, Løvf M, Henrique R, Jerónimo 
C, Lothe RA, Skotheim RI, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

Gene fusions involving the erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS)
transcription factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and FLI1 are a common feature of
prostate carcinomas (PCas). The most common upstream fusion partner described is 
the androgen-regulated prostate-specific gene TMPRSS2, most frequently with ERG, 
but additional 5' fusion partners have been described. We performed 5' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends in 18 PCas with ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 outlier expression
to identify the 5' fusion partners. We also evaluated the exon-level expression
profile of these ETS genes in 14 cases. We identified and confirmed by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction the two novel chimeric genes OR51E2-ETV1 and UBTF-ETV4 in two
PCas. OR51E2 encodes a G-protein-coupled receptor that is overexpressed in PCas, 
whereas UBTF is a ubiquitously expressed gene encoding an HMG-box DNA-binding
protein involved in ribosome biogenesis. We additionally describe two novel gene 
fusion combinations of previously described genes, namely, SLC45A3-ETV4 and
HERVK17-ETV4. Finally, we found one PCa with TMPRSS2-ETV1, one with
C15orf21-ETV1, one with EST14-ETV1, and two with 14q133-q21.1-ETV1. In nine PCas 
(eight ETV1 and one ETV5), exhibiting ETS outlier expression and genomic
rearrangement detected by FISH, no 5' fusion partner was found. Our findings
contribute significantly to characterize the heterogeneous group of ETS gene
fusions and indicate that all genes described as 5' fusion partners with one ETS 
gene can most likely be rearranged with any of the other ETS genes involved in
prostate carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3689235
PMID: 23814484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jul 20;31(21):2654-61. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.44.2137. Epub
2013 Jun 17.

Follicular lymphoma cells induce changes in T-cell gene expression and function: 
potential impact on survival and risk of transformation.

Kiaii S(1), Clear AJ, Ramsay AG, Davies D, Sangaralingam A, Lee A, Calaminici M, 
Neuberg DS, Gribben JG.

Author information: 
(1)Barts Cancer Institute, The London School of Medicine, Queen Mary, University 
of London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jul 20;31(21):2641-2.

PURPOSE: Previous studies have demonstrated the prognostic importance of the
immune microenvironment in follicular lymphoma (FL). To investigate the molecular
mechanisms during which tumor-infiltrating T cells (TILs) are altered in the FL
microenvironment, we studied highly purified CD4 and CD8 TILs from lymph node
biopsies at diagnosis in treatment-naive patients with FL compared with reactive 
tonsils and the peripheral blood of healthy donors.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Gene expression profiling of highly purified CD4 and CD8
TILs was performed on the Affymetrix platform. Diagnostic tissue microarrays from
an independent patient set (n = 172) were used to verify protein expression and
analyze any impact of TIL-expressed genes on outcome. Time-lapse imaging was used
to assess T-cell motility.
RESULTS: The most upregulated genes in both CD4 and CD8 TILs were PMCH, ETV1, and
TNFRSF9. PMCH is not expressed in peripheral blood T cells, but expression is
highly induced on culture with FL. Both CD4 and CD8 TILs from patients with FL
have significantly impaired motility compared with those of healthy TILs from
reactive tonsils and this can be induced on healthy T cells by FL cells. During
multivariate analysis, a model incorporating the number and location of T cells
expressing PMCH, NAMPT, and ETV1 showed prognostic significance for overall
survival and for time to transformation.
CONCLUSION: We showed altered gene expression in TILs in FL and demonstrated that
altering the immune microenvironment in FL affects overall survival and time to
transformation in this disease.

PMCID: PMC3709054
PMID: 23775959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cancer Res. 2013 Aug 15;73(16):5110-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0578. Epub
2013 Jun 17.

14-3-3 proteins modulate the ETS transcription factor ETV1 in prostate cancer.

Oh S(1), Shin S, Lightfoot SA, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Overexpression of the ETS-related transcription factor ETV1 can initiate
neoplastic transformation of the prostate. ETV1 activity is highly regulated by
phosphorylation, but the underlying mechanisms are unknown. Here we report that
all 14-3-3 proteins, with the exception of the tumor suppressor 14-3-3s, can bind
to ETV1 in a condition manner dictated by its prominent phosphorylation site
S216. Non-s 14-3-3 proteins synergized with ETV1 to activate transcription of its
target genes MMP-1 and MMP-7, which regulate extracellular matrix in the prostate
tumor microenvironment. S216 mutation or 14-3-3t downregulation was sufficient to
reduce ETV1 protein levels in prostate cancer cells, indicating that non-s 14-3-3
proteins protect ETV1 from degradation. Notably, S216 mutation also decreased
ETV1-dependent migration and invasion in benign prostate cells. Downregulation of
14-3-3t reduced prostate cancer cell invasion and growth in the same manner as
ETV1 attenuation. Finally, we showed that 14-3-3t and 14-3-3e were overexpressed 
in human prostate tumors. Taken together, our results showed that non-s 14-3-3
proteins are important modulators of ETV1 function that promote prostate
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3745528
PMID: 23774214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Jul;16(7):958-65. doi: 10.1038/nn.3419. Epub 2013 Jun 2.

Neural coding during active somatosensation revealed using illusory touch.

O'Connor DH(1), Hires SA, Guo ZV, Li N, Yu J, Sun QQ, Huber D, Svoboda K.

Author information: 
(1)Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn,
Virginia, USA.

Active sensation requires the convergence of external stimuli with
representations of body movements. We used mouse behavior, electrophysiology and 
optogenetics to dissect the temporal interactions among whisker movement, neural 
activity and sensation of touch. We photostimulated layer 4 activity in single
barrels in a closed loop with whisking. Mimicking touch-related neural activity
caused illusory perception of an object at a particular location, but scrambling 
the timing of the spikes over one whisking cycle (tens of milliseconds) did not
abolish the illusion, indicating that knowledge of instantaneous whisker position
is unnecessary for discriminating object locations. The illusions were induced
only during bouts of directed whisking, when mice expected touch, and in the
relevant barrel. Reducing activity biased behavior, consistent with a spike count
code for object detection at a particular location. Our results show that mice
integrate coding of touch with movement over timescales of a whisking bout to
produce perception of active touch.

PMCID: PMC3695000
PMID: 23727820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Am J Transl Res. 2013 Apr 19;5(3):254-68. Print 2013.

Emergence of ETS transcription factors as diagnostic tools and therapeutic
targets in prostate cancer.

Rahim S(1), Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Washington DC.

The discovery of chromosomal translocations in prostate cancer has greatly
enhanced our understanding of prostate cancer biology. Genomic rearrangements
involving the ETS family of transcription factors are estimated to be present in 
50-70% of prostate cancer cases. These rearrangements fuse the ETS factors with
promoters of genes that are androgen regulated. Thus, the expression of ETS
factors, such as ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5, is mediated by androgen. In-vitro and 
in-vivo studies suggest that overexpression of ETS proteins increase cell
proliferation and confer an invasive phenotype to prostate cancer cells.
Epidemiological studies demonstrate that ETS-fusion positive patients exhibit
tumors corresponding to a more advanced disease. The ability of ETS factors to
serve as markers for screening and diagnosing prostate cancer patients is being
investigated, and the results have been largely positive to date. Additionally,
ETS factors present an excellent opportunity as therapeutic targets and several
strategies have been devised to directly target ETS proteins or their binding
partners and downstream effectors.

PMCID: PMC3633969
PMID: 23634237  [PubMed]


73. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061253. Print 2013.

Genetic variants associated with increased risk of malignant pleural
mesothelioma: a genome-wide association study.

Matullo G(1), Guarrera S, Betti M, Fiorito G, Ferrante D, Voglino F, Cadby G, Di 
Gaetano C, Rosa F, Russo A, Hirvonen A, Casalone E, Tunesi S, Padoan M, Giordano 
M, Aspesi A, Casadio C, Ardissone F, Ruffini E, Betta PG, Libener R, Guaschino R,
Piccolini E, Neri M, Musk AW, de Klerk NH, Hui J, Beilby J, James AL, Creaney J, 
Robinson BW, Mukherjee S, Palmer LJ, Mirabelli D, Ugolini D, Bonassi S, Magnani
C, Dianzani I.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Foundation, HuGeF, Turin, Italy. giuseppe.matullo@unito.it

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0130109.

Asbestos exposure is the main risk factor for malignant pleural mesothelioma
(MPM), a rare aggressive tumor. Nevertheless, only 5-17% of those exposed to
asbestos develop MPM, suggesting the involvement of other environmental and
genetic risk factors. To identify the genetic risk factors that may contribute to
the development of MPM, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS;
370,000 genotyped SNPs, 5 million imputed SNPs) in Italy, among 407 MPM cases and
389 controls with a complete history of asbestos exposure. A replication study
was also undertaken and included 428 MPM cases and 1269 controls from Australia. 
Although no single marker reached the genome-wide significance threshold, several
associations were supported by haplotype-, chromosomal region-, gene- and
gene-ontology process-based analyses. Most of these SNPs were located in regions 
reported to harbor aberrant alterations in mesothelioma (SLC7A14, THRB, CEBP350, 
ADAMTS2, ETV1, PVT1 and MMP14 genes), causing at most a 2-3-fold increase in MPM 
risk. The Australian replication study showed significant associations in five of
these chromosomal regions (3q26.2, 4q32.1, 7p22.2, 14q11.2, 15q14). Multivariate 
analysis suggested an independent contribution of 10 genetic variants, with an
Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) of 0.76 when only exposure and covariates were
included in the model, and of 0.86 when the genetic component was also included, 
with a substantial increase of asbestos exposure risk estimation (odds ratio, OR:
45.28, 95% confidence interval, CI: 21.52-95.28). These results showed that
genetic risk factors may play an additional role in the development of MPM, and
that these should be taken into account to better estimate individual MPM risk in
individuals who have been exposed to asbestos.

PMCID: PMC3634031
PMID: 23626673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. BJU Int. 2013 May;111(5):836-42. doi: 10.1111/bju.12119.

High-resolution ERG-expression profiling on GeneChip exon 1.0 ST arrays in
primary and castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Smit FP(1), Salagierski M, Jannink S, Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)NovioGendix BV, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether oestrogen-regulated gene (ERG) expression analysis
using GeneChip arrays can predict transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2)-ERG 
fusion. The expression level of the TMPRSS2-ERG gene was studied in various
histological grades of prostate cancer and castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CPRC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: GeneChip Affymetrix exon 1.0 ST arrays were used for
expression profiling of ERG, erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS) variant
gene 1 (ETV1), ETV4 and ETV5 genes in 67 prostate cancer tissue specimens.
Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis and in some cases DNA
sequencing was used to validate the presence and the expression levels of
TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions.
RESULTS: In our series of patients with prostate cancer over expression of the
ERG gene predicted the presence of TMPRSS2-ERG rearrangements in almost all
cases. ETS expression by itself outmatched the diagnostic performance of the ERG 
exons ratioing allowing equal detection of the less frequent ETS gene fusion
transcripts. The gene fusions were expressed at significantly lower levels in
CPRC but occurred more frequently than in primary prostate cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: ERG expression analysis using GeneChip arrays appears to be an
excellent diagnostic tool for identifying gene rearrangements. In coming years,
measuring expression of the ETS gene family by itself might become a clinically
relevant surrogate test to identify patients with fusion-positive prostate
cancer. The variation of gene fusion expression levels, particularly in CPRC,
needs to be taken into account when using quantitative molecular diagnosis of
prostate cancer.

© 2013 BJU International.

PMID: 23578236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59976. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059976. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

ERG induces epigenetic activation of Tudor domain-containing protein 1 (TDRD1) in
ERG rearrangement-positive prostate cancer.

Kacprzyk LA(1), Laible M, Andrasiuk T, Brase JC, Börno ST, Fälth M, Kuner R,
Lehrach H, Schweiger MR, Sültmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Unit Cancer Genome Research, Division of Molecular Genetics, National Center
for Tumor Diseases (NCT) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. kacprzyk@ugabiopharma.com

BACKGROUND: Overexpression of ERG transcription factor due to genomic
ERG-rearrangements defines a separate molecular subtype of prostate tumors. One
of the consequences of ERG accumulation is modulation of the cell's gene
expression profile. Tudor domain-containing protein 1 gene (TDRD1) was reported
to be differentially expressed between TMPRSS2:ERG-negative and
TMPRSS2:ERG-positive prostate cancer. The aim of our study was to provide a
mechanistic explanation for the transcriptional activation of TDRD1 in ERG
rearrangement-positive prostate tumors.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Gene expression measurements by real-time
quantitative PCR revealed a remarkable co-expression of TDRD1 and ERG (r(2) =
0.77) but not ETV1 (r(2)<0.01) in human prostate cancer in vivo. DNA methylation 
analysis by MeDIP-Seq and bisulfite sequencing showed that TDRD1 expression is
inversely correlated with DNA methylation at the TDRD1 promoter in vitro and in
vivo (<U+03C1> = -0.57). Accordingly, demethylation of the TDRD1 promoter in
TMPRSS2:ERG-negative prostate cancer cells by DNA methyltransferase inhibitors
resulted in TDRD1 induction. By manipulation of ERG dosage through gene silencing
and forced expression we show that ERG governs loss of DNA methylation at the
TDRD1 promoter-associated CpG island, leading to TDRD1 overexpression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We demonstrate that ERG is capable of disrupting a
tissue-specific DNA methylation pattern at the TDRD1 promoter. As a result, TDRD1
becomes transcriptionally activated in TMPRSS2:ERG-positive prostate cancer.
Given the prevalence of ERG fusions, TDRD1 overexpression is a common alteration 
in human prostate cancer which may be exploited for diagnostic or therapeutic
procedures.

PMCID: PMC3612037
PMID: 23555854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Neuron. 2013 Mar 20;77(6):1055-68. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.01.015.

Etv1 inactivation reveals proprioceptor subclasses that reflect the level of NT3 
expression in muscle targets.

de Nooij JC(1), Doobar S, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Kavli Institute
for Brain Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The organization of spinal reflex circuits relies on the specification of
distinct classes of proprioceptive sensory neurons (pSN), but the factors that
drive such diversity remain unclear. We report here that pSNs supplying distinct 
skeletal muscles differ in their dependence on the ETS transcription factor Etv1 
for their survival and differentiation. The status of Etv1-dependence is linked
to the location of proprioceptor muscle targets: pSNs innervating hypaxial and
axial muscles depend critically on Etv1 for survival, whereas those innervating
certain limb muscles are resistant to Etv1 inactivation. The level of NT3
expression in individual muscles correlates with Etv1-dependence and the loss of 
pSNs triggered by Etv1 inactivation can be prevented by elevating the level of
muscle-derived NT3-revealing a TrkC-activated Etv1-bypass pathway. Our findings
support a model in which the specification of aspects of pSN subtype character is
controlled by variation in the level of muscle NT3 expression and signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3763960
PMID: 23522042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Genes Dev. 2013 Mar 15;27(6):683-98. doi: 10.1101/gad.211011.112.

ETV1 directs androgen metabolism and confers aggressive prostate cancer in
targeted mice and patients.

Baena E(1), Shao Z, Linn DE, Glass K, Hamblen MJ, Fujiwara Y, Kim J, Nguyen M,
Zhang X, Godinho FJ, Bronson RT, Mucci LA, Loda M, Yuan GC, Orkin SH, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Urol Oncol. 2014 Feb;32(2):213.

Distinguishing aggressive from indolent disease and developing effective therapy 
for advanced disease are the major challenges in prostate cancer research.
Chromosomal rearrangements involving ETS transcription factors, such as ERG and
ETV1, occur frequently in prostate cancer. How they contribute to tumorigenesis
and whether they play similar or distinct in vivo roles remain elusive. Here we
show that in mice with ERG or ETV1 targeted to the endogenous Tmprss2 locus,
either factor cooperated with loss of a single copy of Pten, leading to localized
cancer, but only ETV1 appeared to support development of invasive adenocarcinoma 
under the background of full Pten loss. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that ERG
and ETV1 control a common transcriptional network but largely in an opposing
fashion. In particular, while ERG negatively regulates the androgen receptor (AR)
transcriptional program, ETV1 cooperates with AR signaling by favoring activation
of the AR transcriptional program. Furthermore, we found that ETV1 expression,
but not that of ERG, promotes autonomous testosterone production. Last, we
confirmed the association of an ETV1 expression signature with aggressive disease
and poorer outcome in patient data. The distinct biology of ETV1-associated
prostate cancer suggests that this disease class may require new therapies
directed to underlying programs controlled by ETV1.

PMCID: PMC3613614
PMID: 23512661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58609. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058609. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

The impact of 3'UTR variants on differential expression of candidate cancer
susceptibility genes.

Skeeles LE(1), Fleming JL, Mahler KL, Toland AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Variants in regulatory regions are predicted to play an important role in disease
susceptibility of common diseases. Polymorphisms mapping to microRNA (miRNA)
binding sites have been shown to disrupt the ability of miRNAs to target genes
resulting in differential mRNA and protein expression. Skin tumor susceptibility 
5 (Skts5) was identified as a locus conferring susceptibility to
chemically-induced skin cancer in NIH/Ola by SPRET/Outbred F1 backcrosses. To
determine if polymorphisms between the strains which mapped to putative miRNA
binding sites in the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of genes at Skts5 influenced 
expression, we conducted a systematic evaluation of 3'UTRs of candidate genes
across this locus. Nine genes had polymorphisms in their 3'UTRs which fit the
linkage data and eight of these contained polymorphisms suspected to interfere
with or introduce miRNA binding. 3'UTRs of six genes, Bcap29, Dgkb, Hbp1, Pik3cg,
Twistnb, and Tspan13 differentially affected luciferase expression, but did not
appear to be differentially regulated by the evaluated miRNAs predicted to bind
to only one of the two isoforms. 3'UTRs from four additional genes chosen from
the locus that fit less stringent criteria were evaluated. Ifrd1 and Etv1 showed 
differences and contained polymorphisms predicted to disrupt or create miRNA
binding sites but showed no difference in regulation by the miRNAs tested. In
summary, multiple 3'UTRs with putative functional variants between susceptible
and resistant strains of mice influenced differential expression independent of
predicted miRNA binding.

PMCID: PMC3589377
PMID: 23472213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57193. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057193. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Integrative bioinformatics analysis of genomic and proteomic approaches to
understand the transcriptional regulatory program in coronary artery disease
pathways.

Vangala RK(1), Ravindran V, Ghatge M, Shanker J, Arvind P, Bindu H, Shekar M, Rao
VS.

Author information: 
(1)Tata Proteomics and Coagulation Department, Thrombosis Research Institute,
Bangalore, Karnataka, India. rajani@triindia.org.in

Patients with cardiovascular disease show a panel of differentially regulated
serum biomarkers indicative of modulation of several pathways from disease onset 
to progression. Few of these biomarkers have been proposed for multimarker risk
prediction methods. However, the underlying mechanism of the expression changes
and modulation of the pathways is not yet addressed in entirety. Our present work
focuses on understanding the regulatory mechanisms at transcriptional level by
identifying the core and specific transcription factors that regulate the
coronary artery disease associated pathways. Using the principles of systems
biology we integrated the genomics and proteomics data with computational tools. 
We selected biomarkers from 7 different pathways based on their association with 
the disease and assayed 24 biomarkers along with gene expression studies and
built network modules which are highly regulated by 5 core regulators PPARG,
EGR1, ETV1, KLF7 and ESRRA. These network modules in turn comprise of biomarkers 
from different pathways showing that the core regulatory transcription factors
may work together in differential regulation of several pathways potentially
leading to the disease. This kind of analysis can enhance the elucidation of
mechanisms in the disease and give better strategies of developing multimarker
module based risk predictions.

PMCID: PMC3585295
PMID: 23468932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jul 10;335(1):26-30. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.01.044. Epub
2013 Jan 31.

Downregulation of phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein 1 associates with
clinical risk factors in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, but not with activation
of the RAF-1-MEK-ETV1 pathway.

Schoppmann SF(1), Beer A, Nirtl N, Ba-Ssalamah A, Brodowicz T, Streubel B, Birner
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.

Aim of this study was to investigate phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein 1
(PEBP1) in GIST and its relations with MEK1/2 activation and ETV1 by
immunohistochemistry. Loss of PEBP1 was found in 22/161 (13.7%) GIST, was
associated with clinical risk factors and with a trend towards shorter disease
free survival, but not with pMEK1/2 and ETV1 expression. So downregulation of
PEBP1 does not activate the Ras-Raf-1-MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway by phosphorylation of
MEK1/2 and does not influence ETV1 expression in GIST. Loss of PEBP1 associates
with clinical risk factors, but since no significant influence on survival was
found, further studies are required.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23376254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Cancer. 2013 Jul 15;133(2):335-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28025. Epub 2013 Feb
12.

Identification of TDRD1 as a direct target gene of ERG in primary prostate
cancer.

Boormans JL(1), Korsten H, Ziel-van der Made AJ, van Leenders GJ, de Vos CV,
Jenster G, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
j.boormans@erasmusmc.nl

Molecular classification of ERG-rearranged prostate cancer clarifies the role of 
TMPRSS2-ERG in the development and progression of prostate cancer. The objective 
of our study was to identify direct ERG target genes in ERG-rearranged prostate
cancer. Two independent cohorts of primary prostate cancer (Cohort A, n=48;
Cohort B, n=31), a cohort of late-stage prostate cancer (n=51) and expression
array data of a cohort of primary prostate tumors from a different institute
(n=128) were analyzed for expression of genes that were coexpressed with ERG
overexpression. By genome-wide expression analysis and Q-RT-PCR it was shown that
the gene Tudor domain containing 1 (TDRD1) was by far the strongest correlated
gene with ERG overexpression in both Cohort A and B. Expression array analysis of
the patient cohort from a different institute showed a large overlap in genes
that were positively correlated with ERG overexpression, including TDRD1. In
late-stage prostate cancer, TDRD1 was also coexpressed with ERG overexpression,
although a proportion of ERG-negative late-stage samples expressed TDRD1. TDRD1
expression was not associated with ETV1 overexpression. In the prostate cancer
cell line VCaP, downregulation of ERG by shRNA lead to a lower expression level
of TDRD1 and resulted in a decreased activity of the TDRD1 promoter. By mutation 
analysis we identified a functional ERG binding site in the TDRD1 promoter. Our
findings show TDRD1 as the first identified upregulated direct ERG target gene
that is strongly associated with ERG overexpression in primary prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23319146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(12):e1003151. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003151. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

A synthetic interaction screen identifies factors selectively required for
proliferation and TERT transcription in p53-deficient human cancer cells.

Xie L(1), Gazin C, Park SM, Zhu LJ, Debily MA, Kittler EL, Zapp ML, Lapointe D,
Gobeil S, Virbasius CM, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Programs in Gene Function and Expression and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, USA.

Numerous genetic and epigenetic alterations render cancer cells selectively
dependent on specific genes and regulatory pathways, and represent potential
vulnerabilities that can be therapeutically exploited. Here we describe an RNA
interference (RNAi)-based synthetic interaction screen to identify genes
preferentially required for proliferation of p53-deficient (p53-) human cancer
cells. We find that compared to p53-competent (p53+) human cancer cell lines,
diverse p53- human cancer cell lines are preferentially sensitive to loss of the 
transcription factor ETV1 and the DNA damage kinase ATR. In p53- cells,
RNAi-mediated knockdown of ETV1 or ATR results in decreased expression of the
telomerase catalytic subunit TERT leading to growth arrest, which can be reversed
by ectopic TERT expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis reveals that
ETV1 binds to a region downstream of the TERT transcriptional start-site in p53- 
but not p53+ cells. We find that the role of ATR is to phosphorylate and thereby 
stabilize ETV1. Our collective results identify a regulatory pathway involving
ETV1, ATR, and TERT that is preferentially important for proliferation of diverse
p53- cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3527276
PMID: 23284306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(10):4935-8.

Fusion between TMPRSS2 and ETS family members (ERG, ETV1, ETV4) in prostate
cancers from northern China.

Wang JJ(1), Liu YX, Wang W, Yan W, Zheng YP, Qiao LD, Liu D, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China.

In this study we evaluated the frequency of fusion between TMPRSS2 and ETS family
members (ERG, ETV1, ETV4) in prostate cancers in patients from northern China in 
order to explore differences in fusion rates among regions in northern and
southern China, other parts of Asia, Europe, and North America. We examined 100
prostate cancer patients, diagnosed by means of prostate biopsy; fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH) was used to detect the expression of TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV1
and ETV4 in cancer tissue. Differences in gene fusion rates among different
ethnics groups were also analyzed. Of the 100 prostate cancer patients, 55 (55%) 
had the fusion gene. Among the patients with the fusion gene, 46 (83.6%) patients
had the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion product, 8 (14.8%) patients had TMPRSS2:ETV1 fusion, 1
(1.6%) patient had TMPRSS2:ETV4.

PMID: 23244085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jan;29(1):306-14. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2079. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

ETS variant 1 regulates matrix metalloproteinase-7 transcription in LNCaP
prostate cancer cells.

Shin S(1), Oh S, An S, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Prostate cancer is characterized by the recurrent translocation of ETS
transcription factors, including ETS variant 1 (ETV1) [also known as ETS-related 
81 (ER81)]. Transgenic ETV1 mice develop prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, yet
the mechanisms by which ETV1 exerts its deleterious function remain largely
unexplored. In this study, we demonstrated that ETV1 is capable of binding to the
matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) gene promoter both in vitro and in vivo. ETV1 
stimulated the activity of the MMP-7 promoter, which was suppressed upon mutation
of two ETV1 binding sites located within 200 base pairs upstream of the MMP-7
transcription start site. ETV1 overexpression in human LNCaP prostate cancer
cells induced endogenous MMP-7 gene transcription, whereas ETV1 downregulation
had the opposite effect. While MMP-7 overexpression did not influence LNCaP cell 
proliferation, it increased cell migration, which may be important during later
stages of tumorigenesis. Finally, MMP-7 mRNA was significantly overexpressed in
human prostate tumors compared to normal tissue. Together, these results showed
that MMP-7 is a bona fide ETV1 target gene, implicating that MMP-7 upregulation
is partially responsible for the oncogenic effects of ETV1 in the prostate.

PMCID: PMC3494775
PMID: 23076342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neoplasia. 2012 Jul;14(7):600-11.

Molecular subtyping of primary prostate cancer reveals specific and shared target
genes of different ETS rearrangements.

Paulo P(1), Ribeiro FR, Santos J, Mesquita D, Almeida M, Barros-Silva JD, Itkonen
H, Henrique R, Jerónimo C, Sveen A, Mills IG, Skotheim RI, Lothe RA, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

This work aimed to evaluate whether ETS transcription factors frequently involved
in rearrangements in prostate carcinomas (PCa), namely ERG and ETV1, regulate
specific or shared target genes. We performed differential expression analysis on
nine normal prostate tissues and 50 PCa enriched for different ETS rearrangements
using exon-level expression microarrays, followed by in vitro validation using
cell line models. We found specific deregulation of 57 genes in ERG-positive PCa 
and 15 genes in ETV1-positive PCa, whereas deregulation of 27 genes was shared in
both tumor subtypes. We further showed that the expression of seven
tumor-associated ERG target genes (PLA1A, CACNA1D, ATP8A2, HLA-DMB, PDE3B, TDRD1,
and TMBIM1) and two tumor-associated ETV1 target genes (FKBP10 and GLYATL2) was
significantly affected by specific ETS silencing in VCaP and LNCaP cell line
models, respectively, whereas the expression of three candidate ERG and ETV1
shared targets (GRPR, KCNH8, and TMEM45B) was significantly affected by silencing
of either ETS. Interestingly, we demonstrate that the expression of TDRD1, the
topmost overexpressed gene of our list of ERG-specific candidate targets, is
inversely correlated with the methylation levels of a CpG island found at -66 bp 
of the transcription start site in PCa and that TDRD1 expression is regulated by 
direct binding of ERG to the CpG island in VCaP cells. We conclude that ETS
transcription factors regulate specific and shared target genes and that TDRD1,
FKBP10, and GRPR are promising therapeutic targets and can serve as diagnostic
markers for molecular subtypes of PCa harboring specific fusion gene
rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC3421956
PMID: 22904677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(5):2385-92.

ER81-shRNA inhibits growth of triple-negative human breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-231 in vivo and in vitro.

Chen Y(1), Zou H, Yang LY, Li Y, Wang L, Hao Y, Yang JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kunming General Hospital, Kunming, China.

The lack of effective treatment targets for triple-negative breast cancers make
them unfitted for endocrine or HER2 targeted therapy, and their prognosis is
poor. Transcription factor ER81, a downstream gene of the HER2, is highly
expressed in breast cancer lines, breast atypical hyperplasia and primary breast 
cancers including triple-negative examples. However, whether and how ER81 affects
breast cancer carcinogenesis have remained elusive. We here assessed influence on
a triple-negative cell line. ER81-shRNA was employed to silence ER81 expression
in the MDA-MB-231 cell line, and MTT, colony-forming assays, and flow cytometry
were used to detect cell proliferation, colony-forming capability, cell cycle
distribution, and cell apoptosis in vitro. MDA-MB-231 cells stably transfected
with ER81-shRNA were inoculated into nude mice, and growth inhibition of the
cells was observed in vivo. We found that ER81 mRNA and protein expression in
MDA-MB-231 cells was noticeably reduced by ER81-shRNA, and that cell
proliferation and clonality were decreased significantly. ER81-shRNA further
increased cell apoptosis and the residence time in G0/G1 phase, while delaying
tumor-formation and growth rate in nude mice. It is concluded that ER81 may play 
an important role in the progression of breast cancer and may be a potentially
valuable target for therapy, especially for triple negative breast cancer.

PMID: 22901226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cereb Cortex. 2013 Aug;23(8):1884-900. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs176. Epub 2012 Jun 
26.

Neurog2 simultaneously activates and represses alternative gene expression
programs in the developing neocortex.

Kovach C(1), Dixit R, Li S, Mattar P, Wilkinson G, Elsen GE, Kurrasch DM, Hevner 
RF, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Calgary, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Alberta Children's Hospital 
Research Institute, Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Progenitor cells undergo a series of stable identity transitions on their way to 
becoming fully differentiated cells with unique identities. Each cellular
transition requires that new sets of genes are expressed, while alternative
genetic programs are concurrently repressed. Here, we investigated how the
proneural gene Neurog2 simultaneously activates and represses alternative gene
expression programs in the developing neocortex. By comparing the activities of
transcriptional activator (Neurog2-VP16) and repressor (Neurog2-EnR) fusions to
wild-type Neurog2, we first demonstrate that Neurog2 functions as an activator to
both extinguish Pax6 expression in radial glial cells and initiate Tbr2
expression in intermediate neuronal progenitors. Similarly, we show that Neurog2 
functions as an activator to promote the differentiation of neurons with a dorsal
telencephalic (i.e., neocortical) identity and to block a ventral fate,
identifying 2 Neurog2-regulated transcriptional programs involved in the latter. 
First, we show that the Neurog2-transcriptional target Tbr2 is a direct
transcriptional repressor of the ventral gene Ebf1. Secondly, we demonstrate that
Neurog2 indirectly turns off Etv1 expression, which in turn indirectly regulates 
the expression of the ventral proneural gene Ascl1. Neurog2 thus activates
several genetic off-switches, each with distinct transcriptional targets,
revealing an unappreciated level of specificity for how Neurog2 prevents
inappropriate gene expression during neocortical development.

PMID: 22735158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Endocrinology. 2012 Jul;153(7):3054-65. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-2170. Epub 2012 Jun 
8.

Overlap of endocrine hormone expression in the mouse intestine revealed by
transcriptional profiling and flow cytometry.

Habib AM(1), Richards P, Cairns LS, Rogers GJ, Bannon CA, Parker HE, Morley TC,
Yeo GS, Reimann F, Gribble FM.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Wellcome Trust/Medical Research
Council Building, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Box 139, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2
0XY, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2012 Jul;153(7):2945-8.

The intestine secretes a range of hormones with important local and distant
actions, including the control of insulin secretion and appetite. A number of
enteroendocrine cell types have been described, each characterized by a distinct 
hormonal signature, such as K-cells producing glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide (GIP), L-cells producing glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and I-cells
producing cholecystokinin (CCK). To evaluate similarities between L-, K-, and
other enteroendocrine cells, primary murine L- and K-cells, and pancreatic a- and
ß-cells, were purified and analyzed by flow cytometry and microarray-based
transcriptomics. By microarray expression profiling, L cells from the upper small
intestinal (SI) more closely resembled upper SI K-cells than colonic L-cells.
Upper SI L-cell populations expressed message for hormones classically localized 
to different enteroendocrine cell types, including GIP, CCK, secretin, and
neurotensin. By immunostaining and fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis, 
most colonic L-cells contained GLP-1 and PeptideYY In the upper SI, most L-cells 
contained CCK, approximately 10% were GIP positive, and about 20% were PeptideYY 
positive. Upper SI K-cells exhibited approximately 10% overlap with GLP-1 and 6% 
overlap with somatostatin. Enteroendocrine-specific transcription factors were
identified from the microarrays, of which very few differed between the
enteroendocrine cell populations. Etv1, Prox1, and Pax4 were significantly
enriched in L-cells vs. K cells by quantitative RT-PCR. In summary, our data
indicate a strong overlap between upper SI L-, K-, and I-cells and suggest they
may rather comprise a single cell type, within which individual cells exhibit a
hormonal spectrum that may reflect factors such as location along the intestine
and exposure to dietary nutrients.

PMCID: PMC3440453
PMID: 22685263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 29;109(22):8734-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1206418109. Epub 2012 May 14.

Gene regulation via excitation and BDNF is mediated by induction and
phosphorylation of the Etv1 transcription factor in cerebellar granule cells.

Abe H(1), Okazawa M, Nakanishi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, Suita, Osaka
565-0874, Japan.

In maturing postnatal cerebellar granule cells, the Etv1/Er81 transcription
factor is induced by sequential activity-dependent mechanisms through stimulation
of AMPA and NMDA receptors, voltage-dependent Nav1.2 Na(+) channels, and
voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channels. Etv1 then up-regulates a battery of maturation
genes involved in the cerebellar circuitry. In this process, BDNF is also induced
and participates in the up-regulation of these maturation genes. Using cultures
of granule cells, we addressed how the activity-dependent and BDNF signaling
mechanisms converge on the regulation of the representative NR2C NMDA receptor
and Tiam1 maturation genes. BDNF up-regulated both the NR2C and Tiam1 genes via
the TrkB-Erk cascade and this up-regulation was blocked not only by inhibition of
the activity-dependent signaling mechanisms but also by suppression of Etv1
expression with Etv1 siRNA. Importantly, Etv1 was selectively phosphorylated by
Erk1/2 in the BDNF signaling cascade, and the inhibition of this phosphorylation 
abrogated the BDNF-induced up-regulation of the NR2C and Tiam1 genes. The
luciferase reporter assays in combination with mutations of MEK and Etv1
indicated that the Erk-mediated, phosphorylated Etv1 interacted with the Ets
motifs of the NR2C promoter sequence and that phosphorylation at both serine 94
and a cluster of threonines and a serine (Thr139, Thr143, and Ser146) of Etv1 was
indispensable for the BDNF-mediated activation of the NR2C promoter activity.
This study demonstrates that the NR2C and Tiam1 maturation genes are
synergistically controlled by the activity-dependent induction of Etv1 and its
phosphorylation by the BDNF signaling cascade.

PMCID: PMC3365191
PMID: 22586091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Hum Pathol. 2012 Nov;43(11):1910-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.01.018. Epub 2012
May 7.

Rearrangement of the ETS genes ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 is a clonal event
during prostate cancer progression.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Braun M, Nikolov P, Boehm D, Scheble V, Menon R, Fend F,
Kristiansen G, Perner S, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

ETS gene rearrangements are frequently found in prostate cancer. Several studies 
have assessed the rearrangement status of the most commonly found ETS rearranged 
gene ERG, and the less frequent genes, ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 in primary 
prostate cancer. However, frequency in metastatic disease is not well
investigated. Recently, we have assessed the ERG rearrangement status in both
primary and corresponding lymph node metastases and observed that ERG
rearrangement in primary prostate cancer transfers into lymph node metastases,
suggesting it to be a clonal expansion event during prostate cancer progression. 
As a continuation, we investigated in this study whether this observation is
valid for the less frequent ETS rearranged genes. Using dual-color break-apart
fluorescent in situ hybridization assays, we evaluated the status of all less
frequent ETS gene rearrangements for the first time on tissue microarrays
constructed from a large cohort of 86 patients with prostate cancer and composed 
of primary and corresponding lymph node metastases, as well as in a second cohort
composed of 43 distant metastases. ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 rearrangements 
were found in 8 (10%) of 81, 5 (6%) of 85, 1 (1%) of 85, and 2 (2%) of 86 of
primary prostate cancer, respectively, and in 6 (8%) of 73, 4 (6%) of 72, 1 (1%) 
of 75, and 1 (1%) of 78 of corresponding lymph node metastases, respectively.
ETV-1 and ETV-5 rearrangements were not found in the distant metastases cases,
whereas ETV-4 and ELK-4 rearrangements were found in 1 (4%) of 25 and 1 (4%) of
24, respectively. Our findings suggest that rearrangement of the less frequent
ETS genes is a clonal event during prostate cancer progression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22569213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2012 Dec;31(6):341-8. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2012.659397.
Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Ewing sarcoma with 7;22 translocation: three new cases and clinicopathological
characterization.

Shulman SC(1), Katzenstein H, Bridge J, Bannister LL, Qayed M, Oskouei S, Shehata
BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia
30322, USA.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the second most common primary bone malignancy in children 
and is typically characterized by a translocation involving the EWS gene on
chromosome 22 and a member of the ETS family of genes: FLI1 (90%), ERG1 (5%),
ETV1 (1%), ETV4 (1%), and FEV (1%). We identified three new cases of t(7;22)
(p22;q12) (EWS-ETV1) ES and a literature search revealed an additional six cases.
In comparison to conventional ES with t(11;22) (q24;q12) (EWS-FLI1), the t(7;22) 
ES variant has a higher propensity for females and children in a younger age
group and it occurs more commonly in extraosseous locations.

PMID: 22432475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Aug;1826(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2012.02.002.
Epub 2012 Mar 8.

ETV1, 4 and 5: an oncogenic subfamily of ETS transcription factors.

Oh S(1), Shin S, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

The homologous ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 proteins form the PEA3 subfamily of ETS
transcription factors. In Ewing tumors, chromosomal translocations affecting ETV1
or ETV4 are an underlying cause of carcinogenesis. Likewise, chromosomal
rearrangements of the ETV1, ETV4 or ETV5 gene occur in prostate tumors and are
thought to be one of the major driving forces in the genesis of prostate cancer. 
In addition, these three ETS proteins are implicated in melanomas, breast and
other types of cancer. Complex posttranslational modifications govern the
activity of PEA3 factors, which can promote cell proliferation, motility and
invasion. Here, we review evidence for a role of ETV1, 4 and 5 as oncoproteins
and describe modes of their action. Modulation of their activation or interaction
with cofactors as well as inhibiting crucial target gene products may ultimately 
be exploited to treat various cancers that are dependent on the PEA3 group of ETS
transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3362686
PMID: 22425584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 1;18(7):1879-87. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2364.
Epub 2012 Feb 20.

MAPKAP kinase 2 overexpression influences prognosis in gastrointestinal stromal
tumors and associates with copy number variations on chromosome 1 and expression 
of p38 MAP kinase and ETV1.

Birner P(1), Beer A, Vinatzer U, Stary S, Höftberger R, Nirtl N, Wrba F, Streubel
B, Schoppmann SF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery and Obstetrics and Gynecology, Clinical Institute of
Pathology, Institute of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

PURPOSE: ETV1 has been proposed to be activated by KIT mutations in
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). The aim of the study was to evaluate the 
clinical role of ETV1 and associated proteins in GIST.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expressions of ETV1, MAPKAP kinase 2 (MAPKAPK2),
phosphorylated p38 MAP kinase (pp38), phosphorylated MSK1 (pMSK1), phosphorylated
RSK1, COP1, and KIT protein were determined immunohistochemically in 139 GISTs.
Sequence analysis of KIT, PDGFRA, and MAPKAPK2 and FISHs of ETV1 as well as
chromosomes 1 and 7 were done.
RESULTS: Prominent ETV1 expression was seen in 50% of GISTs, but no correlation
with clinical outcome was found. Correlation of ETV1 expression and KIT mutation 
was seen in 60% of cases. MAPKAPK2 overexpression (n = 62/44.6%) correlated with 
pp38 expression (P = 0.021, <U+03C7>(2) test) and alterations of chromosome 1 (n = 17, P
= 0.024, <U+03C7>(2) test). In one of 20 sequenced cases with high MAKAPK2 expression, a
putative damaging MAPKAPK2 gene mutation was found. All relapsing GISTs with very
low/low risk according to Fletcher showed high MAPKAPK2 and KIT expression.
MAPKAPK2 overexpression was an independent prognostic factor for disease-free
survival (P = 0.006, Cox regression).
CONCLUSION: ETV1 is not universally overexpressed in GIST and seems to also be
induced by pathways other than KIT mutation. Nevertheless, its clinical relevance
is low. Overexpression of ETV1 inhibitor MAPKAPK2 is associated with shorter
survival in GIST, indicating a clinically relevant role of this gene not reported
previously. Patients with low-risk GISTs showing MAPKAPK2 overexpression might
profit from early adjuvant tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22351694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Anat. 2012 Mar;220(3):201-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01466.x. Epub 2012 
Jan 3.

Examining the relationship between early axon growth and transcription factor
expression in the developing cerebral cortex.

Lickiss T(1), Cheung AF, Hutchinson CE, Taylor JS, Molnár Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK. thomas.lickiss@dpag.ox.ac.uk

The transcription factors Satb2 (special AT-rich sequence binding protein 2) and 
Ctip2 (COUP-TF interacting protein 2) have been shown to be required for callosal
and corticospinal axon growth respectively from subtypes of cerebral cortex
projection neurons. In this study we investigated early stages of directed axon
growth in the embryonic mouse cerebral cortex, and studied the possible
correlation with the expression of Satb2 and Ctip2. Electroporation of an
EYFP-expressing plasmid at embryonic day 13.5 to label developing projection
neurons revealed that directed axon growth is first seen in radially migrating
neurons in the intermediate zone (IZ), prior to migration into the cortical
plate, as has been suggested previously. Onset of expression of SATB2 and CTIP2
was also observed in the IZ, correlating well with this stage of migration and
initiation of axon growth. Immunohistochemical staining through embryonic and
early postnatal development revealed a significant population of Satb2/Ctip2
co-expressing cells, while retrograde axon tracing from the corpus callosum at
embryonic day 18.5 back-labelled many neurons with bi-directional axon processes.
However, through retrograde tracing and simultaneous immunohistochemical staining
we show that these bi-directional processes do not correlate with Satb2/Ctip2
co-expression. Our work shows that although expression of these transcription
factors correlates well with the appearance of directed axon growth during
cortical development, the transcriptional code underlying the bi-directional
axonal projections of early neocortical neurons is not likely to be the result of
Satb2/Ctip2 co-expression.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy © 2012 Anatomical Society.

PMCID: PMC3381615
PMID: 22212101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncogenesis. 2012 Jul 16;1:e20. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2012.20.

Overexpression of ETV4 is oncogenic in prostate cells through promotion of both
cell proliferation and epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Pellecchia A(1), Pescucci C, De Lorenzo E, Luceri C, Passaro N, Sica M, Notaro R,
De Angioletti M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Gene Transfer Laboratory, Core Research Laboratory,
Istituto Toscano Tumori, AOUC, Florence, Italy.

The discovery of translocations that involve one of the genes of the ETS family
(ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5) has been a major advance in understanding the
molecular basis of prostate cancer (PC). Each one of these translocations results
in deregulated expression of one of the ETS proteins. Here, we focus on the
mechanism whereby overexpression of the ETV4 gene mediates oncogenesis in the
prostate. By siRNA technology, we show that ETV4 inhibition in the PC3 cancer
cell line reduces not only cell mobility and anchorage-independent growth, but
also cell proliferation, cell cycle progression and tumor growth in a xenograft
model. Conversely, ETV4 overexpression in the nonmalignant human prostate cell
line (RWPE) increases anchorage-independent growth, cell mobility and cell
proliferation, which is probably mediated by downregulation of p21, producing
accelerated progression through the cell cycle. ETV4 overexpression is associated
with changes in the pattern of E-cadherin and N-cadherin expression; the cells
also become spindle-shaped, and these changes are characteristic of the so-called
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). In RWPE cells overexpressing ETV4 EMT
results from a marked increase in EMT-specific transcription factors such as
TWIST1, SLUG1, ZEB1 and ZEB2. Thus, whereas ETV4 shares with the other ETS
proteins (ERG, ETV5 and ETV1) a major role in invasiveness and cell migration, it
emerges as unique in that it increases at the same time also the rate of
proliferation of PC cells. Considering the wide spectrum in the clinical course
of patients with PC, it may be highly relevant that ETV4 is capable of inducing
most and perhaps all of the features that make a tumor aggressive.

PMCID: PMC3412649
PMID: 23552736  [PubMed]


96. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Mar;51(3):240-9. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20948. Epub 2011
Nov 12.

FLI1 is a novel ETS transcription factor involved in gene fusions in prostate
cancer.

Paulo P(1), Barros-Silva JD, Ribeiro FR, Ramalho-Carvalho J, Jerónimo C, Henrique
R, Lind GE, Skotheim RI, Lothe RA, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

To characterize the pattern of ETS rearrangements and to uncover novel ETS fusion
genes, we analyzed 200 prostate carcinomas (PCa) with TaqMan low-density arrays
(TLDAs), followed by selective analyses with fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), RT-PCR, and sequencing. Besides confirming the recurrent presence of ERG,
ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 rearrangements, we here report FLI1 as the fifth ETS
transcription factor involved in fusion genes in prostate cancer. Outlier
expression of the FLI1 gene was detected by TLDAs in one PCa that showed relative
overexpression of FLI1 exons 4:5 as compared with FLI1 exons 2:3. A structural
rearrangement was found using FISH probes flanking the FLI1 gene and RT-PCR and
sequencing analyses showed fusion of SLC45A3 exon 1 with FLI1 exon 3.
Interestingly, we found four cases with two different ETS rearrangements in the
index tumor, thus revealing intratumor genetic heterogeneity. Correlation
analysis with clinico-pathological data showed association of ERG rearrangements 
with locally advanced disease (pT3, P = 0.007) and MYC overexpression (P =
0.001), and association of ETV1 rearrangements with PTEN downregulation (P =
0.015). We report that FLI1 is a novel ETS transcription factor involved in gene 
fusions in prostate cancer and that intratumor genetic heterogeneity of ETS
rearrangements can occasionally be found in index primary tumors.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22081504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):439-49. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.023. Epub 2011 
Oct 26.

ETS-dependent regulation of a distal Gata4 cardiac enhancer.

Schachterle W(1), Rojas A, Xu SM, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158-2517, USA.

The developing heart contains an inner tube of specialized endothelium known as
endocardium, which performs multiple essential functions. In spite of the
essential role of the endocardium in heart development and function, the
transcriptional pathways that regulate its development remain largely undefined. 
GATA4 is a zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed in multiple
cardiovascular lineages and is required for endocardial cushion development and
embryonic viability, but the transcriptional pathways upstream of Gata4 in the
endocardium and its derivatives in the endocardial cushions are unknown. Here, we
describe a distal enhancer from the mouse Gata4 gene that is briefly active in
multiple cardiac lineages early in cardiac development but restricts to the
endocardium where it remains active through cardiogenesis. The activity of this
Gata4 cardiac enhancer in transgenic embryos and in cultured aortic endothelial
cells is dependent on four ETS sites. To identify which ETS transcription factors
might be involved in Gata4 regulation via the ETS sites in the enhancer, we
determined the expression profile of 24 distinct ETS factors in embryonic mouse
hearts. Among multiple ETS transcripts present, ETS1, FLI1, ETV1, ETV5, ERG, and 
ETV6 were the most abundant in the early embryonic heart. We found that ETS1,
FLI1, and ERG were strongly expressed in the heart at embryonic day 8.5 and that 
ETS1 and ERG bound to the endogenous Gata4 enhancer in cultured endothelial
cells. Thus, these studies define the ETS expression profile in the early
embryonic heart and identify an ETS-dependent enhancer from the Gata4 locus.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3246565
PMID: 22056786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Feb;5(2):313-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.647. Epub 2011 Oct 27.

The peripheral zone of the prostate is more prone to tumor development than the
transitional zone: is the ETS family the key?

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Lindstrot A, Ellinger J, Rogenhofer S, Buettner R, Perner S, 
Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

Predisposition to develop prostate cancer (PCA) varies among the prostate zones, 
with the peripheral zone (PZ) more prone to tumor development than the
transitional zone (TZ). In view of the fact that molecular differences between
the zones may explain this difference, combined with the findings that
translocations between TMPRSS2 and several ETS members are frequently observed in
PCA, we hypothesized that the ETS family may be crucial to explaining this
difference. Normal tissues from the PZ and the TZ of 20 PCA patients were laser
microdissected to separate glands from stroma. Two oligo microarrays were
performed in order to investigate the variation in ETS family gene expression
between the glands and the stroma of the two zones. The ETS members, ELF-3,
ELF-5, ERG, ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, ETV-7 and FEV, were found to be differentially
expressed. A striking observation was that ERG and ETV-1 were found to be
up-regulated in the glands of the PZ compared to the TZ, particularly when
considering that ERG and ETV-1 fusions account for 50-80% and 20% of PCA
occurrences, respectively. These results indicate that the glands and stroma of
the two zones display distinct molecular differences and zonal-specific
expression of ETS members. Furthermore, ETS members up-regulated in PCA are
already overexpressed in the normal PZ, suggesting that these members play a role
in the development and progression of PCA.

PMID: 22038307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Vis Exp. 2011 Jul 27;(53). pii: 2802. doi: 10.3791/2802.

Visualization of the interstitial cells of cajal (ICC) network in mice.

Chen Y(1), Shamu T, Chen H, Besmer P, Sawyers CL, Chi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.

The interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) are mesenchymal derived "pacemaker cells"
of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract that generate spontaneous slow waves required 
for peristalsis and mediate neuronal input from the enteric nervous system 1.
Different subtypes of ICC form distinct networks in the muscularis of the GI
tract (2,3). Loss or injury to these networks is associated with a number of
motility disorders(4). ICC cells express the KIT receptor tyrosine kinase on the 
plasma membrane and KIT immunostaining has been used for the past 15 years to
label the ICC network(5,6). Importantly, normal KIT activity is required for ICC 
development(5,6). Neoplastic transformation of ICC cells results in
gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), that frequently harbor gain-of-function
KIT mutations(7,8). We recently showed that ETV1 is a lineage-specific survival
factor expressed in the ICC/GIST lineage and is a master transcriptional
regulator required for both normal ICC network formation and for of GIST
tumorigenesis(9). We further demonstrate that it cooperates with activating KIT
mutations in tumorigenesis. Here, we describe methods for visualization of ICC
networks in mice, largely based on previously published protocols(10,11). More
recently, the chloride channel anoctamin 1 (ANO1) has also been characterized as 
a specific membrane marker of ICC(11,12). Because of their plasma membrane
localization, immunofluorescence of both proteins can be used to visualize the
ICC networks. Here, we describe visualization of the ICC networks by fixed-frozen
cyrosections and whole mount preparations.

PMCID: PMC3197437
PMID: 21841758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;776:335-48. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-243-4_19.

Androgen regulation of ETS gene fusion transcripts in prostate cancer.

Gasi D(1), Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University
Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. d.gasi@erasmusmc.cl

Fusion between androgen-regulated TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor gene ERG
is the most frequent genetic alteration that occurs in 40-70% of prostate
cancers. Not only ERG but also other ETS transcription factor genes are involved 
in gene fusions. ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 have all several fusion partners. One
common feature shared by the majority of these partners is androgen-regulated
expression. Despite its high frequency, the biological and molecular effects of
ETS gene fusion in prostate cancer development and progression are unknown. In
this chapter quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) is used for detection
and further studying the incidence and properties of these fusion transcripts.
The focus is on the expression of TMPRSS2-ERG transcripts in clinical prostate
samples. Androgen regulation of TMPRSS2 is measured in commonly used LNCaP
prostate cancer cells grown with and without the synthetic androgen R1881.
Furthermore, combining Q-PCR with 5' RLM-RACE and sequencing are described for
the identification of novel ETS fusion partners.

PMID: 21796535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jul 26;108(30):12497-502. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109940108. Epub 2011 Jul 11.

The Etv1/Er81 transcription factor orchestrates activity-dependent gene
regulation in the terminal maturation program of cerebellar granule cells.

Abe H(1), Okazawa M, Nakanishi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, Suita, Osaka,
Japan.

In the postnatal period, cerebellar granule cells express a set of the maturation
gene battery in an activity-dependent manner and establish synaptic function in
the cerebellar circuitry. Using primary cultures combined with specific
inhibition of signaling cascades, the present investigation revealed that the
expression of the maturation genes, including the NMDA glutamate receptor NR2C
and GABA(A) receptor GABA(A)Ra6 genes, is controlled by strikingly unified
signaling mechanisms that operate sequentially through stimulation of AMPA and
NMDA receptors, Na(+) channels [voltage-gated Na channel type II (Nav1.2)], and
voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channels. This signaling then induces the Ets variant
gene 1 (Etv1/Er81) transcription factor of the ETS family in an
activity-dependent manner. Consistent with the culture study, the ChIP assay
indicated that Etv1 up-regulates the maturation genes in a developmentally
regulated manner. This activation, as revealed by the luciferase assay, occurrs
by interacting with the Etv1-interacting motifs present in the promoter region.
Importantly, in vivo knockdown of Etv1 by DNA electroporation in the developing
cerebellum prevents the up-regulation of the maturation genes but has no effects 
on preceding developmental processes occurring in the granule cells. Etv1 thus
orchestrates the activity-dependent gene regulation in the terminal maturation
program and specifies the identity of cerebellar granule cells.

PMCID: PMC3145738
PMID: 21746923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Am J Pathol. 2011 Jul;179(1):46-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.03.008. Epub 2011 
May 3.

Protein-coding and microRNA biomarkers of recurrence of prostate cancer following
radical prostatectomy.

Long Q(1), Johnson BA, Osunkoya AO, Lai YH, Zhou W, Abramovitz M, Xia M, Bouzyk
MB, Nam RK, Sugar L, Stanimirovic A, Williams DJ, Leyland-Jones BR, Seth AK,
Petros JA, Moreno CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.

An important challenge in prostate cancer research is to develop effective
predictors of tumor recurrence following surgery to determine whether immediate
adjuvant therapy is warranted. To identify biomarkers predictive of biochemical
recurrence, we isolated the RNA from 70 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded radical
prostatectomy specimens with known long-term outcomes to perform DASL expression 
profiling with a custom panel that we designed of 522 prostate cancer-relevant
genes. We identified a panel of 10 protein-coding genes and two miRNA genes
(RAD23B, FBP1, TNFRSF1A, CCNG2, NOTCH3, ETV1, BID, SIM2, LETMD1, ANXA1, miR-519d,
and miR-647) that could be used to separate patients with and without biochemical
recurrence (P < 0.001), as well as for the subset of 42 Gleason score 7 patients 
(P < 0.001). We performed an independent validation analysis on 40 samples and
found that the biomarker panel was also significant at prediction of biochemical 
recurrence for all cases (P = 0.013) and for a subset of 19 Gleason score 7 cases
(P = 0.010), both of which were adjusted for relevant clinical information
including T-stage, prostate-specific antigen, and Gleason score. Importantly,
these biomarkers could significantly predict clinical recurrence for Gleason
score 7 patients. These biomarkers may increase the accuracy of prognostication
following radical prostatectomy using formalin-fixed specimens.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3123866
PMID: 21703393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Am J Pathol. 2011 Aug;179(2):992-1003. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.04.004. Epub
2011 May 31.

The role of Pea3 group transcription factors in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Yuen HF(1), McCrudden CM, Chan KK, Chan YP, Wong ML, Chan KY, Khoo US, Law S,
Srivastava G, Lappin TR, Chan KW, El-Tanani M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University of Belfast,
Belfast, United Kingdom.

The transcription factors Pea3, Erm, and Er81 can promote cancer initiation and
progression in various types of solid tumors. However, their role in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has not been elucidated. In this study, we found
that the expression levels of Pea3 and Erm, but not that of Er81, were
significantly higher in ESCC compared with nontumor esophageal epithelium. A high
level of Pea3 expression was significantly correlated with a shorter overall
survival in a cohort of 81 patients with ESCC and the subgroup with N1 stage
tumor (Wilcoxon-Gehan test, P = 0.016 and P = 0.001, respectively). Pea3 was
overexpressed in seven ESCC cell lines compared with two immortalized esophageal 
cell lines. Pea3 knockdown reduced cell proliferation and suppressed nonadherent 
growth, migration, and invasion in ESCC cells in vitro. In addition, Pea3
knockdown in ESCC cells resulted in a down-regulation of phospho-Akt and matrix
metalloproteinase 13, whereas a significant positive correlation in the
expression levels was observed between Pea3 and phospho-Akt (r = 0.281, P <
0.013) and between Pea3 and matrix metalloproteinase 13 in the human specimens (r
= 0.462, P < 0.001). Moreover, Pea3 modulated the sensitivity of EC109 cells to
doxorubicin, probably via reduced activity of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-Akt-mammalian target of Rapamycin complex 1 pathway on Pea3 knockdown.
In conclusion, our results suggest that Pea3 plays an important role in the
progression of ESCC.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3157177
PMID: 21689625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Blood. 2011 Aug 18;118(7):e32-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-323659. Epub 2011 Jun
17.

Tumor suppressor genes FHIT and WWOX are deleted in primary effusion lymphoma
(PEL) cell lines.

Roy D(1), Sin SH, Damania B, Dittmer DP.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, UNC Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, UNC Center for AIDS Research, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7290, USA.

Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) is a diffuse-large B-cell lymphoma with poor
prognosis. One hundred percent of PELs carry the genome of Kaposi
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus and a majority are coinfected with Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV). We profiled genomic aberrations in PEL cells using the Affymetrix
6.0 SNP array. This identified for the first time individual genes that are
altered in PEL cells. Eleven of 13 samples (85%) were deleted for the fragile
site tumor suppressors WWOX and FHIT. Alterations were also observed in the
DERL1, ETV1, RASA4, TPK1, TRIM56, and VPS41 genes, which are yet to be
characterized for their roles in cancer. Coinfection with EBV was associated with
significantly fewer gross genomic aberrations, and PEL could be segregated into
EBV-positive and EBV-negative clusters on the basis of host chromosome
alterations. This suggests a model in which both host genetic aberrations and the
2 viruses contribute to the PEL phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3158728
PMID: 21685375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Br J Cancer. 2011 Jun 28;105(1):124-30. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.187. Epub 2011 Jun 
14.

PEA3/ETV4-related transcription factors coupled with active ERK signalling are
associated with poor prognosis in gastric adenocarcinoma.

Keld R(1), Guo B, Downey P, Cummins R, Gulmann C, Ang YS, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors often play important roles in tumourigenesis.
Members of the PEA3 subfamily of ETS-domain transcription factors fulfil such a
role and have been associated with tumour metastasis in several different
cancers. Moreover, the activity of the PEA3 subfamily transcription factors is
potentiated by Ras-ERK pathway signalling, which is itself often deregulated in
tumour cells.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical patterns of PEA3 expression and active ERK
signalling were analysed and mRNA expression levels of PEA3, ER81, MMP-1 and
MMP-7 were determined in gastric adenocarcinoma samples.
RESULTS: Here, we have studied the expression of the PEA3 subfamily members
PEA3/ETV4 and ER81/ETV1 in gastric adenocarcinomas. PEA3 is upregulated at the
protein level in gastric adenocarcinomas and both PEA3/ETV4 and ER81/ETV1 are
upregulated at the mRNA level in gastric adenocarcinoma tissues. This increased
expression correlates with the expression of a target gene associated with
metastasis, MMP-1. Enhanced ERK signalling is also more prevalent in late-stage
gastric adenocarcinomas, and the co-association of ERK signalling and PEA3
expression also occurs in late-stage gastric adenocarcinomas. Furthermore, the
co-association of ERK signalling and PEA3 expression correlates with decreased
survival rates.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that members of the PEA3 subfamily of transcription
factors are upregulated in gastric adenocarcinomas and that the simultaneous
upregulation of PEA3 expression and ERK pathway signalling is indicative of
late-stage disease and a poor survival prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3137405
PMID: 21673681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 15;286(28):25387-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.202788. Epub
2011 May 26.

The Ets factor Etv1 interacts with Tpit protein for pituitary
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene transcription.

Budry L(1), Couture C, Balsalobre A, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) is expressed in two lineages of the pituitary, the
anterior lobe corticotrophs and the intermediate lobe melanotrophs. POMC
expression in these two lineages is highly dependent on the cell-restricted
transcription factor Tpit. As Tpit intervenes relatively late in differentiation 
of those lineages, we have been searching for other transcription factors that
may participate in their gene expression program. On the basis of similarity with
the Tpit expression profile, we identified Ets variant gene 1 (Etv1/Er81) as a
putative POMC transcription factor. Using Etv1-lacZ knockin mice, we describe
preferential Etv1 expression in pituitary POMC cells and also in posterior lobe
pituicytes. We further show that Etv1 enhances POMC transcription on its own and 
in synergy with Tpit. The Ets-binding site located within the Tpit/Pitx
regulatory element is necessary for Etv1 activity in POMC-expressing AtT-20 cells
but dispensable for synergy with Tpit. Etv1 and Tpit interact together in
coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Furthermore, Etv1 is present at the POMC
promoter, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of Etv1 in AtT-20 cells produces a
significant decrease in POMC expression. Etv1 knockout pituitaries show normal
POMC cell distribution and normal POMC mRNA abundance, suggesting compensation by
other factors. The coordinate expression of Etv1 with POMC cell differentiation
and its interaction with the highly cell-restricted Tpit factor indicate that
Etv1 participates in a combinatorial code for pituitary cell-specific gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3137109
PMID: 21622576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nature. 2011 May 15;474(7351):403-6. doi: 10.1038/nature10005.

COP1 is a tumour suppressor that causes degradation of ETS transcription factors.

Vitari AC(1), Leong KG, Newton K, Yee C, O'Rourke K, Liu J, Phu L, Vij R,
Ferrando R, Couto SS, Mohan S, Pandita A, Hongo JA, Arnott D, Wertz IE, Gao WQ,
French DM, Dixit VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Jul;11(7):466.

The proto-oncogenes ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 encode transcription factors in the E26
transformation-specific (ETS) family, which includes the most frequently
rearranged and overexpressed genes in prostate cancer. Despite being critical
regulators of development, little is known about their post-translational
regulation. Here we identify the ubiquitin ligase COP1 (also known as RFWD2) as a
tumour suppressor that negatively regulates ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5. ETV1, which is
mutated in prostate cancer more often, was degraded after being ubiquitinated by 
COP1. Truncated ETV1 encoded by prostate cancer translocation TMPRSS2:ETV1 lacks 
the critical COP1 binding motifs and was 50-fold more stable than wild-type ETV1.
Almost all patient translocations render ETV1 insensitive to COP1, implying that 
this confers a selective advantage to prostate epithelial cells. Indeed, COP1
deficiency in mouse prostate elevated ETV1 and produced increased cell
proliferation, hyperplasia, and early prostate intraepithelial neoplasia.
Combined loss of COP1 and PTEN enhanced the invasiveness of mouse prostate
adenocarcinomas. Finally, rare human prostate cancer samples showed hemizygous
loss of the COP1 gene, loss of COP1 protein, and elevated ETV1 protein while
lacking a translocation event. These findings identify COP1 as a tumour
suppressor whose downregulation promotes prostatic epithelial cell proliferation 
and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 21572435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19343. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019343.

YK-4-279 inhibits ERG and ETV1 mediated prostate cancer cell invasion.

Rahim S(1), Beauchamp EM, Kong Y, Brown ML, Toretsky JA, Üren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, D. C., United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Genomic rearrangements involving the ETS family of transcription
factors occur in 40-70% of prostate cancer cases. ERG and ETV1 are the most
common ETS members observed in these genetic alterations. The high prevalence of 
these rearrangements and their biological significance represents a novel
therapeutic target for the treatment of prostate cancer.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We recently reported the development of YK-4-279, a small
molecule inhibitor of EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein in Ewing's Sarcoma. Since ERG and ETV1
belong to the same class of ETS factors as FLI1, we tested the ability of
YK-4-279 to inhibit biological functions of ERG and ETV1 proteins in prostate
cancer. YK-4-279 inhibited ERG and ETV1 mediated transcriptional activity in a
luciferase assay. YK-4-279 also decreased ERG and ETV1 downstream target mRNA and
protein expression in ETV1-fusion positive LNCaP and ERG fusion positive VCaP
cells. YK-4-279 reduced the motility of LNCaP cells in a scratch assay and the
invasive phenotype of both LNCaP and VCaP cells in a HUVEC invasion assay.
Fusion-negative PC3 cells were unresponsive to YK-4-279. SiRNA mediated ERG
knockdown in VCaP cells resulted in a loss of drug responsiveness. Concurrently, 
transient ERG expression in PC-3 cells resulted in increased invasive potential, 
which was reduced by YK-4-279.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate that YK-4-279 inhibits ERG and ETV1 biological
activity in fusion-positive prostate cancer cells leading to decreased motility
and invasion. Therefore, YK-4-279 may have an impact on metastasis in prostate
cancer and it may be further evaluated for its clinical applications in prostate 
cancer in addition to Ewing's sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3084826
PMID: 21559405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Genes Cancer. 2011 Jan 1;1(10):1044-1052.

The ETS gene ETV4 is required for anchorage-independent growth and a cell
proliferation gene expression program in PC3 prostate cells.

Hollenhorst PC(1), Paul L, Ferris MW, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, 1001 E 3 St.
Bloomington, Indiana 47405.

Chromosomal abnormalities that give rise to elevated expression levels of the ETS
genes ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, or ERG are prevalent in prostate cancer, but the function
of these transcription factors in carcinogenesis is not clear. Previous work in
cell lines implicates ERG, ETV1, and ETV5 as regulators of invasive growth but
not transformation. Here we show that the PC3 prostate cancer cell line provides 
a model system to study the over-expression of ETV4. Migration assays, anchorage 
independent growth assays, and microarray analysis indicate that high ETV4
expression contributes to both transformation and cellular motility in PC3 cells.
ETV4 directly bound the 5' and 3' MYC enhancers and modulated expression of both 
MYC and other cell proliferation genes, demonstrating a potential role in cell
growth control. Despite this novel role for ETV4 in anchorage independent growth,
ETV4 over-expression in normal prostate-derived RWPE-1 cells showed effects
similar to ETV1 over-expression - increased cellular motility, and an
up-regulation of genes encoding extracellular proteins as well as ones important 
for development, inflammation, and wound healing. Because ETV1 and ETV4 have
similar roles when introduced to the same cellular background, we suggest that
the requirement of high ETV4 expression for maintenance of the
anchorage-independent growth in PC3 cells is due to a specific characteristic of 
this cell line rather than a function of ETV4 that is distinct from the other
oncogenic ETS genes. Thus, the function of ETS genes in prostate cancer may
differ based on other genetic alterations in a tumor.

PMCID: PMC3046414
PMID: 21373373  [PubMed]


110. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 26;6(1):e16332. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016332.

Overexpression of full-length ETV1 transcripts in clinical prostate cancer due to
gene translocation.

Gasi D(1), van der Korput HA, Douben HC, de Klein A, de Ridder CM, van Weerden
WM, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

ETV1 is overexpressed in a subset of clinical prostate cancers as a fusion
transcript with many different partners. However, ETV1 can also be overexpressed 
as a full-length transcript. Full-length ETV1 protein functions differently from 
truncated ETV1 produced by fusion genes. In this study we describe the genetic
background of full-length ETV1 overexpression and the biological properties of
different full-length ETV1 isoforms in prostate cancer. Break-apart FISH showed
in five out of six patient samples with overexpression of full-length ETV1 a
genomic rearrangement of the gene, indicating frequent translocation. We were
able to study the rearrangements in more detail in two tumors. In the first tumor
5'-RACE on cDNA showed linkage of the complete ETV1 transcript to the first exon 
of a prostate-specific two exon ncRNA gene that maps on chromosome 14 (EST14).
This resulted in the expression of both full-length ETV1 transcripts and
EST14-ETV1 fusion transcripts. In chromosome spreads of a xenograft derived from 
the second prostate cancer we observed a complex ETV1 translocation involving a
chromosome 7 fragment that harbors ETV1 and fragments of chromosomes 4 and 10.
Further studies revealed the overexpression of several different full-length
transcripts, giving rise to four protein isoforms with different N-terminal
regions. Even the shortest isoform synthesized by full-length ETV1 stimulated in 
vitro anchorage-independent growth of PNT2C2 prostate cells. This contrasts the
lack of activity of even shorter N-truncated ETV1 produced by fusion transcripts.
Our findings that in clinical prostate cancer overexpression of full-length ETV1 
is due to genomic rearrangements involving different chromosomes and the
identification of a shortened biologically active ETV1 isoform are highly
relevant for understanding the mechanism of ETV1 function in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3027657
PMID: 21298110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 6;5(12):e15145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015145.

Genomic aberrations in lung adenocarcinoma in never smokers.

Job B(1), Bernheim A, Beau-Faller M, Camilleri-Broët S, Girard P, Hofman P,
Mazières J, Toujani S, Lacroix L, Laffaire J, Dessen P, Fouret P; LG
Investigators.

Collaborators: Dartevelle P, Dulmet E, Leroy-Ladurie F, de Montpreville V, Monnet
I, Bernard A, Piard F, Alifano M, Camilleri-Broët S, Régnard JF, Hofman P, Hofman
V, Mouroux J, Trédaniel J, Beau-Faller M, Massard G, Neuville A, Antoine M,
Cadranel J, Brouchet L, Mazières J, Rouquette I, Saint-Blancard P, Vaylet F,
Berhneim A, Dessen P, Dufour F, Dorvault N, Fouret P, Job B, Lacroix L, Lazar V, 
Richon C, Roux V, Saulnier P, Taranchon E, Toujani S, Valent A, Girard P, Gossot 
D, Validire P, Laffaire J.

Author information: 
(1)Plate-forme de Biologie intégrée, Institut de recherche intégrée en
Cancérologie à Villejuif, Villejuif, France.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer in never smokers would rank as the seventh most common
cause of cancer death worldwide.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We performed high-resolution array comparative genomic
hybridization analysis of lung adenocarcinoma in sixty never smokers and
identified fourteen new minimal common regions (MCR) of gain or loss, of which
five contained a single gene (MOCS2, NSUN3, KHDRBS2, SNTG1 and ST18). One larger 
MCR of gain contained NSD1. One focal amplification and nine gains contained FUS.
NSD1 and FUS are oncogenes hitherto not known to be associated with lung cancer. 
FISH showed that the amplicon containing FUS was joined to the next telomeric
amplicon at 16p11.2. FUS was over-expressed in 10 tumors with gain of 16p11.2
compared to 30 tumors without that gain. Other cancer genes present in
aberrations included ARNT, BCL9, CDK4, CDKN2B, EGFR, ERBB2, MDM2, MDM4, MET, MYC 
and KRAS. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering with adjustment for
false-discovery rate revealed clusters differing by the level and pattern of
aberrations and displaying particular tumor characteristics. One cluster was
strongly associated with gain of MYC. Another cluster was characterized by
extensive losses containing tumor suppressor genes of which RB1 and WRN. Tumors
in that cluster frequently harbored a central scar-like fibrosis. A third cluster
was associated with gains on 7p and 7q, containing ETV1 and BRAF, and displayed
the highest rate of EGFR mutations. SNP array analysis validated copy-number
aberrations and revealed that RB1 and WRN were altered by recurrent copy-neutral 
loss of heterozygosity.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study has uncovered new aberrations containing cancer
genes. The oncogene FUS is a candidate gene in the 16p region that is frequently 
gained in never smokers. Multiple genetic pathways defined by gains of MYC,
deletions of RB1 and WRN or gains on 7p and 7q are involved in lung
adenocarcinoma in never smokers.

PMCID: PMC2997777
PMID: 21151896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Cancer. 2010 Dec 9;9:313. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-313.

The ERK MAP kinase-PEA3/ETV4-MMP-1 axis is operative in oesophageal
adenocarcinoma.

Keld R(1), Guo B, Downey P, Gulmann C, Ang YS, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
UK.

BACKGROUND: Many members of the ETS-domain transcription factor family are
important drivers of tumourigenesis. In this context, their activation by Ras-ERK
pathway signaling is particularly relevant to the tumourigenic properties of many
ETS-domain transcription factors. The PEA3 subfamily of ETS-domain transcription 
factors have been implicated in tumour metastasis in several different cancers.
RESULTS: Here, we have studied the expression of the PEA3 subfamily members
PEA3/ETV4 and ER81/ETV1 in oesophageal adenocarcinomas and determined their role 
in oesophageal adenocarcinoma cell function. PEA3 plays an important role in
controlling both the proliferation and invasive properties of OE33 oesophageal
adenocarcinoma cells. A key target gene is MMP-1. The ERK MAP kinase pathway
activates PEA3 subfamily members and also plays a role in these PEA3 controlled
events, establishing the ERK-PEA3-MMP-1 axis as important in OE33 cells. PEA3
subfamily members are upregulated in human adenocarcinomas and expression
correlates with MMP-1 expression and late stage metastatic disease. Enhanced ERK 
signaling is also more prevalent in late stage oesophageal adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that the ERK-PEA3-MMP-1 axis is upregulated in
oesophageal adenocarcinoma cells and is a potentially important driver of the
metastatic progression of oesophageal adenocarcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3009708
PMID: 21143918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem J. 2011 Feb 1;433(3):515-25. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101562.

ERK/p90(RSK)/14-3-3 signalling has an impact on expression of PEA3 Ets
transcription factors via the transcriptional repressor capicúa.

Dissanayake K(1), Toth R, Blakey J, Olsson O, Campbell DG, Prescott AR,
MacKintosh C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Dundee, Scotland, UK.

Compounds that inhibit signalling upstream of ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated
kinase) are promising anticancer therapies, motivating research to define how
this pathway promotes cancers. In the present study, we show that human capicúa
represses mRNA expression for PEA3 (polyoma enhancer activator 3) Ets
transcription factors ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 (ETV is Ets translocation variant), and
this repression is relieved by multisite controls of capicúa by ERK, p90(RSK)
(p90 ribosomal S6 kinase) and 14-3-3 proteins. Specifically, 14-3-3 binds to
p90(RSK)-phosphorylated Ser¹7³ of capicúa thereby modulating DNA binding to its
HMG (high-mobility group) box, whereas ERK phosphorylations prevent binding of a 
C-terminal NLS (nuclear localization sequence) to importin a4 (KPNA3). ETV1, ETV4
and ETV5 mRNA levels in melanoma cells are elevated by siRNA (small interfering
RNA) knockdown of capicúa, and decreased by inhibiting ERK and/or expressing a
form of capicúa that cannot bind to 14-3-3 proteins. Capicúa knockdown also
enhances cell migration. The findings of the present study give further
mechanistic insights into why ETV1 is highly expressed in certain cancers,
indicate that loss of capicúa can desensitize cells to the effects of ERK pathway
inhibitors, and highlight interconnections among growth factor signalling,
spinocerebellar ataxias and cancers.

PMCID: PMC3025492
PMID: 21087211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cancer Cell. 2010 Nov 16;18(5):407-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.036.

Bioinformatic mining of gene expression datasets identifies ETV1 as a critical
regulator of oncogenesis in gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Rubin BP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Lerner Research Institute 
and Taussig Cancer Center, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. rubinb2@ccf.org

PMID: 21075305  [PubMed]


115. Genome Res. 2011 Jan;21(1):56-67. doi: 10.1101/gr.110684.110. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Discovery of non-ETS gene fusions in human prostate cancer using next-generation 
RNA sequencing.

Pflueger D(1), Terry S, Sboner A, Habegger L, Esgueva R, Lin PC, Svensson MA,
Kitabayashi N, Moss BJ, MacDonald TY, Cao X, Barrette T, Tewari AK, Chee MS,
Chinnaiyan AM, Rickman DS, Demichelis F, Gerstein MB, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Half of prostate cancers harbor gene fusions between TMPRSS2 and members of the
ETS transcription factor family. To date, little is known about the presence of
non-ETS fusion events in prostate cancer. We used next-generation transcriptome
sequencing (RNA-seq) in order to explore the whole transcriptome of 25 human
prostate cancer samples for the presence of chimeric fusion transcripts. We
generated more than 1 billion sequence reads and used a novel computational
approach (FusionSeq) in order to identify novel gene fusion candidates with high 
confidence. In total, we discovered and characterized seven new cancer-specific
gene fusions, two involving the ETS genes ETV1 and ERG, and four involving
non-ETS genes such as CDKN1A (p21), CD9, and IKBKB (IKK-beta), genes known to
exhibit key biological roles in cellular homeostasis or assumed to be critical in
tumorigenesis of other tumor entities, as well as the oncogene PIGU and the tumor
suppressor gene RSRC2. The novel gene fusions are found to be of low frequency,
but, interestingly, the non-ETS fusions were all present in prostate cancer
harboring the TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion. Future work will focus on determining if
the ETS rearrangements in prostate cancer are associated or directly predispose
to a rearrangement-prone phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3012926
PMID: 21036922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Lab Invest. 2011 Mar;91(3):404-12. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2010.179. Epub 2010 Oct
25.

Testing mutual exclusivity of ETS rearranged prostate cancer.

Svensson MA(1), LaFargue CJ, MacDonald TY, Pflueger D, Kitabayashi N, Santa-Cruz 
AM, Garsha KE, Sathyanarayana UG, Riley JP, Yun CS, Nagy D, Kosmeder JW, Pestano 
GA, Tewari AK, Demichelis F, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Prostate cancer is a clinically heterogeneous and multifocal disease. More than
80% of patients with prostate cancer harbor multiple geographically discrete
cancer foci at the time of diagnosis. Emerging data suggest that these foci are
molecularly distinct consistent with the hypothesis that they arise as
independent clones. One of the strongest arguments is the heterogeneity observed 
in the status of E26 transformation specific (ETS) rearrangements between
discrete tumor foci. The clonal evolution of individual prostate cancer foci
based on recent studies demonstrates intertumoral heterogeneity with intratumoral
homogeneity. The issue of multifocality and interfocal heterogeneity is important
and has not been fully elucidated due to lack of the systematic evaluation of ETS
rearrangements in multiple tumor sites. The current study investigates the
frequency of multiple gene rearrangements within the same focus and between
different cancer foci. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays were
designed to detect the four most common recurrent ETS gene rearrangements. In a
cohort of 88 men with localized prostate cancer, we found ERG, ETV1, and ETV5
rearrangements in 51% (44/86), 6% (5/85), and 1% (1/86), respectively. None of
the cases demonstrated ETV4 rearrangements. Mutual exclusiveness of ETS
rearrangements was observed in the majority of cases; however, in six cases, we
discovered multiple ETS or 5' fusion partner rearrangements within the same tumor
focus. In conclusion, we provide further evidence for prostate cancer tumor
heterogeneity with the identification of multiple concurrent gene rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC3130188
PMID: 20975660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Nature. 2010 Oct 14;467(7317):796-7. doi: 10.1038/467796a.

Cancer: Oncogenes in context.

Heinrich MC, Corless CL.

Comment on
    Nature. 2010 Oct 14;467(7317):849-53.

PMID: 20944735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nature. 2010 Oct 14;467(7317):849-53. doi: 10.1038/nature09409. Epub 2010 Oct 3.

ETV1 is a lineage survival factor that cooperates with KIT in gastrointestinal
stromal tumours.

Chi P(1), Chen Y, Zhang L, Guo X, Wongvipat J, Shamu T, Fletcher JA, Dewell S,
Maki RG, Zheng D, Antonescu CR, Allis CD, Sawyers CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2010 Oct 14;467(7317):796-7.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST) is the most common human sarcoma and is
primarily defined by activating mutations in the KIT or PDGFRA receptor tyrosine 
kinases. KIT is highly expressed in interstitial cells of Cajal (ICCs)-the
presumed cell of origin for GIST-as well as in haematopoietic stem cells,
melanocytes, mast cells and germ cells. Yet, families harbouring germline
activating KIT mutations and mice with knock-in Kit mutations almost exclusively 
develop ICC hyperplasia and GIST, suggesting that the cellular context is
important for KIT to mediate oncogenesis. Here we show that the ETS family member
ETV1 is highly expressed in the subtypes of ICCs sensitive to oncogenic KIT
mediated transformation, and is required for their development. In addition, ETV1
is universally highly expressed in GISTs and is required for growth of
imatinib-sensitive and resistant GIST cell lines. Transcriptome profiling and
global analyses of ETV1-binding sites suggest that ETV1 is a master regulator of 
an ICC-GIST-specific transcription network mainly through enhancer binding. The
ETV1 transcriptional program is further regulated by activated KIT, which
prolongs ETV1 protein stability and cooperates with ETV1 to promote
tumorigenesis. We propose that GIST arises from ICCs with high levels of
endogenous ETV1 expression that, when coupled with an activating KIT mutation,
drives an oncogenic ETS transcriptional program. This differs from other
ETS-dependent tumours such as prostate cancer, melanoma and Ewing sarcoma where
genomic translocation or amplification drives aberrant ETS expression. It also
represents a novel mechanism of oncogenic transcription factor activation.

PMCID: PMC2955195
PMID: 20927104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2010 Sep;19(3):151-6. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e3181bb216a.

Detection of TMPRSS2 gene deletions and translocations in carcinoma,
intraepithelial neoplasia, and normal epithelium of the prostate by direct
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Zhang S(1), Pavlovitz B, Tull J, Wang Y, Deng FM, Fuller C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210, 
USA. zhangs@upstate.edu

TMPRSS2 gene fusions with ETS transcription factor family members ERG, ETV1, or
ETV4 have been recently discovered as a common molecular event in prostate
cancer. Much attention has been focused on exploring their clinical application
as a genetic tumor marker for the diagnosis, prognosis, and prediction of
response to therapy. Although several studies have been done, the clinical
utility of TMPRSS2 genetic alterations as biomarkers for prostate carcinoma
remains indeterminate. In this study, we examined adenocarcinomas, prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), and normal epithelium of the prostate retrieved 
from radical prostatectomy specimens to determine the frequency, specificity,
tissue heterogeneity, and prognostic value of TMPRSS2 genetic alterations using a
direct-labeled TMPRSS2 dual-color break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) probe cocktail designed to detect all known TMPRSS2-associated deletions
or translocations. Seventy-one patients (161 samples) with normal prostate
tissue, 60 patients (153 samples) with PIN, and 61 patients (142 samples) with
carcinoma in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue microarrays were tested.
None of the 161 normal prostate samples showed TMPRSS2 translocation or deletion.
Sixty-two percent patients of prostate carcinomas demonstrated TMPRSS2 gene
alterations, including 39% with translocation, 16% with deletion, and 7% with a
mixed pattern. Tissue heterogeneity for TMPRSS2 gene alterations was identified
in 28% of prostate carcinomas. No difference in the frequency of TMPRSS2 gene
alterations was found between Gleason 6 and 7 tumors. Seventeen percent of PIN
had TMPRSS2 gene alterations and showed the same FISH patterns as in the
carcinomas from respective prostatectomy specimens. The TMPRSS2 dual-color
break-apart FISH probe cocktail provides a simple and reliable method for the
detection of TMPRSS2-related genetic alterations in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue. TMPRSS2 genetic alterations detectable by this method
are strictly restricted in prostate neoplasia, and can be identified in the
majority of prostate carcinomas. Tissue heterogeneity for TMPRSS2 alterations is 
common, and it should be considered when sampling and evaluating biopsy
specimens.

PMID: 20736744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mod Pathol. 2010 Nov;23(11):1492-8. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.149. Epub 2010
Aug 6.

ETS family-associated gene fusions in Japanese prostate cancer: analysis of 194
radical prostatectomy samples.

Miyagi Y(1), Sasaki T, Fujinami K, Sano J, Senga Y, Miura T, Kameda Y, Sakuma Y, 
Nakamura Y, Harada M, Tsuchiya E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology and Genetics Division, Kanagawa Cancer Center Research
Institute, Yokohama, Japan. miyagi@gancen.asahi.yokohama.jp

The incidence and clinical significance of the TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion in
prostate cancer has been investigated with contradictory results. It is now
common knowledge that significant variability in gene alterations exists
according to ethnic background in various kinds of cancer. In this study, we
evaluated gene fusions involving the ETS gene family in Japanese prostate cancer.
Total RNA from 194 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded prostate cancer samples
obtained by radical prostatectomy was subjected to reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction to detect the common TMPRSS2:ERG T1-E4 and T1-E5 fusion
transcripts and five other non-TMPRSS2:ERG fusion transcripts. We identified 54
TMPRSS2:ERG-positive cases (54/194, 28%) and two HNRPA2B1:ETV1-positive cases
(2/194, 1%). The SLC45A3-ELK4 transcript, a fusion transcript without structural 
gene rearrangement, was detectable in five cases (5/194, 3%). The frequencies of 
both TMPRSS2:ERG- and non-TMPRSS2:ERG-positive cases were lower than those
reported for European, North American or Brazilian patients. Internodular
heterogeneity of TMPRSS2:ERG was observed in 5 out of 11 multifocal cases (45%); 
a frequency similar to that found in European and North American cases. We found 
a positive correlation between the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion and a Gleason score of =7
and patient age, but found no relationship with pT stage or plasma
prostate-specific antigen concentration. To exclude the possibility that Japanese
prostate cancer displays novel TMPRSS2:ERG transcript variants or has unique 5'
fusion partners for the ETS genes, we performed 5' RACE using fresh-frozen
prostate cancer samples. We identified only the normal 5' cDNA ends for ERG, ETV1
and ETV5 in fusion-negative cases. Because we identified a relatively low
frequency of TMPRSS2:ERG and other fusions, further evaluation is required before
this promising molecular marker should be introduced into the management of
Japanese prostate cancer patients.

PMID: 20693979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Mol Diagn. 2010 Sep;12(5):718-24. doi: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.100002. Epub 2010
Jul 8.

Detection of TMPRSS2-ETS fusions by a multiprobe fluorescence in situ
hybridization assay for the early diagnosis of prostate cancer: a pilot study.

Sun QP(1), Li LY, Chen Z, Pang J, Yang WJ, Zhou XF, Qiu JG, Su ZL, He D, Gao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, the Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, 
Guangzhou, China.

Fusion of the prostate-specific and androgen-regulated transmembrane-serine
protease gene (TMPRSS2) with the erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS)
family members is the most common genetic alteration in prostate cancer. However,
the biological and clinical role of TMPRSS2-ETS fusions in prostate cancer,
especially in problematic prostate needle core biopsies, has not been rigorously 
evaluated. We randomly collected 85 specimens including 50 archival prostate
cancer tissue blocks, 15 normal prostate specimens, and 20 benign prostatic
hyperplasia specimens for TMPRSS2-ETS fusion analyses. Moreover, the fusion
status in an additional 20 patients with initial negative biopsies who progressed
to biopsy-positive prostate cancer at subsequent follow-ups was also
characterized. Fluorescently labeled probes specific for ERG-related
rearrangements involving the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion as well as TMPRSS2-ETV1 and
TMPRSS2-ETV4 were used to assess samples for gene rearrangements indicative of
malignancy under a design of sequential trial. Rearrangements involving
TMPRSS2-ETS fusions were detected in 90.0% of the 50 postoperative prostate
cancer samples. The positive rate for the rearrangements in the initial prostate 
cancer-negative biopsies of 20 patients who eventually progressed to prostate
cancer was 60.0% (12/20). Our preliminary study demonstrates that the clinical
utility of TMPRSS2-ETS fusion detection as a biomarker and ancillary diagnostic
tool for the early diagnosis of prostate cancer is promising, given this approach
shows significant high sensitivity and specificity in detection.

PMCID: PMC2928438
PMID: 20616363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Aug 15;518(16):3272-89. doi: 10.1002/cne.22399.

Molecular analysis of neocortical layer structure in the ferret.

Rowell JJ(1), Mallik AK, Dugas-Ford J, Ragsdale CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Molecular markers that distinguish specific layers of rodent neocortex are
increasingly employed to study cortical development and the physiology of
cortical circuits. The extent to which these markers represent general features
of neocortical cell type identity across mammals, however, is unknown. To assess 
the conservation of layer markers more broadly, we isolated orthologs for 15
layer-enriched genes in the ferret, a carnivore with a large, gyrencephalic
brain, and analyzed their patterns of neocortical gene expression. Our major
findings are: 1) Many but not all layer markers tested show similar patterns of
layer-specific gene expression between mouse and ferret cortex, supporting the
view that layer-specific cell type identity is conserved at a molecular level
across mammalian superorders; 2) Our panel of deep layer markers (ER81/ETV1,
SULF2, PCP4, FEZF2/ZNF312, CACNA1H, KCNN2/SK2, SYT6, FOXP2, CTGF) provides
molecular evidence that the specific stratifications of layers 5 and 6 into 5a,
5b, 6a, and 6b are also conserved between rodents and carnivores; 3) Variations
in layer-specific gene expression are more pronounced across areas of ferret
cortex than between homologous areas of mouse and ferret cortex; 4) This
variation of area gene expression was clearest with the superficial layer markers
studied (SERPINE2, MDGA1, CUX1, UNC5D, RORB/NR1F2, EAG2/KCNH5). Most
dramatically, the layer 4 markers RORB and EAG2 disclosed a molecular
sublamination to ferret visual cortex and demonstrated a molecular dissociation
among the so-called agranular areas of the neocortex. Our findings establish
molecular markers as a powerful complement to cytoarchitecture for neocortical
layer and cell-type comparisons across mammals.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2894274
PMID: 20575059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Exp Mol Med. 2010 Jul 31;42(7):484-502.

Integrative epigenomic and genomic analysis of malignant pheochromocytoma.

Sandgren J(1), Andersson R, Rada-Iglesias A, Enroth S, Akerstrom G, Dumanski JP, 
Komorowski J, Westin G, Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala University
Hospital, SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden.

Epigenomic and genomic changes affect gene expression and contribute to tumor
development. The histone modifications trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4me3) and lysine 27 (H3K27me3) are epigenetic regulators associated to active
and silenced genes, respectively and alterations of these modifications have been
observed in cancer. Furthermore, genomic aberrations such as DNA copy number
changes are common events in tumors. Pheochromocytoma is a rare endocrine tumor
of the adrenal gland that mostly occurs sporadic with unknown epigenetic/genetic 
cause. The majority of cases are benign. Here we aimed to combine the genome-wide
profiling of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, obtained by the ChIP-chip methodology, and DNA
copy number data with global gene expression examination in a malignant
pheochromocytoma sample. The integrated analysis of the tumor expression levels, 
in relation to normal adrenal medulla, indicated that either histone
modifications or chromosomal alterations, or both, have great impact on the
expression of a substantial fraction of the genes in the investigated sample.
Candidate tumor suppressor genes identified with decreased expression, a H3K27me3
mark and/or in regions of deletion were for instance TGIF1, DSC3, TNFRSF10B,
RASSF2, HOXA9, PTPRE and CDH11. More genes were found with increased expression, 
a H3K4me3 mark, and/or in regions of gain. Potential oncogenes detected among
those were GNAS, INSM1, DOK5, ETV1, RET, NTRK1, IGF2, and the H3K27 trimethylase 
gene EZH2. Our approach to associate histone methylations and DNA copy number
changes to gene expression revealed apparent impact on global gene transcription,
and enabled the identification of candidate tumor genes for further exploration.

PMCID: PMC2912476
PMID: 20534969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. EMBO J. 2010 Jul 7;29(13):2147-60. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.106. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

Genome-wide analysis of ETS-family DNA-binding in vitro and in vivo.

Wei GH(1), Badis G, Berger MF, Kivioja T, Palin K, Enge M, Bonke M, Jolma A,
Varjosalo M, Gehrke AR, Yan J, Talukder S, Turunen M, Taipale M, Stunnenberg HG, 
Ukkonen E, Hughes TR, Bulyk ML, Taipale J.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL)
and Genome-Scale Biology Program, Institute of Biomedicine and High Throughput
Center, University of Helsinki, Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland.

Members of the large ETS family of transcription factors (TFs) have highly
similar DNA-binding domains (DBDs)-yet they have diverse functions and activities
in physiology and oncogenesis. Some differences in DNA-binding preferences within
this family have been described, but they have not been analysed systematically, 
and their contributions to targeting remain largely uncharacterized. We report
here the DNA-binding profiles for all human and mouse ETS factors, which we
generated using two different methods: a high-throughput microwell-based TF
DNA-binding specificity assay, and protein-binding microarrays (PBMs). Both
approaches reveal that the ETS-binding profiles cluster into four distinct
classes, and that all ETS factors linked to cancer, ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and FLI1,
fall into just one of these classes. We identify amino-acid residues that are
critical for the differences in specificity between all the classes, and confirm 
the specificities in vivo using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
sequencing (ChIP-seq) for a member of each class. The results indicate that even 
relatively small differences in in vitro binding specificity of a TF contribute
to site selectivity in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2905244
PMID: 20517297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Neurosci. 2010 Mar 31;30(13):4717-24. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0419-10.2010.

Differential regulation of dopaminergic gene expression by Er81.

Cave JW(1), Akiba Y, Banerjee K, Bhosle S, Berlin R, Baker H.

Author information: 
(1)Burke Medical Research Institute and Department of Neurology and Neuroscience,
Weill Cornell Medical College, White Plains, New York 10605, USA.

A recent study proposed that differentiation of dopaminergic neurons requires a
conserved "dopamine motif" (DA-motif) that functions as a binding site for ETS
DNA binding domain transcription factors. In the mammalian olfactory bulb (OB),
the expression of a set of five genes [including tyrosine hydroxylase (Th)] that 
are necessary for differentiation of dopaminergic neurons was suggested to be
regulated by the ETS-domain transcription factor ER81 via the DA-motif. To
investigate this putative regulatory role of ER81, expression levels of these
five genes were compared in both olfactory bulbs of adult wild-type mice
subjected to unilateral naris closure and the olfactory bulbs of neonatal Er81
wild-type and mutant mice. These studies found that ER81 was necessary only for
Th expression and not the other cassette genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) experiments showed that
ER81 bound directly to a consensus binding site/DA-motif in the rodent Th
proximal promoter. However, the ER81 binding site/DA-motif in the Th proximal
promoter is poorly conserved in other mammals. Both ChIP assays with canine OB
tissue and EMSA experiments with the human Th proximal promoter did not detect
ER81 binding to the Th DA-motif from these species. These results suggest that
regulation of Th expression by the direct binding of ER81 to the Th promoter is a
species-specific mechanism. These findings indicate that ER81 is not necessary
for expression of the OB dopaminergic gene cassette and that the DA-motif is not 
involved in differentiation of the mammalian OB dopaminergic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2859884
PMID: 20357122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Apr;34(4):478-85. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181d6827b.

ETS gene aberrations in atypical cribriform lesions of the prostate: Implications
for the distinction between intraductal carcinoma of the prostate and cribriform 
high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

Han B(1), Suleman K, Wang L, Siddiqui J, Sercia L, Magi-Galluzzi C, Palanisamy N,
Chinnaiyan AM, Zhou M, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, USA.

BACKGROUND: Atypical cribriform lesions (ACLs) of the prostate consist of
cribriform glands lined with cytologically malignant cells with partial or
complete basal cell lining. It may represent cribriform "high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia" (HGPIN) or "intraductal carcinoma of the prostate"
(IDC-P), which is almost always associated with clinically aggressive prostate
carcinoma (PCa). Distinction between these 2 lesions has profound clinical
significance, especially on needle biopsies. However, there are lesions that do
not fully satisfy the criteria for IDC-P yet are worse than typical HGPIN and are
difficult to distinguish based on morphologic criteria alone.
METHODS: To better understand the biologic and molecular basis of distinction
between cribriform HGPIN and IDC, we used break-apart fluorescence in-situ
hybridization assay to assess ETS gene aberrations, a specific and commonest
molecular alteration involving PCa, in a cohort of 16 isolated ACL, presumed to
be an isolated cribriform HGPIN, and 45 carcinoma-associated ACL (ACL-PCa) on
radical prostatectomy specimens, presumed to be spectrum of IDC-P. The latter was
further divided into 2 groups: group A with marked nuclear atypia (nuclear size
6xnormal or larger) and/or comedonecrosis (n=21) and group B that did not fulfill
these criteria (n=24).
RESULTS: Overall, ERG rearrangement was absent (0 of 16) in isolated cribriform
HGPIN, whereas present in 75% (36 of 48) of IDC-P, of which 65% (23 of 36) were
through deletion and 35% (13 of 36) through insertion. Notably, 17% (6 of 36) of 
the IDC-P showed duplication of ERG rearrangement in combination with deletion of
5'-ERG. Hundred percent (34 of 34) of the IDC-P showed concordance of ERG
rearrangement status with adjacent invasive carcinoma. There was no difference
between the 2 groups of IDC-P lesions regarding prevalence of ERG rearrangement
(group A 79% vs. group B 74%) and EDel2+ (20% vs. 15%). No case with ETV1, ETV4, 
or ETV5 rearrangement was identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our molecular data suggest that isolated cribriform HGPIN and IDC-P 
are biologically distinct lesions. Majority of ACL-PCa most likely represent
intraductal spread of PCa. There is a significant overlap between IDC-P and HGPIN
at the lower grade morphologic spectrum. ERG break-apart fluorescence in-situ
hybridization assay provides insight into understanding the molecular basis of
cribriform HGPIN and IDC-P and has potential clinical implications in their
distinction on needle biopsies.

PMID: 20220513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Neurosci. 2010 Feb 24;30(8):2824-34. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4023-09.2010.

Origin and molecular specification of globus pallidus neurons.

Nóbrega-Pereira S(1), Gelman D, Bartolini G, Pla R, Pierani A, Marín O.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas y 
Universidad Miguel Hernández, Sant Joan d'Alacant, Spain.

The mechanisms controlling the assembly of brain nuclei are poorly understood. In
the forebrain, it is typically assumed that the formation of nuclei follows a
similar sequence of events that in the cortex. In this structure, projection
neurons are generated sequentially from common progenitor cells and migrate
radially to reach their final destination, whereas interneurons are generated
remotely and arrive to the cortex through tangential migration. Using the globus 
pallidus as a model to study the formation of forebrain nuclei, we found that the
development of this basal ganglia structure involves the generation of several
distinct classes of projection neurons from relatively distant progenitor pools, 
which then assemble together through tangential migration. Our results thus
suggest that tangential migration in the forebrain is not limited to
interneurons, as previously thought, but also involves projection neurons and
reveal that the assembly of forebrain nuclei is more complex than previously
anticipated.

PMID: 20181580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 1;70(5):2075-84. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3092. Epub
2010 Feb 16.

An oncogenic role for ETV1 in melanoma.

Jané-Valbuena J(1), Widlund HR, Perner S, Johnson LA, Dibner AC, Lin WM, Baker
AC, Nazarian RM, Vijayendran KG, Sellers WR, Hahn WC, Duncan LM, Rubin MA, Fisher
DE, Garraway LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Copy gains involving chromosome 7p represent one of the most common genomic
alterations found in melanomas, suggesting the presence of "driver" cancer genes.
We identified several tumor samples that harbored focal amplifications situated
at the peak of common chromosome 7p gains, in which the minimal common
overlapping region spanned the ETV1 oncogene. Fluorescence in situ hybridization 
analysis revealed copy gains spanning the ETV1 locus in >40% of cases, with ETV1 
amplification (>6 copies/cell) present in 13% of primary and 18% of metastatic
melanomas. Melanoma cell lines, including those with ETV1 amplification,
exhibited dependency on ETV1 expression for proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth. Moreover, overexpression of ETV1 in combination
with oncogenic NRAS(G12D) transformed primary melanocytes and promoted tumor
formation in mice. ETV1 overexpression elevated microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor expression in immortalized melanocytes, which was necessary 
for ETV1-dependent oncogenicity. These observations implicate deregulated ETV1 in
melanoma genesis and suggest a pivotal lineage dependency mediated by oncogenic
ETS transcription factors in this malignancy.

PMCID: PMC2846410
PMID: 20160028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 22;5(1):e8854. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008854.

Pea3 transcription factors and wnt1-induced mouse mammary neoplasia.

Baker R(1), Kent CV, Silbermann RA, Hassell JA, Young LJ, Howe LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, New York, USA.

The role of the PEA3 subfamily of Ets transcription factors in breast neoplasia
is controversial. Although overexpression of PEA3 (E1AF/ETV4), and of the related
factors ERM (ETV5) and ER81 (ETV1), have been observed in human and mouse breast 
tumors, PEA3 factors have also been ascribed a tumor suppressor function. Here,
we utilized the MMTV/Wnt1 mouse strain to further interrogate the role of PEA3
transcription factors in mammary tumorigenesis based on our previous observation 
that Pea3 is highly expressed in MMTV/Wnt1 mammary tumors. Pea3 expression in
mouse mammary tissues was visualized using a Pea3(NLSlacZ) reporter strain. In
normal mammary glands, Pea3 expression is predominantly confined to myoepithelial
cells. Wnt1 transgene expression induced marked amplification of this cell
compartment in nontumorous mammary glands, accompanied by an apparent increase in
Pea3 expression. The pattern of Pea3 expression in MMTV/Wnt1 mammary glands
recapitulated the cellular profile of activated beta-catenin/TCF signaling, which
was visualized using both beta-catenin immunohistochemistry and the
beta-catenin/TCF-responsive reporter Axin2(NLSlacZ). To test the requirement for 
PEA3 factors in Wnt1-induced tumorigenesis, we employed a mammary-targeted
dominant negative PEA3 transgene, DeltaNPEA3En. Expression of DeltaNPEA3En
delayed early-onset tumor formation in MMTV/Wnt1 virgin females (P = 0.03),
suggesting a requirement for PEA3 factor function for Wnt1-driven tumor
formation. Consistent with this observation, expression of the DeltaNPEA3En
transgene was profoundly reduced in mammary tumors compared to nontumorous
mammary glands from bigenic MMTV/Wnt1, MMTV/DeltaNPEA3En mice (P = 0.01). Our
data provide the first description of Wnt1-mediated expansion of the
Pea3-expressing myoepithelial compartment in nontumorous mammary glands.
Consistent with this observation, mammary myoepithelium was selectively
responsive to Wnt1. Together these data suggest the MMTV/Wnt1 strain as a
potential model of basal breast cancer. Furthermore, this study provides evidence
for a protumorigenic role of PEA3 factors in breast neoplasia, and supports
targeting the PEA3 transcription factor family in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2809747
PMID: 20107508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Br J Cancer. 2010 Feb 16;102(4):678-84. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605554. Epub 2010
Jan 26.

Molecular characterisation of ERG, ETV1 and PTEN gene loci identifies patients at
low and high risk of death from prostate cancer.

Reid AH(1), Attard G, Ambroisine L, Fisher G, Kovacs G, Brewer D, Clark J, Flohr 
P, Edwards S, Berney DM, Foster CS, Fletcher A, Gerald WL, Møller H, Reuter VE,
Scardino PT, Cuzick J, de Bono JS, Cooper CS; Transatlantic Prostate Group.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, Male Urological Cancer Research Centre,
Surrey, UK.

BACKGROUND: The discovery of ERG/ETV1 gene rearrangements and PTEN gene loss
warrants investigation in a mechanism-based prognostic classification of prostate
cancer (PCa). The study objective was to evaluate the potential clinical
significance and natural history of different disease categories by combining
ERG/ETV1 gene rearrangements and PTEN gene loss status.
METHODS: We utilised fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) assays to detect
PTEN gene loss and ERG/ETV1 gene rearrangements in 308 conservatively managed PCa
patients with survival outcome data.
RESULTS: ERG/ETV1 gene rearrangements alone and PTEN gene loss alone both failed 
to show a link to survival in multivariate analyses. However, there was a strong 
interaction between ERG/ETV1 gene rearrangements and PTEN gene loss (P<0.001).
The largest subgroup of patients (54%), lacking both PTEN gene loss and ERG/ETV1 
gene rearrangements comprised a 'good prognosis' population exhibiting favourable
cancer-specific survival (85.5% alive at 11 years). The presence of PTEN gene
loss in the absence of ERG/ETV1 gene rearrangements identified a patient
population (6%) with poorer cancer-specific survival that was highly significant 
(HR=4.87, P<0.001 in multivariate analysis, 13.7% survival at 11 years) when
compared with the 'good prognosis' group. ERG/ETV1 gene rearrangements and PTEN
gene loss status should now prospectively be incorporated into a predictive model
to establish whether predictive performance is improved.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that FISH studies of PTEN gene loss and ERG/ETV1
gene rearrangements could be pursued for patient stratification, selection and
hypothesis-generating subgroup analyses in future PCa clinical trials and
potentially in patient management.

PMCID: PMC2837564
PMID: 20104229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Oncogene. 2010 Mar 25;29(12):1810-20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.471. Epub 2010 Jan
11.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase complex component COP1 regulates PEA3 group member
stability and transcriptional activity.

Baert JL(1), Monte D, Verreman K, Degerny C, Coutte L, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université de Lille-Nord de
France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille Cedex 59021, France.
jean-luc.baert@ibl.fr

In this study, we report that the PEA3 group members interact with the mammalian 
really interesting new gene (RING) E3 ubiquitin ligase constitutive
photomorphogenetic 1 (COP1), which mediates ubiquitylation and subsequent
proteasome degradation of the p53 and c-Jun transcription factors. This
interaction is mediated by the central region of COP1 including the coiled-coil
domain and two COP1-interacting consensus motifs localized in the well-conserved 
N-terminal transactivation domain of the PEA3 group members. At the
transcriptional level, COP1 reduces the transcriptional activity of ERM and the
two other PEA3 group proteins on Ets-responsive reporter genes; this effect being
dependent on the RING domain of COP1 and the two COP1-interacting motifs of ERM. 
Reduced transcriptional activity was, however, not related to COP1-induced
changes in ERM stability. In fact, increased ubiquitylation and subsequent
proteasome-mediated degradation of ERM is achieved only when COP1 is expressed
with DET1, a key COP1 partner within the ubiquitylation complex. Conversely, we
show that the depletion of COP1 or DET1 by small interference RNA (siRNA) in U2OS
cells stabilizes endogenous ERM whereas only COP1 knockdown enhances expression
of ICAM-1, a gene regulated by this transcription factor. These results indicate 
that COP1 is a complex regulator of ERM and the two other PEA3 group members.

PMID: 20062082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Development. 2010 Jan;137(2):293-302. doi: 10.1242/dev.041178.

Role of Fgf8 signalling in the specification of rostral Cajal-Retzius cells.

Zimmer C(1), Lee J, Griveau A, Arber S, Pierani A, Garel S, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR), Medical Research Council
(MRC), Department of Molecular Neurobiology, London NW7 1AA, UK.
zimmer@ibdml.univ-mrs.fr

Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells play a key role in the formation of the cerebral cortex.
These pioneer neurons are distributed throughout the cortical marginal zone in
distinct graded distributions. Fate mapping and cell lineage tracing studies have
recently shown that CR cells arise from restricted domains of the pallial
ventricular zone, which are associated with signalling centres involved in the
early regionalisation of the telencephalic vesicles. In this study, we identified
a subpopulation of CR cells in the rostral telencephalon that expresses Er81, a
downstream target of Fgf8 signalling. We investigated the role of the rostral
telencephalic patterning centre, which secretes FGF molecules, in the
specification of these cells. Using pharmacological inhibitors and genetic
inactivation of Fgf8, we showed that production of Fgf8 by the rostral
telencephalic signalling centre is required for the specification of the Er81+ CR
cell population. Moreover, the analysis of Fgf8 gain-of-function in cultivated
mouse embryos and of Emx2 and Gli3 mutant embryos revealed that ectopic Fgf8
signalling promotes the generation of CR cells with a rostral phenotype from the 
dorsal pallium. These data showed that Fgf8 signalling is both required and
sufficient to induce rostral CR cells. Together, our results shed light on the
mechanisms specifying rostral CR cells and further emphasise the crucial role of 
telencephalic signalling centres in the generation of distinct CR cell
populations.

PMCID: PMC2799162
PMID: 20040495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell. 2009 Dec 11;139(6):1069-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.11.030.

Nuclear receptor-induced chromosomal proximity and DNA breaks underlie specific
translocations in cancer.

Lin C(1), Yang L, Tanasa B, Hutt K, Ju BG, Ohgi K, Zhang J, Rose DW, Fu XD, Glass
CK, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego School of
Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0648, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2009 Dec 11;139(6):1047-9.

Chromosomal translocations are a hallmark of leukemia/lymphoma and also appear in
solid tumors, but the underlying mechanism remains elusive. By establishing a
cellular model that mimics the relative frequency of authentic translocation
events without proliferation selection, we report mechanisms of nuclear
receptor-dependent tumor translocations. Intronic binding of liganded androgen
receptor (AR) first juxtaposes translocation loci by triggering intra- and
interchromosomal interactions. AR then promotes site-specific DNA double-stranded
breaks (DSBs) at translocation loci by recruiting two types of enzymatic
activities induced by genotoxic stress and liganded AR, including
activation-induced cytidine deaminase and the LINE-1 repeat-encoded ORF2
endonuclease. These enzymes synergistically generate site-selective DSBs at
juxtaposed translocation loci that are ligated by nonhomologous end joining
pathway for specific translocations. Our data suggest that the confluence of two 
parallel pathways initiated by liganded nuclear receptor and genotoxic stress
underlies nonrandom tumor translocations, which may function in many types of
tumors and pathological processes.

PMCID: PMC2812435
PMID: 19962179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cancer Res. 2009 Oct 15;69(20):8102-10. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0941. Epub 
2009 Sep 29.

Induction of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and modulation of androgen
receptor by ETS variant 1/ETS-related protein 81.

Shin S(1), Kim TD, Jin F, van Deursen JM, Dehm SM, Tindall DJ, Grande JP, Munz
JM, Vasmatzis G, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

ETS variant 1 (ETV1), also known as ETS-related protein 81, is overexpressed in
prostate tumors, but whether and how this transcription factor affects
tumorigenesis has remained elusive. Here, we show that ETV1 is primarily
overexpressed in the most aggressive human prostate tumors. Transgenic ETV1 mice 
developed prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia as well as hyperplasia/neoplasia in
seminal vesicles. Moreover, ETV1 cooperated with the androgen receptor (AR) to
bind to the prostate-specific antigen enhancer and stimulate gene transcription. 
Consistent with its ability to physically interact with AR, ETV1 rendered an ETV1
binding site-driven reporter androgen inducible, and, on the other hand, ETV1
super-induced transcription from an AR binding site on androgen stimulation. In
conclusion, our study substantiates that ETV1 overexpression is an underlying
cause in the development of prostate and possibly also seminal vesicle cancer.
Its interaction with and activation of AR provides a molecular mechanism on how
ETV1 exerts its deleterious function. Thus, inhibiting ETV1 or blocking its
interaction with AR may represent novel strategies in prostate cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3947560
PMID: 19789348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;590:195-207. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-378-7_12.

Use of reporter genes to study promoters of the androgen receptor.

Shemshedini L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA.

As a transcriptional regulator, the androgen receptor (AR) regulates the
expression of many genes that are essential for male sexual differentiation,
including the development of both normal prostate and prostate cancer. The AR
acts by binding to regulatory DNA sequences found on the promoters of regulated
genes. The study of AR activity on such responsive promoters is greatly
facilitated by the use of the reporter gene assay, which provides a quantitative 
and reproducible method for studying the activity of such promoters. Among the
several reporter genes that can be used, the genes encoding luciferase (Luc) and 
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) have been used most widely and
successfully by researchers interested in AR-regulated promoters. Such studies
have led to the identification and characterization of DNA regulatory elements
mediating AR activity on responsive promoters and to an improved understanding of
how AR regulates the transcription process. Described in this chapter is a method
by which to generate and utilize Luc and CAT reporter gene plasmids driven by the
promoter of a novel androgen-regulated gene, ETV1.

PMID: 19763505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncol Res. 2009;17(9):413-23.

Transcriptional activation of hTERT in breast carcinomas by the Her2-ER81-related
pathway.

Vageli D(1), Ioannou MG, Koukoulis GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Larissa, Medical School of
Thessaly, Larissa, Greece. vagelidim@yahoo.gr

Her2 and ER81 (a member of ETS family) have been suggested to cause a synergistic
increase in the transcriptional activation of hTERT. Our study aimed to offer
further confirmation in clinical material. We determined the mRNA levels of Her2,
ER81, and hTERT, by QRT-PCR, in 43 breast carcinomas. In the specimens showing
hTERT transcriptional activation, Her2 and ER81 were increased in statistically
significant tumor subgroups (61% and 79% correspondingly). The 86% of specimens
with both Her2 and ER81 increased expression showed hTERT transcriptional
activation. Synchronous transcriptional activation of hTERT, Her2, and ER81
elevated expression was noted in 42% of the samples. In conclusion, we agree with
a previous study that Her2 overexpression may increase the hTERT transcriptional 
activation. Our data indicate that the mechanism may involve Her2-ER81
interaction(s) and that the activation of hTERT could be mainly mediated by
transcriptional activation of ER81.

PMID: 19718948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nat Rev Urol. 2009 Aug;6(8):429-39. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2009.127.

ETS gene fusions in prostate cancer.

Clark JP(1), Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Male Urological Cancer Research Centre, Sutton, UK. jeremy.clark@icr.ac.uk

Chromosomal rearrangements that result in high level expression of ETS gene
family members are common events in human prostate cancer. Most frequently, the
androgen-activated gene TMPRSS2 is found fused to the ERG gene. Fusions involving
ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 occur less frequently but exhibit greater variability in
fusion structure with 12 unique 5' fusion partners identified so far. ETS gene
rearrangement seems to be a key event in driving prostate neoplastic development:
the rearrangement occurs as an early event and continues to be expressed in
metastatic and castration-resistant disease. However, ETS alterations seem
insufficient on their own to induce cancer formation. No consistent associations 
are seen between the presence of ETS alteration and clinical outcome, with the
possible exception that duplication of rearranged ERG, reflecting aneuploidy, is 
associated with poor outcome. Thus, factors other than ERG gene status may be the
major determinants of poor clinical outcome. Expression signatures of prostate
cancers containing the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion suggest involvement of beta-estradiol
signaling, and reveal higher levels of expression of HDAC1 and ion channel genes 
when compared to cancers that lack the rearrangement. These observations suggest 
new therapeutic possibilities for patients harboring ETS gene fusions.

PMID: 19657377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 28;106(30):12465-70. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905931106. Epub 2009 Jul 10.

ETS family transcription factors collaborate with alternative signaling pathways 
to induce carcinoma from adult murine prostate cells.

Zong Y(1), Xin L, Goldstein AS, Lawson DA, Teitell MA, Witte ON.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Chromosomal rearrangements involving erythroblast transformation specific (ETS)
family transcription factors were recently defined as the most common genetic
alterations in human prostate cancer. Despite their prevalence, it is unclear
what quantitative role they play in either initiation or progression of the
disease. Using a lentiviral transduction and dissociated cell prostate
regeneration approach, we find that acutely increased expression of ETS proteins 
in adult murine prostate epithelial cells is sufficient to induce the formation
of epithelial hyperplasia and focal prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
lesions, but not progression to carcinoma. However, combined expression of ERG
with additional genetic alternations associated with human prostate cancer can
lead to aggressive disease. Although ERG overexpression does not cooperate with
loss of the tumor suppressor p53, it does collaborate with alterations in PI3K
signaling, such as Pten knockdown or AKT up-regulation, to produce a
well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Most striking is our finding that
overexpression of androgen receptor (AR) does not give rise to any hyperplastic
lesions, but when combined with high levels of ERG, it promotes the development
of a more poorly differentiated, invasive adenocarcinoma. These findings suggest 
that in human prostate cancer, the most potent function of ETS gene fusions may
be to synergize with alternative genetic events and provide different pathways
for carcinoma production and invasive behavior. Our results provide direct
evidence for selective cooperating events in ERG-induced prostate tumorigenesis
and offer a rational basis for combined therapeutic interventions against
multiple oncogenic pathways in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2708977
PMID: 19592505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Genome Biol. 2009;10(7):229. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-7-229. Epub 2009 Jul 1.

A passport to neurotransmitter identity.

Smidt MP(1), Burbach JP.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience and Pharmacology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands. m.p.smidt-2@umcutrecht.nl

Comparison of a regulatory network that specifies dopaminergic neurons in
Caenorhabditis elegans to the development of vertebrate dopamine systems in the
mouse reveals a possible partial conservation of such a network.

PMCID: PMC2728521
PMID: 19591649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Prostate. 2009 Oct 1;69(14):1507-20. doi: 10.1002/pros.20997.

A novel, spontaneously immortalized, human prostate cancer cell line, Bob, offers
a unique model for pre-clinical prostate cancer studies.

Attard G(1), Rizzo S, Ledaki I, Clark J, Reid AH, Thompson A, Khoo V, de Bono JS,
Cooper CS, Hudson DL.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, Surrey, UK.

INTRODUCTION: New in vitro models of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) 
are urgently required.
METHODS: Trans-rectal needle biopsies (TRBP) of the prostate were performed for
research purposes on progressing CRPC patients who had not received prior
treatment to the prostate. Biopsies were immediately digested with collagenase
and plated onto collagen-coated flasks with a feeder layer of 3T6 cells and
cultured in cytokine-supplemented keratinocyte serum-free medium.
RESULTS: Biopsies from 25 patients were collected and one of these, following an 
initial period of crisis, spontaneously immortalized. A series of cell lines
called Bob were then established from a clone that survived CD133-selection
followed by 4 weeks under adhesion-independent conditions in methylcellulose.
Gains and losses previously described in clinical prostate tumors, most notably
loss of 8(p) and gain of 8(q), were identified on comparative genomic
hybridization and long-term growth in culture, survival in methylcellulose and
invasion through matrigel confirmed the malignant phenotype of Bob. Furthermore, 
Bob expressed high levels of p53 and markers of early differentiation, including 
K8, prostatic acid phosphatase and prostate stem cell antigen. There was,
however, no in vivo growth and ERG and ETV1 were not rearranged. Growth in serum 
permitted some differentiation.
CONCLUSION: This is the first spontaneously immortalized prostate cancer cell
line to be established from a TRBP of a patient with CRPC. Bob is a novel
pre-clinical model for functional studies in CRPC and especially for studying the
CRPC "basal" phenotype.

PMID: 19544327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Neurology. 2009 Sep 8;73(10):746-53. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181af3397. Epub 2009
Jun 17.

Layer-specific genes reveal a rudimentary laminar pattern in human nodular
heterotopia.

Garbelli R(1), Rossini L, Moroni RF, Watakabe A, Yamamori T, Tassi L, Bramerio M,
Russo GL, Frassoni C, Spreafico R.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epileptology and Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, Fondazione
I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, 20133 Milan, Italy.
garbelli.r@istituto-besta.it

Comment in
    Neurology. 2009 Sep 8;73(10):742-3.

OBJECTIVE: To define distinctive features of nodular heterotopia in specimens
derived from drug-resistant patients with epilepsy by evaluating mRNA expression 
of three different layer-specific markers: Rorbeta, Er81, and Nurr1.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression profile of these genes, recognized as markers
mainly expressed in layer IV for Rorbeta, in layer V for Er81, and in layer VI
for Nurr1, in surgical samples from 14 epileptic patients, using in situ
hybridization. Six patients had subcortical nodular heterotopia and 8 patients
were controls. The intrinsic organization of nodular formations and of the
overlaying neocortex was assessed.
RESULTS: In all patients, the 3 selected genes showed high cortical laminar
specificity. In subcortical nodular heterotopia, the different gene expression
profiles revealed a rudimentary laminar organization of the nodules. In the
overlaying cortex, fewer cells expressed the 3 genes in the appropriate specific 
layer as compared to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide new insights into possible ontogenetic mechanisms
of nodular heterotopia formation and show the potential role of layer-specific
markers to elucidate the neuropathology of malformations of cortical development.

PMID: 19535771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mod Pathol. 2009 Sep;22(9):1176-85. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.79. Epub 2009 May
22.

Characterization of ETS gene aberrations in select histologic variants of
prostate carcinoma.

Han B(1), Mehra R, Suleman K, Tomlins SA, Wang L, Singhal N, Linetzky KA,
Palanisamy N, Zhou M, Chinnaiyan AM, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Histologic variants of prostate carcinoma account for 5-10% of the disease and
are typically seen in association with conventional acinar carcinoma. These
variants often differ from the latter in clinical, immunophenotypic, and biologic
potential. Recently, recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene
TMPRSS2 and the ETS transcription factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 have been
identified in a majority of conventional prostate carcinomas. However, the
frequency and significance of this critical molecular event is unknown in the
histologic variants of prostate carcinoma. Here, we used break-apart fluorescence
in situ hybridization to assess TMPRSS2 and ETS aberrations in a series of select
histologic variants: foamy gland carcinoma (N=17), ductal adenocarcinoma (N=18), 
mucinous carcinoma (N=18), and small cell carcinoma (N=7). A histologic variation
of acinar adenocarcinoma, demonstrating glomeruloid morphology (N=9), was also
investigated. Overall, 55% of histologic variant or variation morphologies
demonstrated ETS aberrations (ERG in 54% and ETV1 in 1%). TMPRSS2:ERG fusion was 
identified in 83% (15/18), 71% (5/7), 50% (9/18), 33% (3/9), and 29% (5/17) of
mucinous, small cell, ductal, glomeruloid, and foamy gland prostate carcinomas,
respectively. Previously, we reported that 100% of androgen-independent
metastatic prostate carcinomas harboring TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion were associated 
with interstitial deletion (Edel). Interestingly, ERG rearrangement in small cell
carcinomas occurred exclusively through Edel, supporting the notion that
TMPRSS2:ERG with Edel is an aggressive molecular subtype. SPINK1, a biomarker
expressed exclusively in a subset of ETS negative prostate carcinomas, was
expressed in 6% of ETS negative histologic variants, specifically in ductal
adenocarcinoma. Notably, 88% (43/49) variant morphologies in this cohort showed
concordance of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion with associated conventional acinar type,
suggesting that variant morphology is clonally related to the latter. Overall,
our data provide insight into the origin, molecular mechanism, and phenotypic
association of ETS fusions in histologic variants of prostate carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2760291
PMID: 19465903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nature. 2009 Apr 16;458(7240):843-4. doi: 10.1038/458843a.

Neuroscience: A bar code for differentiation.

Spitzer NC.

Comment on
    Nature. 2009 Apr 16;458(7240):885-9.

PMID: 19370023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 1;69(7):2734-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4926. Epub
2009 Mar 17.

SLC45A3-ELK4 is a novel and frequent erythroblast transformation-specific fusion 
transcript in prostate cancer.

Rickman DS(1), Pflueger D, Moss B, VanDoren VE, Chen CX, de la Taille A, Kuefer
R, Tewari AK, Setlur SR, Demichelis F, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Chromosomal rearrangements account for all erythroblast transformation-specific
(ETS) family member gene fusions that have been reported in prostate cancer and
have clinical, diagnostic, and prognostic implications. Androgen-regulated genes 
account for the majority of the 5' genomic regulatory promoter elements fused
with ETS genes. TMPRSS2-ERG, TMPRSS2-ETV1, and SLC45A3-ERG rearrangements account
for roughly 90% of ETS fusion prostate cancer. ELK4, another ETS family member,
is androgen regulated, involved in promoting cell growth, and highly expressed in
a subset of prostate cancer, yet the mechanism of ELK4 overexpression is unknown.
In this study, we identified a novel ETS family fusion transcript, SLC45A3-ELK4, 
and found it to be expressed in both benign prostate tissue and prostate cancer. 
We found high levels of SLC45A3-ELK4 mRNA restricted to a subset of prostate
cancer samples. SLC45A3-ELK4 transcript can be detected at high levels in urine
samples from men at risk for prostate cancer. Characterization of the fusion mRNA
revealed a major variant in which SLC45A3 exon 1 is fused to ELK4 exon 2. Based
on quantitative PCR analyses of DNA, unlike other ETS fusions described in
prostate cancer, the expression of SLC45A3-ELK4 mRNA is not exclusive to cases
harboring a chromosomal rearrangement. Treatment of LNCaP cancer cells with a
synthetic androgen (R1881) revealed that SLC45A3-ELK4, and not endogenous ELK4,
mRNA expression is androgen regulated. Altogether, our findings show that
SLC45A3-ELK4 mRNA expression is heterogeneous, highly induced in a subset of
prostate cancers, androgen regulated, and most commonly occurs through a
mechanism other than chromosomal rearrangement (e.g., trans-splicing).

PMCID: PMC4063441
PMID: 19293179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Nature. 2009 Apr 16;458(7240):885-9. doi: 10.1038/nature07929. Epub 2009 Mar 15.

Gene regulatory logic of dopamine neuron differentiation.

Flames N(1), Hobert O.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York 10032, USA.
nf2171@columbia.edu

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Apr 16;458(7240):843-4.

Dopamine signalling regulates a variety of complex behaviours, and defects in
dopamine neuron function or survival result in severe human pathologies, such as 
Parkinson's disease. The common denominator of all dopamine neurons is the
expression of dopamine pathway genes, which code for a set of phylogenetically
conserved proteins involved in dopamine synthesis and transport. Gene regulatory 
mechanisms that result in the direct activation of dopamine pathway genes and
thereby ultimately determine the identity of dopamine neurons are poorly
understood in all systems studied so far. Here we show that a simple
cis-regulatory element, the dopamine (DA) motif, controls the expression of all
dopamine pathway genes in all dopaminergic cell types in Caenorhabditis elegans. 
The DA motif is activated by the ETS transcription factor AST-1. Loss of ast-1
results in the failure of all distinct dopaminergic neuronal subtypes to
terminally differentiate. Ectopic expression of ast-1 is sufficient to activate
the dopamine pathway in some cellular contexts. Vertebrate dopamine pathway genes
also contain phylogenetically conserved DA motifs that can be activated by the
mouse ETS transcription factor Etv1 (also known as ER81), and a specific class of
dopamine neurons fails to differentiate in mice lacking Etv1. Moreover, ectopic
Etv1 expression induces dopaminergic fate marker expression in neuronal primary
cultures. Mouse Etv1 can also functionally substitute for ast-1 in C. elegans.
Our studies reveal a simple and apparently conserved regulatory logic of dopamine
neuron terminal differentiation and may provide new entry points into the
diagnosis or therapy of conditions in which dopamine neurons are defective.

PMCID: PMC2671564
PMID: 19287374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Genes Cells. 2009 Mar;14(3):407-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01281.x. Epub
2009 Feb 17.

Identification of mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-transcription factors by microarray
and knockdown analyses, and signature molecule-marked MSC in bone marrow by
immunohistochemistry.

Kubo H(1), Shimizu M, Taya Y, Kawamoto T, Michida M, Kaneko E, Igarashi A,
Nishimura M, Segoshi K, Shimazu Y, Tsuji K, Aoba T, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Although ex vivo expanded mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have been used in numerous
studies, the molecular signature and in vivo distribution status of MSC remain
unknown. To address this matter, we identified numerous human MSC-characteristic 
genes--including nine transcription factor genes--using DNA microarray and
real-time RT-PCR analyses: Most of the MSC-characteristic genes were
down-regulated 24 h after incubation with osteogenesis-, chondrogenesis- or
adipogenesis-induction medium, or 48-72 h after knockdown of the nine
transcription factors. Furthermore, knockdowns of ETV1, ETV5, FOXP1, GATA6,
HMGA2, SIM2 or SOX11 suppressed the self-renewal capacity of MSC, whereas those
of FOXP1, SOX11, ETV1, SIM2 or PRDM16 reduced the osteogenic- and/or adipogenic
potential. In addition, immunohistochemistry using antibodies for the MSC
characteristic molecules--including GATA6, TRPC4, FLG and TGM2--revealed that
MSC-like cells were present near the endosteum and in the interior of bone marrow
of adult mice. These findings indicate that MSC synthesize a set of MSC markers
in vitro and in vivo, and that MSC-characteristic transcription factors are
involved in MSC stemness regulation.

PMID: 19228201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nature. 2009 Feb 12;457(7231):E1; discussion E2-3. doi: 10.1038/nature07738.

ETS rearrangements and prostate cancer initiation.

Carver BS(1), Tran J, Chen Z, Carracedo-Perez A, Alimonti A, Nardella C, Gopalan 
A, Scardino PT, Cordon-Cardo C, Gerald W, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Comment on
    Nature. 2007 Aug 2;448(7153):595-9.

The first recurrent translocation event in prostate cancer has been recently
described; it results in the translocation of an ETS (E26 transformation
specific) transcription factor (ERG or ETV1) to the TMPRSS2 promoter region,
which contains androgen responsive elements. The TMPRSS2:ERG genetic
rearrangement has been reported to occur in approximately 40% of primary prostate
tumours (ETV1 genetic rearrangements occur at a much lower frequency), and it
results in the aberrant androgen-regulated expression of ERG. Tomlins et al.
concluded that ETS genetic rearrangements are sufficient to initiate prostate
neoplasia. However, here we show that ETS genetic rearrangements may in fact
represent progression events rather than initiation events in prostate
tumorigenesis. To this end, we demonstrate that the prostate-specific
overexpression of ERG does not initiate prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2967456
PMID: 19212347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Neuroscience. 2009 Mar 17;159(2):682-91. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.12.064.
Epub 2009 Jan 10.

Expression of layer-specific markers in the adult neocortex of BCNU-Treated rat, 
a model of cortical dysplasia.

Moroni RF(1), Inverardi F, Regondi MC, Watakabe A, Yamamori T, Spreafico R,
Frassoni C.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Clinical Epileptology and Experimental Neurophysiology, Fondazione
I.R.C.C.S., Istituto Neurologico "C. Besta," Via Celoria 11, 20133 Milan, Italy.

The experimental model of cortical dysplasia (CD) obtained by administering
carmustine (1-3-bis-chloroethyl-nitrosurea [BCNU]) in pregnant rat uterus mimics 
the histopathological abnormalities observed in human CD patients: altered
cortical layering, and presence of heterotopia and dysmorphic/heterotopic
neurons. To investigate further the cortical layering disruption and the neuronal
composition of heterotopia in BCNU-exposed cortex, we analyzed the expression
pattern of the transcription factors Nurr1, Er81, Ror-beta, and Cux2
(respectively specific markers of layers VI, V, IV and superficial layers) in the
cortical areas of BCNU-treated rats by means of in situ hybridization, and
compared the findings with those observed in adult control rats. Combining in
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry we also investigated the origin of
dysmorphic or heterotopic neurons. The main results of the present study are (i) 
the analysis of cortical layer thickness revealed that the cortical thinning in
the BCNU model was prevalently restricted to the superficial layers; (ii) in
cortical and periventricular heterotopia, the prevalent presence of superficial
layer neurons in the internal areas, and deeper layer neurons in a more
peripheral region, demonstrated a rudimentary pattern of laminar organization in 
nodule formation; and (iii) the Er81 signal in the dysmorphic and heterotopic
pyramidal neurons located in layers I/II showed that they belong to layer V.
These results shed light on the disorganization of the laminar architecture of
the BCNU model by providing correlations with normal cortical layering and
revealing the ontogenesis of heterotopia and heterotopic/dysmorphic neurons. They
also provide strong evidence of the usefulness of layer-specific markers in
investigating the neuropathology of CD, thus opening up the possibility of
expanding their application to human neuropathology.

PMID: 19174181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Dairy Sci. 2009 Feb;92(2):758-64. doi: 10.3168/jds.2008-1395.

Fine mapping and association analysis of a quantitative trait locus for milk
production traits on Bos taurus autosome 4.

Rincón G(1), Islas-Trejo A, Casellas J, Ronin Y, Soller M, Lipkin E, Medrano JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis 95616, USA.

To fine map a quantitative trait locus (QTL) affecting milk production traits
previously associated with microsatellite RM188, we implemented an interval
mapping analysis by using microsatellite markers in a large Israeli Holstein
half-sib sire family, and linkage disequilibrium (LD) mapping in a large set of
US Holstein bulls. Interval mapping located the target QTL to the near vicinity
of RM188. For the LD mapping, we identified 42 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) in 15 genes in a 12-Mb region on bovine chromosome 4. A total of 24 tag SNP
were genotyped in 882 bulls belonging to the University of California Davis
archival collection of Holstein bull DNA samples with predicted transmitted
ability phenotypes. Marker-to-marker LD analysis revealed 2 LD blocks, with
intrablock r(2) values of 0.10 and 0.46, respectively; outside the blocks, r(2)
values ranged from 0.002 to 0.23. A standard additive/dominance model using the
generalized linear model procedure of SAS and the regression module of HelixTree 
software were used to test marker-trait associations. Single nucleotide
polymorphism 9 on ARL4A, SNP10 on XR_027435.1, SNP12 on ETV1, SNP21 on SNX13, and
SNP24 were significantly associated with milk production traits. We propose the
interval encompassing ARL4A and SNX13 genes as a candidate region in bovine
chromosome 4 for a concordant QTL related to milk protein traits in dairy cattle.
Functional studies are needed to confirm this result.

PMID: 19164688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Apr;62(4):373-6. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.061515. Epub 2008 Dec 
9.

Hormone-sensitive prostate cancer: a case of ETS gene fusion heterogeneity.

Attard G(1), Jameson C, Moreira J, Flohr P, Parker C, Dearnaley D, Cooper CS, de 
Bono JS.

Author information: 
(1)The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Sutton, UK.

Fusion of the hormone-regulated gene TMPRSS2 with ERG occurs in 50-70% of
prostate cancers; fusions of ETV1 with one of several partners occur in
approximately 10% of prostate cancers. These two translocations are mutually
exclusive. The presence of subclasses of these chromosomal rearrangements may
indicate worse prognosis, with the subclass 2+Edel, which has duplication of
TMPRSS2:ERG fusion sequences, indicating particularly poor survival. However as
this case shows, significant heterogeneity can exist with ERG and ETV1
rearrangements occurring in both prostate intra-epithelial neoplasia and cancer
in the same prostatectomy specimen and with adjacent cancer areas containing a
single copy, duplication and even triplication of the rearranged locus. As the
majority of ETS gene fusions are hormone regulated, they could explain the
pathogenesis underlying exquisitely hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. This is
exemplified by the case presented here of a patient diagnosed in 1991 who remains
asymptomatic and chemotherapy-naïve after having long-lasting tumour responses to
multiple lines of systemic hormonal treatments.

PMID: 19066166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 1;325(1):106-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.09.033. Epub 2008
Oct 18.

The Pea3 Ets transcription factor regulates differentiation of multipotent
progenitor cells during mammary gland development.

Kurpios NA(1), MacNeil L, Shepherd TG, Gludish DW, Giacomelli AO, Hassell JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Centre for Functional
Genomics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The Pea3 Ets transcription factor is overexpressed in breast tumors suggesting
that it plays a role in mammary oncogenesis. However, the normal biological
function of Pea3 in the mammary gland is not known. Here we report that Pea3 was 
expressed in the epithelium of the mouse mammary anlagen commensurate with their 
genesis, and at later times in the nipple and mammary ducts of female embryos. In
adult mice Pea3 transcripts peaked at the onset of puberty and early pregnancy,
times of active epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation. Pea3 was
expressed in all progenitor cap cells and rare body cells of terminal end buds,
and in the myoepithelial cells of ducts and alveoli. Analyses of the mammary
glands of Pea3-null mice during puberty revealed an increased number of terminal 
end buds and an increased fraction of proliferating progenitor cells within these
structures compared to their wild type littermates. Tissue transplant experiments
demonstrated that these phenotypes were intrinsic to the Pea3-null mammary
epithelium. During pregnancy, mammary glands isolated from Pea3-null females had 
impaired alveolar development as revealed by a decreased fraction of alveolar
structures. We performed in vitro colony forming assays of mammary epithelial
cells and discovered that loss of Pea3 altered the distribution of specific
multipotent progenitor cells. Double-immunofluorescence confirmed that
multipotential progenitors co-expressing markers of the myoepithelial and luminal
epithelial lineage were amplified in the mammary glands of Pea3-null mice by
comparison to their wild type counterparts. We propose that Pea3 functions in
multipotential progenitors to regulate their lineage-specific differentiation
potential.

PMID: 18977342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nat Neurosci. 2008 Nov;11(11):1283-93. doi: 10.1038/nn.2209. Epub 2008 Oct 12.

A central role for Islet1 in sensory neuron development linking sensory and
spinal gene regulatory programs.

Sun Y(1), Dykes IM, Liang X, Eng SR, Evans SM, Turner EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California 93093, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2008 Nov;11(11):1246.

We used conditional knockout strategies in mice to determine the developmental
events and gene expression program regulated by the LIM-homeodomain factor Islet1
in developing sensory neurons. Early development of the trigeminal and dorsal
root ganglia was grossly normal in the absence of Islet1. From E12.5 onward,
however, Isl1 mutant embryos showed a loss of the nociceptive markers TrkA and
Runx1 and a near absence of cutaneous innervation. Proprioceptive neurons
characterized by the expression of TrkC, Runx3 and Etv1 were relatively spared.
Microarray analysis of Isl1 mutant ganglia revealed prolonged expression of
developmental regulators that are normally restricted to early sensory
neurogenesis and ectopic expression of transcription factors that are normally
found in the CNS, but not in sensory ganglia. Later excision of Isl1 did not
reactivate early genes, but resulted in decreased expression of transcripts
related to specific sensory functions. Together these results establish a central
role for Islet1 in the transition from sensory neurogenesis to subtype
specification.

PMCID: PMC2605652
PMID: 18849985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS One. 2008 Sep 25;3(9):e3266. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003266.

Analysis of area-specific expression patterns of RORbeta, ER81 and Nurr1 mRNAs in
rat neocortex by double in situ hybridization and cortical box method.

Hirokawa J(1), Watakabe A, Ohsawa S, Yamamori T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Brain Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian neocortex is subdivided into many areas, each of which 
exhibits distinctive lamina architecture. To investigate such area differences in
detail, we chose three genes for comparative analyses, namely, RORbeta, ER81 and 
Nurr1, mRNAs of which have been reported to be mainly expressed in layers 4, 5
and 6, respectively. To analyze their qualitative and quantitative coexpression
profiles in the rat neocortex, we used double in situ hybridization (ISH)
histochemistry and cortical box method which we previously developed to integrate
the data of different staining and individuals in a standard three-dimensional
space.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Our new approach resulted in three main observations. First, 
the three genes showed unique area distribution patterns that are mostly
complementary to one another. The patterns revealed by cortical box method
matched well with the cytoarchitectonic areas defined by Nissl staining. Second, 
at single cell level, RORbeta and ER81 mRNAs were coexpressed in a subpopulation 
of layer 5 neurons, whereas Nurr1 and ER81 mRNAs were not colocalized. Third,
principal component analysis showed that the order of hierarchical processing in 
the cortex correlates well with the expression profiles of these three genes.
Based on this analysis, the dysgranular zone (DZ) in the somatosensory area was
considered to exhibit a profile of a higher order area, which is consistent with 
previous proposal.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The tight relationship between the expression of the
three layer specific genes and functional areas were revealed, demonstrating the 
usefulness of cortical box method in the study on the cerebral cortex. In
particular, it allowed us to perform statistical evaluation and pattern matching,
which would become important in interpreting the ever-increasing data of gene
expression in the cortex.

PMCID: PMC2533703
PMID: 18815614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;68(18):7629-37. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2014.

A fluorescence in situ hybridization screen for E26 transformation-specific
aberrations: identification of DDX5-ETV4 fusion protein in prostate cancer.

Han B(1), Mehra R, Dhanasekaran SM, Yu J, Menon A, Lonigro RJ, Wang X, Gong Y,
Wang L, Shankar S, Laxman B, Shah RB, Varambally S, Palanisamy N, Tomlins SA,
Kumar-Sinha C, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions involving E26 transformation-specific (ETS) transcription 
factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 have been identified in 40% to 70% of prostate
cancers. Here, we used a comprehensive fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
split probe strategy interrogating all 27 ETS family members and their five known
5' fusion partners in a cohort of 110 clinically localized prostate cancer
patients. Gene rearrangements were only identified in ETS genes that were
previously implicated in prostate cancer gene fusions including ERG, ETV1, and
ETV4 (43%, 5%, and 5%, respectively), suggesting that a substantial fraction of
prostate cancers (estimated at 30-60%) cannot be attributed to an ETS gene
fusion. Among the known 5' gene fusion partners, TMPRSS2 was rearranged in 47% of
cases followed by SLC45A3, HNRPA2B1, and C15ORF21 in 2%, 1%, and 1% of cases,
respectively. Based on this comprehensive FISH screen, we have made four
noteworthy observations. First, by screening the entire ETS transcription factor 
family for rearrangements, we found that a large fraction of prostate cancers
(44%) cannot be ascribed to an ETS gene fusion, an observation which will
stimulate research into identifying recurrent non-ETS aberrations in prostate
cancers. Second, we identified SLC45A3 as a novel 5' fusion partner of ERG;
previously, TMPRSS2 was the only described 5' partner of ERG. Third, we
identified two prostate-specific, androgen-induced genes, FLJ35294 and CANT1, as 
5' partners to ETV1 and ETV4. Fourth, we identified a ubiquitously expressed,
androgen-insensitive gene, DDX5, fused in frame with ETV4, leading to the
expression of a DDX5-ETV4 fusion protein.

PMCID: PMC2760292
PMID: 18794152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;68(18):7541-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5930.

Truncated ETV1, fused to novel tissue-specific genes, and full-length ETV1 in
prostate cancer.

Hermans KG(1), van der Korput HA, van Marion R, van de Wijngaart DJ, Ziel-van der
Made A, Dits NF, Boormans JL, van der Kwast TH, van Dekken H, Bangma CH, Korsten 
H, Kraaij R, Jenster G, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

In this study, we describe the properties of novel ETV1 fusion genes, encoding
N-truncated ETV1 (dETV1), and of full-length ETV1, overexpressed in clinical
prostate cancer. We detected overexpression of novel ETV1 fusion genes or of
full-length ETV1 in 10% of prostate cancers. Novel ETV1 fusion partners included 
FOXP1, an EST (EST14), and an endogenous retroviral repeat sequence (HERVK17).
Like TMPRSS2, EST14 and HERVK17 were prostate-specific and androgen-regulated
expressed. This unique expression pattern of most ETV1 fusion partners seems an
important determinant in prostate cancer development. In transient reporter
assays, full-length ETV1 was a strong transactivator, whereas dETV1 was not.
However, several of the biological properties of dETV1 and full-length ETV1 were 
identical. On stable overexpression, both induced migration and invasion of
immortalized nontumorigenic PNT2C2 prostate epithelial cells. In contrast to
dETV1, full-length ETV1 also induced anchorage-independent growth of these cells.
PNT2C2 cells stably transfected with dETV1 or full-length ETV1 expression
constructs showed small differences in induced expression of target genes. Many
genes involved in tumor invasion/metastasis, including uPA/uPAR and MMPs, were
up-regulated in both cell types. Integrin beta3 (ITGB3) was clearly up-regulated 
by full-length ETV1 but much less by dETV1. Based on the present data and on
previous findings, a novel concept of the role of dETV1 and of full-length ETV1
overexpression in prostate cancer is proposed.

PMID: 18794142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 15;105(3):866-74. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21884.

Rcl is a novel ETV1/ER81 target gene upregulated in breast tumors.

Shin S(1), Bosc DG, Ingle JN, Spelsberg TC, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

ETV1 (ER81) is a transcription factor that can be activated by HER2/Neu, a
proto-oncoprotein often overexpressed in metastatic breast tumors. Here, we
demonstrate that ETV1 downregulation suppresses proliferation of
HER2/Neu-positive MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in vitro and tumor formation in 
vivo, proving for the first time the existence of a critical role of ETV1 in
breast cancer cell physiology. A screen for novel ETV1 target genes hinted at
Rcl, an enzyme involved in nucleotide metabolism. To characterize the human Rcl
gene, we cloned its promoter and found that ETV1 and HER2/Neu cooperated in
activating the Rcl promoter, whereas a dominant-negative ETV1 molecule suppressed
the Rcl promoter. Moreover, ETV1 and HER2/Neu synergized to upregulate the
endogenous Rcl gene. ETV1 also bound to the Rcl promoter in vivo, indicating that
Rcl is a bona fide target gene of ETV1. Hybridization of Rcl cDNA to a breast
cancer array revealed that Rcl is overexpressed in approximately 40% of all
breast tumors. Importantly, its expression significantly escalates with
increasing tumor grade, strongly implicating that Rcl contributes to breast
tumorigenesis. Since joint overexpression of Rcl with vascular endothelial growth
factor, another target gene of ETV1, has been shown to induce tumor formation,
Rcl may be one crucial effector of ETV1 and HER2/Neu in breast tumors.
Furthermore, given its expression pattern and enzymatic function in nucleotide
metabolism, Rcl presents itself as a novel target in breast cancer therapy via
modulation of its activity by small molecule drugs.

PMID: 18726892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Aug 20;26(24):3930-6. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2007.15.6752.

Gene panel model predictive of outcome in men at high-risk of systemic
progression and death from prostate cancer after radical retropubic
prostatectomy.

Cheville JC(1), Karnes RJ, Therneau TM, Kosari F, Munz JM, Tillmans L, Basal E,
Rangel LJ, Bergstralh E, Kovtun IV, Savci-Heijink CD, Klee EW, Vasmatzis G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

PURPOSE: In men who are at high-risk of prostate cancer, progression and death
from cancer after radical retropubic prostatectomy (RRP), limited prognostic
information is provided by established prognostic features. The objective of this
study was to develop a model predictive of outcome in this group of patients.
METHODS: Candidate genes were identified from microarray expression data from 102
laser capture microdissected prostate tissue samples. Candidates were
overexpressed in tumor compared with normal prostate and more frequently in
Gleason patterns 4 and 5 than in 3. A case control study of 157 high-risk
patients, matched on Gleason score and stage with systemic progression or death
of prostate cancer as the end point, was used to evaluate the expression of
candidate genes and build a multivariate model. Tumor was collected from the
highest Gleason score in paraffin-embedded blocks and the gene expression was
quantified by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
Validation of the final model was performed on a separate case-control study of
57 high-risk patients who underwent RRP.
RESULTS: A model incorporating gene expression of topoisomerase-2a, cadherin-10, 
the fusion status based on ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 expression, and the aneuploidy
status resulted in a 0.81 area under the curve (AUC) in receiver operating
characteristic statistical analysis for the identification of men with systemic
progression and death from high grade prostate cancer. The AUC was 0.79 in the
independent validation study.
CONCLUSION: The model can identify men with high-risk prostate cancer who may
benefit from more intensive postoperative follow-up and adjuvant therapies.

PMCID: PMC2654311
PMID: 18711181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 9;3(7):e2634. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002634.

IGF1 is a common target gene of Ewing's sarcoma fusion proteins in mesenchymal
progenitor cells.

Cironi L(1), Riggi N, Provero P, Wolf N, Suvà ML, Suvà D, Kindler V, Stamenkovic 
I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology CHUV, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is associated with 85-90% of Ewing's
sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), the remaining 10-15% of cases expressing chimeric
genes encoding EWS or FUS fused to one of several ets transcription factor family
members, including ERG-1, FEV, ETV1 and ETV6. ESFT are dependent on insulin-like 
growth factor-1 (IGF-1) for growth and survival and recent evidence suggests that
mesenchymal progenitor/stem cells constitute a candidate ESFT origin.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To address the functional relatedness between
ESFT-associated fusion proteins, we compared mouse progenitor cell (MPC)
permissiveness for EWS-FLI-1, EWS-ERG and FUS-ERG expression and assessed the
corresponding expression profile changes. Whereas all MPC isolates tested could
stably express EWS-FLI-1, only some sustained stable EWS-ERG expression and none 
could express FUS-ERG for more than 3-5 days. Only 14% and 4% of the total number
of genes that were respectively induced and repressed in MPCs by the three fusion
proteins were shared. However, all three fusion proteins, but neither FLI-1 nor
ERG-1 alone, activated the IGF1 promoter and induced IGF1 expression.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Whereas expression of different ESFT-associated fusion
proteins may require distinct cellular microenvironments and induce transcriptome
changes of limited similarity, IGF1 induction may provide one common mechanism
for their implication in ESFT pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2481291
PMID: 18648544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Mar 11;88(10):669-73.

[Frequency and transcript variant analysis of gene fusions between TMPRSS2 and
ETS transcription factor genes in prostate cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Dai MJ(1), Chen LL, Zheng YB, Chen W, Tao ZH, Weng ZL, Wu XL, Li CD, Chen ZG,
Chen XD, Shi SB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Laboratory Diagnosis, First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical College, Wenzhou 325000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the frequencies and types of fusions between the
transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2), ETS-related gene (ERG), ETS variant-1 
(ETV1), and ETS variant-4 (ETV4) genes in prostate cancer (PCa) and significance 
thereof.
METHODS: Biopsy samples of prostate were obtained under transrectal ultrasound
(TRUS) from 32 PCa patients, aged (74 +/- 8) and 34 patients with benign prostate
hyperplasia (BPH). Nested RT-PCR and direct DNA sequencing were used to detect
the fusion genes of TMPRSS2/ERG, TMPRSS2/ETV1, and TMPRSS2/ETV4. The association 
between the fusion-positive tumor rate and Gleason grading was analyzed.
RESULTS: Of the 32 PCa patients, TMPRSS2/ERG fusion was detected in 17 cases
(53.1%), including 5 variant fusion transcripts one of which was newly discovered
with the GenBank accession number of EU090248. TMPRSS2/ETV1 fusion was detected
in only 2 cases (6.3%), including one newly discovered variant fusion transcripts
with the GenBank accession number of EU090249. TMPRSS2/ETV4 fusion was not
detected. The positive rates of TMPRSS2/ERG and TMPRSS2/ETV1 fusions showed no
statistical association with the Gleason grade (P = 0.169). No fusion between the
TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor genes was detected in the 34 BPH samples.
CONCLUSION: TMPRSS2/ERG and TMPRS22/ETV1 fusion genes with different subtypes
exist in the tissues of PCa. TMPRSS2/ERG and TMPRSS2/ETV1 fusion genes may be
used as diagnostic tools for PCa.

PMID: 18642766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 16;3(7):e2714. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002714.

Role of Sox-9, ER81 and VE-cadherin in retinoic acid-mediated
trans-differentiation of breast cancer cells.

Endo Y(1), Deonauth K, Prahalad P, Hoxter B, Zhu Y, Byers SW.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Georgetown
University, Washington DC, United States of America.

Many aspects of development, tumor growth and metastasis depend upon the
provision of an adequate vasculature. This can be a result of regulated
angiogenesis, recruitment of circulating endothelial progenitors and/or vascular 
trans-differentiation. The present study demonstrates that treatment of SKBR-3
breast cancer cells with retinoic acid (RA), an important regulator of
embryogenesis, cancer and other diseases, stimulates the formation of networks in
Matrigel. RA-treatment of SKBR-3 cells co-cultured with human umbilical vein
endothelial cells resulted in the formation of mixed structures. RA induces
expression of many endothelial genes including vascular endothelial (VE)
cadherin. VE-cadherin was also induced by RA in a number of other breast cancer
cells. We show that RA-induced VE-cadherin is responsible for the RA-induced
morphological changes. RA rapidly induced the expression of Sox-9 and ER81, which
in turn form a complex on the VE-cadherin promoter and are required to mediate
the transcriptional regulation of VE-cadherin by RA. These data indicate that RA 
may promote the expression of endothelial genes resulting in endothelial-like
differentiation, or provide a mechanism whereby circulating endothelial
progenitor cells could be incorporated into a growing organ or tumor.

PMCID: PMC2444023
PMID: 18628953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Br J Cancer. 2008 Jul 22;99(2):314-20. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604472. Epub 2008 Jul
1.

Heterogeneity and clinical significance of ETV1 translocations in human prostate 
cancer.

Attard G(1), Clark J, Ambroisine L, Mills IG, Fisher G, Flohr P, Reid A, Edwards 
S, Kovacs G, Berney D, Foster C, Massie CE, Fletcher A, De Bono JS, Scardino P,
Cuzick J, Cooper CS; Transatlantic Prostate Group.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, Male Urological Cancer Research Centre, 15
Cotswold Road, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK.

A fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) assay has been used to screen for
ETV1 gene rearrangements in a cohort of 429 prostate cancers from patients who
had been diagnosed by trans-urethral resection of the prostate. The presence of
ETV1 gene alterations (found in 23 cases, 5.4%) was correlated with higher
Gleason Score (P=0.001), PSA level at diagnosis (P=<0.0001) and clinical stage
(P=0.017) but was not linked to poorer survival. We found that the six previously
characterised translocation partners of ETV1 only accounted for 34% of ETV1
re-arrangements (eight out of 23) in this series, with fusion to the
androgen-repressed gene C15orf21 representing the commonest event (four out of
23). In 5'-RACE experiments on RNA extracted from formalin-fixed tissue we
identified the androgen-upregulated gene ACSL3 as a new 5'-translocation partner 
of ETV1. These studies report a novel fusion partner for ETV1 and highlight the
considerable heterogeneity of ETV1 gene rearrangements in human prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2480965
PMID: 18594527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cancer Cell. 2008 Jun;13(6):519-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.04.016.

The role of SPINK1 in ETS rearrangement-negative prostate cancers.

Tomlins SA(1), Rhodes DR, Yu J, Varambally S, Mehra R, Perner S, Demichelis F,
Helgeson BE, Laxman B, Morris DS, Cao Q, Cao X, Andrén O, Fall K, Johnson L, Wei 
JT, Shah RB, Al-Ahmadie H, Eastham JA, Eggener SE, Fine SW, Hotakainen K, Stenman
UH, Tsodikov A, Gerald WL, Lilja H, Reuter VE, Kantoff PW, Scardino PT, Rubin MA,
Bjartell AS, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

ETS gene fusions have been characterized in a majority of prostate cancers;
however, the key molecular alterations in ETS-negative cancers are unclear. Here 
we used an outlier meta-analysis (meta-COPA) to identify SPINK1 outlier
expression exclusively in a subset of ETS rearrangement-negative cancers (
approximately 10% of total cases). We validated the mutual exclusivity of SPINK1 
expression and ETS fusion status, demonstrated that SPINK1 outlier expression can
be detected noninvasively in urine, and observed that SPINK1 outlier expression
is an independent predictor of biochemical recurrence after resection. We
identified the aggressive 22RV1 cell line as a SPINK1 outlier expression model
and demonstrate that SPINK1 knockdown in 22RV1 attenuates invasion, suggesting a 
functional role in ETS rearrangement-negative prostate cancers.

PMCID: PMC2732022
PMID: 18538735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Endocrinol. 2008 Aug;198(2):281-90. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0142. Epub 2008 May 20.

Etv5, an ETS transcription factor, is expressed in granulosa and cumulus cells
and serves as a transcriptional regulator of the cyclooxygenase-2.

Eo J(1), Han K, M Murphy K, Song H, Lim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, RCTC, IBST, Konkuk
University, 1 Hwayang-Dong, Kwangjin-Gu, Seoul 143-701, South Korea.

Etv4, Etv1, and Etv5 are members of Etv4 subfamily of E26 transformation-specific
(Ets) transcription factors that are known to influence a host of biological
processes. We previously showed that Etv5, expressed in Sertoli cells, plays a
crucial role in maintaining spermatogonial stem cell niche in the mouse testis.
However, it is not yet known whether Etv4 family members are expressed in the
ovary or play any role in ovarian functions. Here, we show that Etv5 and Etv4 are
expressed in mouse ovaries in granulosa and cumulus cells during
folliculogenesis. Both Etv5 and Etv4 mRNAs are also detected in cumulus-oocyte
complexes (COCs) and denuded oocytes. Notably, Etv4 is highly expressed in the
cumulus cells of ovulated COCs at 16-h post-human chorionic gonadotropin.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (PTGS2), a rate-limiting enzyme for prostaglandin synthesis, is 
critical for oocyte maturation and ovulation. Since several putative Ets-binding 
sites are present in the PTGS2 promoter, we examined whether Etv5 influences
Ptgs2 transcriptional activity. Indeed, we found that addition of Etv5 increases 
the transcriptional activity of the 3.2-kb mouse Ptgs2 promoter by 2.5-fold in
luciferase reporter assays. Collectively, the results show that Etv4 and Etv5 are
expressed in granulosa and cumulus cells during folliculogenesis and ovulation,
suggesting that they influence cellular events in the ovary by regulating
downstream genes such as Ptgs2.

PMID: 18492810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2008 Jul;56(5):257-9. doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2008.03.005.
Epub 2008 May 15.

[Ewing's tumours, genetic and cellular aspects].

[Article in French]

Delattre O.

Ewing's tumour is the second most frequent primary tumour of bone. It is
associated in 85% of cases with a specific and recurrent chromosome
translocation, a t(11; 22)(q24; q12) which generates a fusion gene between the 5'
part of EWS and the 3' part of FLI-1, a member of the ETS family. Less
frequently, this gene fusion involves EWS and another member of the ETS family
which can be: ERG, ETV1, E1AF or FEV depending on the cases. The EWS-ETS fusion
is causative in the development of Ewing's tumour. Its mechanism of action mainly
relies on the abnormal transcription regulation of key target genes which are
involved in the regulation of cell cycle, signal transduction, migration. The
cellular context within which EWS-FLI-1 exerts its oncogenic action is a long
standing matter of debate. Recent data converge to suggest that the Ewing cell
origin is a mesenchymal stem cell.

PMID: 18485618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cancer Res. 2008 May 15;68(10):3584-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6154.

Characterization of TMPRSS2-ETS gene aberrations in androgen-independent
metastatic prostate cancer.

Mehra R(1), Tomlins SA, Yu J, Cao X, Wang L, Menon A, Rubin MA, Pienta KJ, Shah
RB, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS
transcription factor family members ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 have been identified as a
critical event in prostate cancer development. In this study, we characterized
the prevalence and diversity of these rearrangements in hormone-refractory
metastatic prostate cancer. We used a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
split probe strategy to comprehensively evaluate TMPRSS2-ETS aberrations across
97 nonosseous metastatic sites of prostate cancer from 30 rapid autopsies of men 
who died of androgen-independent disease. Tissue microarrays were constructed
representing multiple metastatic sites from each patient, and split signal FISH
probes for TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 were used to assess for TMPRSS2-ETS
rearrangements. In patients exhibiting these aberrations, multiple sites from an 
individual case harbored the same gene fusion molecular subtype suggesting clonal
expansion of disease. The most common prostate cancer gene fusion, TMPRSS2-ERG,
can be generated by the mechanism of interstitial deletion (Edel) about 39% to
60% of the time in clinically localized disease. Interestingly, we observed that 
all of the androgen-independent metastatic prostate cancer sites harboring
TMPRSS2-ERG were associated with Edel. These findings suggest that TMPRSS2-ERG
with Edel is an aggressive and, in this study, uniformly lethal molecular subtype
of prostate cancer associated with androgen-independent disease.

PMCID: PMC2677168
PMID: 18483239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 May;183(1):21-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.01.021.

Detection of the TMPRSS2-ETS fusion gene in prostate carcinomas: retrospective
analysis of 55 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded samples with clinical data.

Rouzier C(1), Haudebourg J, Carpentier X, Valério L, Amiel J, Michiels JF,
Pedeutour F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Solid Tumors Genetics, Nice University Hospital and CNRS UMR
6543, Faculty of Medicine, 28 avenue de Valombrose, 06107 Nice, France.

The recent identification of fusion genes involving ETS family members in human
prostate adenocarcinoma has confirmed the hypothesis that recurrent specific
aberrations such as fusion genes may be as frequent in epithelial tumors as they 
are in leukemias and sarcomas. However, reciprocal translocations with fusion
genes are often not detectable in carcinomas by conventional karyotyping because 
of additional complex chromosomal abnormalities. We retrospectively analyzed a
large series of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples including 55 prostate
carcinomas and 11 benign prostate tumors. We identified the fusion gene
TMPRSS2-ERG by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 40/55 
carcinomas (72%). Our study demonstrates that the detection of ETS fusion gene by
RT-PCR is feasible on formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded samples. No
significant association between the presence of the fusion gene and any clinical 
feature, such as preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level (PSA>20
or PSA< or =20), pTNM stage including capsule invasion, seminal vesicle invasion,
and lymph nodes metastases, or recurrence was observed in our series.

Copyright 2008 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 18474293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cancer Res. 2008 May 1;68(9):3094-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0198.

Two unique novel prostate-specific and androgen-regulated fusion partners of ETV4
in prostate cancer.

Hermans KG(1), Bressers AA, van der Korput HA, Dits NF, Jenster G, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Recently, fusion of ERG to the androgen-regulated, prostate-specific TMPRSS2 gene
has been identified as the most frequent genetic alteration in prostate cancer.
At low frequency, TMPRSS2-ETV1 and TMPRSS2-ETV4 fusion genes have been described.
In this study, we report two novel ETV4 fusion genes in prostate cancer:
KLK2-ETV4 and CANT1-ETV4. Both gene fusions have important unique aspects. KLK2
is a well-established androgen-induced and prostate-specific gene. Fusion of KLK2
to ETV4 results in the generation of an additional ETV4 exon, denoted exon 4a.
This novel exon delivers an ATG for the longest open reading frame, in this way
avoiding translation start in KLK2 exon 1. Although wild-type CANT1 has two
alternative first exons (exons 1 and 1a), only exon 1a was detected in CANT1-ETV4
fusion transcripts. We show that CANT1 transcripts starting at exon 1a have an
androgen-induced and prostate-specific expression pattern, whereas CANT1
transcripts starting at exon 1 are not prostate specific. So, the two novel ETV4 
fusion partners possess as predominant common characteristics androgen-induction 
and prostate-specific expression.

PMID: 18451133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cerebellum. 2008;7(2):179-83. doi: 10.1007/s12311-008-0014-3.

Slowly progressive spinocerebellar ataxia with extrapyramidal signs and mild
cognitive impairment (SCA21).

Delplanque J(1), Devos D, Vuillaume I, De Becdelievre A, Vangelder E, Maurage CA,
Dujardin K, Destée A, Sablonnière B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U837, Jean-Pierre Aubert Research Center, Lille, France.

Spinocerebellar ataxia 21 is a slowly progressive and mild ataxia associated with
extrapyramidal signs. Affected subjects exhibit a moderate gait and limb ataxia
variably associated with akinesia, tremor, rigidity, hyporeflexia, and mild
cognitive impairment. The responsible gene has been assigned to a 19 Mbases
interval on chromosome 7p in a single French family. No evidence of significant
linkage to this locus was found in 21 other families obtained from the EUROSCA
consortium. The locus interval contains several candidate genes that could be
responsible for the disease. Direct sequencing of NDUFA4, PHF14, KIAA0960, ARLA4,
ETV1, DGKB, HDAC9, FERD3L, ITGB8, and SP4 genes were performed, but all the
direct mutation analyses were negative excluding pathogenic mutations associated 
with the disease. Therefore, the gene responsible for SCA21 remains to be
identified.

PMID: 18418688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Asian J Androl. 2008 May;10(3):467-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-7262.2008.00401.x.

Detection of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion gene in circulating prostate cancer cells.

Mao X(1), Shaw G, James SY, Purkis P, Kudahetti SC, Tsigani T, Kia S, Young BD,
Oliver RT, Berney D, Prowse DM, Lu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Centre, Cancer Institute, Department of Histopathology and
Morbid Anatomy, Barts and London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary,
University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.

AIM: To investigate the existence of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion gene in circulating tumor
cells (CTC) from prostate cancer patients and its potential in monitoring tumor
metastasis.
METHODS: We analyzed the frequency of TMPRSS2:ERG and TMPRSS2:ETV1 transcripts in
27 prostate cancer biopsies from prostatectomies, and TMPRSS2:ERG transcripts in 
CTC isolated from 15 patients with advanced androgen independent disease using
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) was applied to analyze the genomic truncation of ERG, which 
is the result of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion in 10 of the 15 CTC samples.
RESULTS: TMPRSS2:ERG transcripts were found in 44% of our samples, but we did not
detect expression of TMPRSS2:ETV1. Using FISH analysis we detected chromosomal
rearrangements affecting the ERG gene in 6 of 10 CTC samples, including 1 case
with associated TMPRSS2:ERG fusion at the primary site. However, TMPRSS2:ERG
transcripts were not detected in any of the 15 CTC samples, including the 10
cases analyzed by FISH.
CONCLUSION: Although further study is required to address the association between
TMPRSS2:ERG fusion and prostate cancer metastasis, detection of genomic
truncation of the ERG gene by FISH analysis could be useful for monitoring the
appearance of CTC and the potential for prostate cancer metastasis.

2008, Asian Journal of Andrology, SIMM and SJTU. All rights reserved.

PMID: 18385909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 Mar;31(3):391-4.

Treatment of Ewing's sarcoma using an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide to regulate 
the cell cycle.

Asami S(1), Chin M, Shichino H, Yoshida Y, Nemoto N, Mugishima H, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Clinical Medicine, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University,
7-7-1 Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is one of the most malignant tumors of bone and soft tissue 
in children and young adults. ES belongs to a group of small round cell tumors
(SRCTs) that also includes neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and malignant
lymphoma. However, ES exhibits several specific chimeric genes (EWS-FLI1,
EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1, EWS-E1AF, and EWS-FEV) caused by chromosomal translocations
that are not shared by other SRCTs. These chimeric genes regulate the expression 
of various other genes; that is, they activate inhibitors of DNA binding 2 (Id2) 
gene expression or they suppress transforming growth factor beta II (TbetaRII)
receptor gene expression. The regulation of these chimeric genes may affect
critical cell signal transductions, such as signals involved in cell cycle and
apoptosis in ES tumor cells. Using an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide against a
sequence containing the ATG initiation codon of the EWS-FLI1 chimeric gene that
specifically reacts with the EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG chimeric genes, we were able to
regulate the cell cycle through the down-regulation of Id2. Here, we report that 
treatment with an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide against this chimeric gene was
very useful for inducing the regression of ES tumor growth; thus, this chimeric
gene may be an important target for the treatment of ES patients.

PMID: 18310898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Feb 28;8:23. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-23.

Er81 is a downstream target of Pax6 in cortical progenitors.

Tuoc TC(1), Stoykova A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.
tcong@gwdg.de

BACKGROUND: Although the transcription factor Pax6 plays an essential role in
neurogenesis, layer formation and arealization in the developing mammalian
cortex, the mechanisms by which it accomplishes these regulatory functions are
largely unknown. Pax6 and the ETS family transcription factor Er81, which is
presumed to play a role in the specification of a sublineage of layer 5
projection neurons, are expressed with a prominent rostrolateral-high to
caudomedial-low gradient in cortical progenitors. In the absence of functional
Pax6, progenitors do not express Er81 and the rostrolateral cortex lacks
Er81-positive layer 5 neurons. In this study, we investigated the transcriptional
regulation of Er81 and provide evidence that Er81 is a direct target of Pax6.
RESULTS: We identified and analyzed the regulatory function of an evolutionarily 
conserved upstream DNA sequence in the putative mouse Er81 promoter. Three
potential Pax6 binding sites were identified in this region. We found that the
presence of one of these sites is necessary and sufficient for full activation of
the Er81 promoter in Pax6-transfected HeLa cells, while other still unknown
factors appear to contribute to Er81 promoter activity in cortical progenitors
and neuronal cells. The results suggest that endogenous Pax6, which is expressed 
at the highest level in progenitors of the rostrolateral cortex, exerts
region-specific control of Er81 activity, thus specifying a subpopulation of
layer 5 projection neurons.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the genetic interplay between the transcription
factors, Pax6 and Er81, is responsible, in part, for the regional specification
of a distinct sublineage of layer 5 projection neurons.

PMCID: PMC2275226
PMID: 18307776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Mar;1779(3):183-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2008.01.002.
Epub 2008 Jan 17.

ERM transcription factor contains an inhibitory domain which functions in
sumoylation-dependent manner.

Degerny C(1), de Launoit Y, Baert JL.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 59021 Lille Cedex, France.

ERM, PEA3 and ETV1 belong to the PEA3 group of ETS transcription factors. They
are involved in many developmental processes and are transcriptional regulators
in metastasis. The PEA3 group members share an N-terminal transactivation domain 
(TAD) whose activity is inhibited by a flanking domain named the negative
regulatory domain (NRD). The mechanism of this inhibition is still unknown. Here 
we show that the NRD maps to residues 73 to 298 in ERM and contains three of the 
five SUMO sites previously identified in the protein. We demonstrate that these
three SUMO sites are responsible for NRD's inhibitory function in the Gal4
system. Although the presence of the three sites is required to obtain maximal
inhibition, only one SUMO site is sufficient to repress transcription whatever
its localization within the NRD. We also show that NRD is a SUMO-dependent
repression domain that can act in cis and in trans to downregulate the powerful
TAD of the VP16 viral protein. In addition, we find that the SUMO sites outside
the NRD also play a role in the negative regulation of full-length ERM activity. 
We thus postulate that each SUMO site in ERM may function as an inhibitory motif.

PMID: 18243147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 1;68(1):73-80. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5352.

Characterization of TMPRSS2:ETV5 and SLC45A3:ETV5 gene fusions in prostate
cancer.

Helgeson BE(1), Tomlins SA, Shah N, Laxman B, Cao Q, Prensner JR, Cao X, Singla
N, Montie JE, Varambally S, Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0602, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions involving oncogenic ETS transcription factors (including
ERG, ETV1, and ETV4) have been identified in a large fraction of prostate
cancers. The most common fusions contain the 5' untranslated region of TMPRSS2
fused to ERG. Recently, we identified additional 5' partners in ETV1 fusions,
including TMPRSS2, SLC45A3, HERV-K_22q11.23, C15ORF21, and HNRPA2B1. Here, we
identify ETV5 as the fourth ETS family member involved in recurrent gene
rearrangements in prostate cancer. Characterization of two cases with ETV5
outlier expression by RNA ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA ends
identified one case with a TMPRSS2:ETV5 fusion and one case with a SLC45A3:ETV5
fusion. We confirmed the presence of these fusions by quantitative PCR and
fluorescence in situ hybridization. In vitro recapitulation of ETV5
overexpression induced invasion in RWPE cells, a benign immortalized prostatic
epithelial cell line. Expression profiling and an integrative molecular concepts 
analysis of RWPE-ETV5 cells also revealed the induction of an invasive
transcriptional program, consistent with ERG and ETV1 overexpression in RWPE
cells, emphasizing the functional redundancy of ETS rearrangements. Together, our
results suggest that the family of 5' partners previously identified in ETV1 gene
fusions can fuse with other ETS family members, suggesting numerous rare gene
fusion permutations in prostate cancer.

PMID: 18172298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 Dec 20;8:117.

Differential regulation of NAB corepressor genes in Schwann cells.

Srinivasan R(1), Jang SW, Ward RM, Sachdev S, Ezashi T, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI, USA. rsrinivasan@wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Myelination of peripheral nerves by Schwann cells requires not only
the Egr2/Krox-20 transactivator, but also the NGFI-A/Egr-binding (NAB)
corepressors, which modulate activity of Egr2. Previous work has shown that
axon-dependent expression of Egr2 is mediated by neuregulin stimulation, and NAB 
corepressors are co-regulated with Egr2 expression in peripheral nerve
development. NAB corepressors have also been implicated in macrophage
development, cardiac hypertrophy, prostate carcinogenesis, and feedback
regulation involved in hindbrain development.
RESULTS: To test the mechanism of NAB regulation in Schwann cells, transfection
assays revealed that both Nab1 and Nab2 promoters are activated by Egr2
expression. Furthermore, direct binding of Egr2 at these promoters was
demonstrated in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of myelinating
sciatic nerve, and binding of Egr2 to the Nab2 promoter was stimulated by
neuregulin in primary Schwann cells. Although Egr2 expression activates the Nab2 
promoter more highly than Nab1, we surprisingly found that only Nab1 - but not
Nab2 - expression levels were reduced in sciatic nerve from Egr2 null mice.
Analysis of the Nab2 promoter showed that it is also activated by ETS proteins
(Ets2 and Etv1/ER81) and is bound by Ets2 in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Overall, these results indicate that induction of Nab2 expression in 
Schwann cells involves not only Egr2, but also ETS proteins that are activated by
neuregulin stimulation. Although Nab1 and Nab2 play partially redundant roles,
regulation of Nab2 expression by ETS factors explains several observations
regarding regulation of NAB genes. Finally, these data suggest that NAB proteins 
are not only feedback inhibitors of Egr2, but rather that co-induction of Egr2
and NAB genes is involved in forming an Egr2/NAB complex that is crucial for
regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2235890
PMID: 18096076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 27;27(14):1993-2003. Epub 2007 Oct 8.

Complex patterns of ETS gene alteration arise during cancer development in the
human prostate.

Clark J(1), Attard G, Jhavar S, Flohr P, Reid A, De-Bono J, Eeles R, Scardino P, 
Cuzick J, Fisher G, Parker MD, Foster CS, Berney D, Kovacs G, Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, Male Urological Cancer Research Centre, Sutton, 
Surrey, UK. jeremy.clark@icr.ac.uk

An ERG gene 'break-apart' fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay has
been used to screen whole-mount prostatectomy specimens for rearrangements at the
ERG locus. In cancers containing ERG alterations the observed pattern of changes 
was often complex. Different categories of ERG gene alteration were found either 
together in a single cancerous region or within separate foci of cancer in the
same prostate slice. In some cases the juxtaposition of particular patterns of
ERG alterations suggested possible mechanisms of tumour progression. Prostates
harbouring ERG alterations commonly also contained cancer that lacked
rearrangements of the ERG gene. A single trans-urethral resection of the prostate
specimen examined harboured both ERG and ETV1 gene rearrangements demonstrating
that the observed complexity may, at least in part, be explained by multiple ETS 
gene alterations arising independently in a single prostate. In a search for
possible precursor lesions clonal ERG rearrangements were found both in high
grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and in atypical in situ
epithelial lesions consistent with the diagnosis of low grade PIN. Our
observations support the view that ERG gene alterations represent an initiating
event that promotes clonal expansion initially to form regions of epithelial
atypia. The complex patterns of ERG alteration found in prostatectomy specimens
have important implications for the design of experiments investigating the
clinical significance and mechanism of development of individual prostate
cancers.

PMID: 17922029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2008;11(3):241-6. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

A genome-wide association screen identifies regions on chromosomes 1q25 and 7p21 
as risk loci for sporadic prostate cancer.

Nam RK(1), Zhang WW, Loblaw DA, Klotz LH, Trachtenberg J, Jewett MA, Stanimirovic
A, Davies TO, Toi A, Venkateswaran V, Sugar L, Siminovitch KA, Narod SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. robert.nam@utoronto.ca

We conducted a genome-wide association study of 3090 sporadic prostate cancer
patients and controls using the Affymetrix 10 000 SNP GeneChip. Initial screening
of 40 prostate cancer cases and 40 non-cancer controls revealed 237 SNPs to be
associated with prostate cancer (P<0.05). Among these SNPs, 33 were selected for 
further association analysis of 2069 men who had undergone a cancer-screening
prostate biopsy. Results identified five loci as being significantly associated
with increased prostate cancer risk in this larger sample (rs 1930293, OR=1.7,
P=0.03; rs 717809-2p12, OR=1.3, P=0.03; rs 494770-4q34, OR=1.3, P=0.01; rs
2348763-7p21, OR=1.5, P=0.01; rs 1552895-9p22, OR=1.5, P=0.002). To validate
these association data, 61 additional HapMap tagSNPs spanning the latter five
loci were genotyped in this subject cohort and an additional 1021 men (total
subject number=3090). This analysis revealed tag SNP rs 4568789 (chromosome 1q25)
and tag SNP rs 13225697 (chromosome 7p21) to be significantly associated with
prostate cancer (P-values 0.009 and 0.008, respectively). Haplotype analysis
revealed significant associations of prostate cancer with two allele risk
haplotypes on both chromosome 1q25 (adjusted OR of 2.7 for prostate cancer,
P=0.0003) and chromosome 7p21 (adjusted OR of 1.3, P=0.0004). As linkage data
have identified a putative prostate cancer gene on chromosome 1q25 (HPC1), and
microarray data have revealed the ETV1 oncogene to be overexpressed in prostate
cancer tissue, it appears that chromosome 1q25 and 7p21 may be sites of gene
variants conferring risk for sporadic and inherited forms of prostate cancer.

PMID: 17876339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 1;67(17):7991-5.

Heterogeneity of TMPRSS2 gene rearrangements in multifocal prostate
adenocarcinoma: molecular evidence for an independent group of diseases.

Mehra R(1), Han B, Tomlins SA, Wang L, Menon A, Wasco MJ, Shen R, Montie JE,
Chinnaiyan AM, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS
family transcription factors ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 have been identified in the
majority of prostate adenocarcinomas (PCA). PCA is often multifocal with
histologic heterogeneity of different tumor foci. As TMPRSS2 is a common 5'
partner of ETS gene fusions, we monitored TMPRSS2 rearrangement by fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) to study the origin and molecular basis of
multifocal PCA heterogeneity. TMPRSS2 rearrangement was evaluated by FISH on a
tissue microarray representing 93 multifocal PCAs from 43 radical prostatectomy
resections. Overall, 70% (30 of 43) of the cases showed TMPRSS2 rearrangement,
including 63% through deletion (loss of the 3' TMPRSS2 signal), 27% through
translocation (split of 5' and 3' TMPRSS2 signals), and 10% through both
mechanisms in different tumor foci. Of the 30 TMPRSS2 rearranged cases, 30%
showed concordance in all tumor foci, whereas 70% were discordant in at least one
focus. In TMPRSS2 rearranged cases, the largest (index) tumor was rearranged 83% 
of the time. Pathologic stage, size, or Gleason grade of the multifocal PCA did
not correlate with overall TMPRSS2 rearrangement. Our results suggest that
multifocal PCA is a heterogeneous group of diseases arising from multiple,
independent clonal expansions. Understanding this molecular heterogeneity is
critical to the future development and utility of diagnostic and prognostic PCA
biomarkers.

PMID: 17804708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):498-509. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

Undifferentiated small round cell sarcomas with rare EWS gene fusions:
identification of a novel EWS-SP3 fusion and of additional cases with the
EWS-ETV1 and EWS-FEV fusions.

Wang L(1), Bhargava R, Zheng T, Wexler L, Collins MH, Roulston D, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):437-40.

Ewing family tumors (EFTs) are prototypical primitive small round blue cell
sarcomas arising in bone or extraskeletal soft tissues in children or
adolescents. EFTs show fusions of EWS with a gene of the ETS family of
transcription factors, either EWS-FLI1 (90 to 95%) or EWS-ERG (5 to 10%). Rare
cases with fusions of EWS to other ETS family genes, such as ETV1, E1AF, and FEV,
have been identified, but their clinicopathological similarity to classic EFTs
remains unclear. We report four new cases of EFT-like tumors with rare EWS
fusions, including two with EWS-ETV1, one with EWS-FEV, and a fourth case in
which we cloned a novel EWS-SP3 fusion, the first known cancer gene fusion
involving a gene of the Sp zinc finger family. Analysis of these three new cases 
along with data on nine previously reported cases with fusions of EWS to ETV1,
E1AF, or FEV suggest a strong predilection for extraskeletal primary sites.
EFT-like cases with fusions of EWS to non-ETS translocation partners are also
uncommon but involve the same amino-terminal portion of EWS, which in our novel
EWS-SP3 fusion is joined to the SP3 zinc-finger DNA-binding domain. As these data
further support, these types of EWS fusions are associated with primitive
extraskeletal small round cell sarcomas of uncertain lineage arising mainly in
the pediatric population.

PMCID: PMC1975108
PMID: 17690209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nature. 2007 Aug 2;448(7153):595-9.

Distinct classes of chromosomal rearrangements create oncogenic ETS gene fusions 
in prostate cancer.

Tomlins SA(1), Laxman B, Dhanasekaran SM, Helgeson BE, Cao X, Morris DS, Menon A,
Jing X, Cao Q, Han B, Yu J, Wang L, Montie JE, Rubin MA, Pienta KJ, Roulston D,
Shah RB, Varambally S, Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Feb 12;457(7231):E1; discussion E2-3.

Recently, we identified recurrent gene fusions involving the 5' untranslated
region of the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS (E26
transformation-specific) family genes ERG, ETV1 or ETV4 in most prostate cancers.
Whereas TMPRSS2-ERG fusions are predominant, fewer TMPRSS2-ETV1 cases have been
identified than expected on the basis of the frequency of high (outlier)
expression of ETV1 (refs 3-13). Here we explore the mechanism of ETV1 outlier
expression in human prostate tumours and prostate cancer cell lines. We
identified previously unknown 5' fusion partners in prostate tumours with ETV1
outlier expression, including untranslated regions from a prostate-specific
androgen-induced gene (SLC45A3) and an endogenous retroviral element
(HERV-K_22q11.23), a prostate-specific androgen-repressed gene (C15orf21), and a 
strongly expressed housekeeping gene (HNRPA2B1). To study aberrant activation of 
ETV1, we identified two prostate cancer cell lines, LNCaP and MDA-PCa 2B, that
had ETV1 outlier expression. Through distinct mechanisms, the entire ETV1 locus
(7p21) is rearranged to a 1.5-megabase prostate-specific region at
14q13.3-14q21.1 in both LNCaP cells (cryptic insertion) and MDA-PCa 2B cells
(balanced translocation). Because the common factor of these rearrangements is
aberrant ETV1 overexpression, we recapitulated this event in vitro and in vivo,
demonstrating that ETV1 overexpression in benign prostate cells and in the mouse 
prostate confers neoplastic phenotypes. Identification of distinct classes of ETS
gene rearrangements demonstrates that dormant oncogenes can be activated in
prostate cancer by juxtaposition to tissue-specific or ubiquitously active
genomic loci. Subversion of active genomic regulatory elements may serve as a
more generalized mechanism for carcinoma development. Furthermore, the
identification of androgen-repressed and insensitive 5' fusion partners may have 
implications for the anti-androgen treatment of advanced prostate cancer.

PMID: 17671502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Dev Dyn. 2007 Aug;236(8):2109-17.

Onset of ETS expression is not accelerated by premature exposure to signals from 
limb mesenchyme.

Wang G(1), Scott SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

The ETS transcription factors ER81 and PEA3 are expressed in discrete populations
of sensory and motor neurons and regulate late events in neuronal development and
limb innervation. Although initiation of ETS expression requires limb-derived
signals, we show here that precocious axon growth into transplanted older donor
limbs, which prematurely exposes neurons to limb-derived signals, does not
accelerate the onset of expression of Er81 or Pea3. Similarly, neither
MN-cadherin, which is reportedly regulated by ER81, nor T-cadherin is expressed
precociously in neurons innervating older donor limbs. Thus, neurons must attain 
a particular level of differentiation to respond to inducing signals from limb.
We also show that signals emanating from limb mesenchyme are sufficient to
initiate Er81 and Pea3 expression in sensory and motor neurons in the absence of 
myogenic cells in Sp(d) mutant mice and that induction of ETS expression is
unlikely to directly involve retinoid signaling from limb mesenchyme.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17654714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Cancer Res. 2007 Jul;5(7):725-35.

c-Jun has multiple enhancing activities in the novel cross talk between the
androgen receptor and Ets variant gene 1 in prostate cancer.

Cai C(1), Hsieh CL, Shemshedini L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43606,
USA.

The multiple transcriptional roles of c-Jun are shown in a novel cross-talk
between the androgen receptor (AR) and its new target gene, Ets variant gene 1
(ETV1). In this report, we show that c-Jun can mediate AR induction of ETV1
expression independent of c-Jun transactivation function. Interestingly, c-Jun
can transactivate the cloned ETV1 promoter also in the absence of
ligand-activated AR, suggesting two mechanisms by which c-Jun can induce ETV1
expression. In addition, both wild-type c-Jun and a transactivation-deficient
mutant can enhance the transcriptional activity of ETV1, as measured by both
reporter gene assay and endogenous expression of matrix metalloproteinase genes, 
well-known targets of Ets proteins. Overexpression of the c-Jun mutant protein
also led to increased prostate cancer cell invasion. Immunoprecipitation and
immunocytochemistry experiments showed copurification and colocalization of c-Jun
with AR or ETV1, suggesting that c-Jun acts on AR or ETV1 via a physical
association. Collectively, these results, together with a parallel overexpression
of ETV1, c-Jun, and AR in prostate tumors, imply that c-Jun plays a pivotal role 
in the pathway that connects ligand-activated AR to elevated ETV1 expression,
leading to enhanced expression of matrix metalloproteinases and prostate cancer
cell invasion.

PMID: 17634427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mod Pathol. 2007 Sep;20(9):921-8. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Gene fusions between TMPRSS2 and ETS family genes in prostate cancer: frequency
and transcript variant analysis by RT-PCR and FISH on paraffin-embedded tissues.

Tu JJ(1), Rohan S, Kao J, Kitabayashi N, Mathew S, Chen YT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions between TMPRSS2 and ETS family genes have recently been
shown to occur at a high frequency in prostate cancer. In this study, we used
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue and evaluated both TMPRSS2-ERG and
TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusions by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The results were correlated to
overexpression of the downstream ERG and ETV1 sequences. Of 82 cases examined,
TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusion was seen in only one case, by FISH. In comparison,
TMPRSS2-ERG fusion was documented in 35 cases (43%) by either RT-PCR or FISH.
Deletion, rather than translocation, was found to be the main mechanism for
TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion (81 vs 19%). RT-PCR and FISH results correlated well,
with most positive cases resulting in overexpression of downstream ERG sequences.
Several TMPRSS2-ERG fusion transcript variants were identified, most of which are
predicted to encode truncated ERG proteins. Prostate cancer of Gleason's scores 6
or 7 had more frequent TMPRSS2-ERG fusions than higher-grade tumors, but this
difference was not statistically significant (P=0.42). On the other hand,
mucin-positive carcinomas more often harbor such gene fusions when compared to
mucin-negative tumors (P=0.004). These morphological correlates, and more
importantly the potential correlation of such fusions to clinical outcome and
treatment responses, should be further explored.

PMID: 17632455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Mol Histol. 2007 Dec;38(6):517-25. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Molecular identity of olfactory bulb interneurons: transcriptional codes of
periglomerular neuron subtypes.

Allen ZJ 2nd(1), Waclaw RR, Colbert MC, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH 45229, USA.

Interneurons in the glomerular layer (GL) of the olfactory bulb represent a
diverse set of cells, which can be identified by distinct expression of different
neurotransmitters as well as calcium binding proteins. Using genetic based fate
mapping, we show here that at least three of these different interneurons
subtypes (i.e. dopaminergic, calbindin- and calretinin-expressing) derive from
cells that express the homeobox genes Dlx5/6. The transcription factors ER81,
Meis2, Pax6 and Sp8 have all been implicated in olfactory bulb interneuron
development and each of these can be observed in Dlx5/6-derived periglomerular
cells. Conversely, the T-box factors Tbr1 and Tbx21, which mark olfactory bulb
projection neurons, are not expressed in the Dlx5/6-derived periglomerular cells.
While the interneuron subtypes that are marked by Pax6 and Sp8 have been
described, little information exists as to the specific subtypes that express
ER81 or Meis2. We show here that ER81 is expressed in dopaminergic cells and in a
subset of calretinin-expressing cells in the GL. Meis2 is found in dopaminergic
and calbindin-expressing cells as well as in a subpopulation of the
calretinin-expressing interneurons of the glomerular layer. These findings
suggest that distinct transcriptional codes may underlie the differentiation of
specific olfactory bulb interneuron subtypes.

PMID: 17624499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):459-63. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

Ewing sarcoma with novel translocation t(2;16) producing an in-frame fusion of
FUS and FEV.

Ng TL(1), O'Sullivan MJ, Pallen CJ, Hayes M, Clarkson PW, Winstanley M, Sorensen 
PH, Nielsen TO, Horsman DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, British Columbia Cancer
Agency, 600 W. 10th Ave., Vancouver, BC, Canada, V5Z 4E6.

Comment in
    J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):437-40.

Ewing family tumors are molecularly characterized by expression of chimeric
transcripts generated by specific chromosomal translocations, most commonly
involving fusion of the EWS gene to a member of the ETS family of transcription
factors (including FLI1, ERG, ETV1, E1AF, and FEV). Approximately 85% of reported
cases of Ewing sarcoma bear an EWS-FLI1 fusion. In rare cases, FUS can substitute
for EWS, with translocation t(16;21)(p11;q24) producing a FUS-ERG fusion with no 
EWS rearrangement. We report a case of Ewing sarcoma, presenting as a
pathological fracture of the distal clavicle in a 33-year-old male, in which
cytogenetic analysis revealed a single t(2;16)(q35;p11) balanced translocation.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization using a commercially available diagnostic
probe was negative for an EWS gene rearrangement; instead, break-apart
fluorescence in situ hybridization probes for FUS and FEV were positive for a
translocation involving these genes. Cloning and sequencing of the breakpoint
region demonstrated an in-frame fusion of FUS to FEV. In conclusion, this
represents the first reported case of Ewing family tumors demonstrating a variant
translocation involving FUS and FEV and highlights the need to consider
alternative permutations of fusion partners for molecular diagnosis of sarcomas.

PMCID: PMC1975098
PMID: 17620387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Aug;21(8):1835-46. Epub 2007 May 15.

ETV1 is a novel androgen receptor-regulated gene that mediates prostate cancer
cell invasion.

Cai C(1), Hsieh CL, Omwancha J, Zheng Z, Chen SY, Baert JL, Shemshedini L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio 43606,
USA.

Androgens and the androgen receptor (AR) act in cells by modulating gene
expression. Through gene microarray studies, we have identified Ets Variant Gene 
1 (ETV1) as a novel androgen-regulated gene. Our data demonstrate that ETV1 mRNA 
and protein are up-regulated in response to ligand-activated AR in
androgen-dependent LNCaP cells, but there is no detectable ETV1 expression in
normal prostate cells. The ETV1 promoter is induced by androgens and recruits the
AR in the context of chromatin. ETV1-regulated endogenous matrix
metalloproteinase genes can be induced by ligand-activated AR. In contrast to the
hormone-induced expression in androgen-dependent LNCaP cells, ETV1 expression in 
androgen-independent LNCaP cells is high and unresponsive to androgen. This
androgen-independent ETV1 expression contrasts with the hormone-dependent
expression observed for TMPRSS2 in these androgen-independent prostate cancer
cells. ETV1 is overexpressed in prostate cancer independent of the TMPRSS2:ETV1
translocation. Disruption of ETV1 expression in both androgen-dependent and
androgen-independent prostate cancer cells significantly compromises the invasion
capacity of these cells, suggesting an important role for ETV1 in prostate cancer
metastasis. Collectively, these results demonstrate that ETV1 expression
transitions from androgen-induced to androgen-independent as prostate cancer
cells switch from hormone-dependent to hormone-refractory and suggest that this
transition may be in part responsible for the elevated levels of ETV1 observed in
prostate tumors. Additionally, our data provide an indirect mechanism of AR
regulation of gene expression, via the transactivation of the transcription
factor ETV1.

PMID: 17505060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Urologe A. 2007 Jul;46(7):754-60.

[TMPRSS2-ETS gene fusion in prostate cancer].

[Article in German]

Perner S(1), Schmidt FH, Hofer MD, Kuefer R, Rubin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham & Women's Hospital/Harvard Medical School,
221 Longwood Avenue, EBRC 442A, Boston, MA 02115-6110, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent chromosomal rearrangements have not been well characterized
in common carcinomas. Using a novel bioinformatics approach, our group recently
described a novel gene fusion in PCa. This fusion involves the androgen-regulated
gene TMPRSS2 and so far three members of the ETS family of transcription factors 
already described as rearranged in the Ewing's family of tumors. By analogy,
fusion status in prostate cancer may determine clinical outcome and secondary
genetic alterations as witnessed in Ewing's tumors.
MATERIAL: These novel gene fusions occur in the majority of prostate cancers
identified by PSA screening and are the driving mechanism for overexpression of
the three members of the ETS transcription factor family, either ERG (21q22.3),
ETV1 (7p21.2), or ETV4 (17q21). Considering the high incidence of prostate cancer
and the high frequency of this gene fusion, the TMPRSS2-ETS gene fusion is the
most common genetic aberration so far described in human malignancies.
RESULTS: So far, this is the only gene rearrangement in any of the most prevalent
cancers. As confirmed by other groups, we demonstrated that, within the group of 
ETS transcription factors, ERG is the most common fusion partner of the ETS genes
with TMPRSS2. This gene fusion is considered to be an early event in PCa
development. Emerging data suggest that gene fusion PCa demonstrates a distinct
clinical course and thus support its use as a diagnostic test and prognostic
biomarker. Also similar to the Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML), the gene fusion in prostate cancer has potential as an important 
candidate for the development of targeted therapy.

PMID: 17458530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Jun 1;502(4):485-96.

ER81 and CaMKIV identify anatomically and phenotypically defined subsets of mouse
olfactory bulb interneurons.

Saino-Saito S(1), Cave JW, Akiba Y, Sasaki H, Goto K, Kobayashi K, Berlin R,
Baker H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Yamagata University School of
Medicine, Yamagata, Japan 990-9585.

The mechanisms underlying dopamine (DA) phenotypic differentiation in the
olfactory bulb (OB) have not yet been fully elucidated and are the subject of
some controversy. OB DA interneurons destined for the glomerular layer were shown
to originate in the subventricular zone (SVZ) and in the rostral migratory stream
(RMS). The current study investigated whether calcium/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase IV (CaMKIV) either alone or together with the Ets transcription
factor ER81 was necessary for phenotypic determination during migration of
progenitors. In most brain areas, including the OB, CaMKIV and ER81 displayed a
reciprocal distribution. In the SVZ, only ER81 could be demonstrated. In the RMS,
a subpopulation of progenitors contained ER81, but few, if any, contained CaMKIV.
In OB, CaMKIV expression, restricted to deep granule cells, showed limited
overlap with ER81. ER81 expression was weak in deep granule cells. Strong
labeling occurred in the mitral and glomerular layers, where ER81 colabeled
dopaminergic periglomerular cells that expressed either tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)
or green fluorescent protein, the latter reporter gene under control of 9-kb of
5' TH promoter. Odor deprivation resulted in a significant 5.2-fold decline in TH
immunoreactivity, but ER81 exhibited a relatively small 1.7-fold decline in
immunoreactivity. TH expression as well as brain and bulb size were unchanged in 
CaMKIV knockout mice. These data suggest that ER81 may be required but is not
sufficient for DA neuron differentiation and that CaMKIV is not directly involved
in TH gene regulation.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17394138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Oncol Rep. 2007 May;17(5):1033-6.

Molecular genetic analyses of the TMPRSS2-ERG and TMPRSS2-ETV1 gene fusions in 50
cases of prostate cancer.

Winnes M(1), Lissbrant E, Damber JE, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, SE-413 45
Göteborg, Sweden.

Recently, gene fusions between the androgen responsive gene TMPRSS2 and members
of the ETS-family of DNA-binding transcription factor genes were found in
prostate cancer. Recurrent fusions were identified between the 5'-noncoding
region of TMPRSS2 and ERG, or less frequently ETV1 or ETV4, resulting in
overexpression of normal or truncated ETS-proteins. Herein, we have analyzed a
series of 50 prostate cancer samples for expression of TPRSS2-ERG and
TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusion transcripts. RT-PCR analysis revealed TMPRSS2-ERG fusion
transcripts in 18 of the 50 tumors (36%). None of the tumors expressed a
TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusion. Our findings show that the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion is common in
prostate cancer and that the related TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusion is very rare. However,
the frequency of ERG-fusions in the present study is somewhat lower than
previously observed, indicating heterogeneity with regard to expression of
ETS-gene fusions in subsets of prostate cancers. Moreover, clinical follow-up
studies showed a clear tendency that fusion-positive tumors were associated with 
lower Gleason grade and better survival than fusion-negative tumors. Our findings
suggest that ERG gene fusions might be of prognostic significance in prostate
cancer.

PMID: 17390040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mod Pathol. 2007 May;20(5):538-44. Epub 2007 Mar 2.

Comprehensive assessment of TMPRSS2 and ETS family gene aberrations in clinically
localized prostate cancer.

Mehra R(1), Tomlins SA, Shen R, Nadeem O, Wang L, Wei JT, Pienta KJ, Ghosh D,
Rubin MA, Chinnaiyan AM, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

Novel recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the 
ETS family members ERG, ETV1, or ETV4 have been recently identified as a common
molecular event in prostate cancer development. We comprehensively analyzed the
frequency and risk of disease progression for the TMPRSS2 and ETS family genes
rearrangements in a cohort of 96 American men surgically treated for clinically
localized prostate cancer. Using three break apart (TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV4) and one
fusion (TMPRSS:ETV1) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays, we
identified rearrangements in TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 in 65, 55, 2, and 2% of
cases, respectively. Overall, 54 and 2% of cases demonstrated TMPRSS2:ERG and
TMPRSS2:ETV1 fusions, respectively. As intronic loss of genomic DNA between
TMPRSS2 and ERG has been identified as a mechanism of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion, our
assays allowed us to detect deletion of the 3' end of TMPRSS2 and the 5' end of
ERG in 41 and 39% of cases rearranged for respective genes. Prostate cancers
demonstrating TMPRSS2 gene rearrangement were associated with high pathologic
stage (P=0.04). Our results confirm that recurrent chromosomal aberrations in
TMPRSS2 and/or ETS family members are found in about 70% of prostate cancers.
Importantly, we define a novel approach to study these gene fusions and
identified cases where TMPRSS2 was rearranged without rearrangement of ERG, ETV1 
or ETV4 and cases with ETS family gene rearrangement without TMPRSS2
rearrangement, suggesting that novel 5' and 3' partners may be involved in gene
fusions in prostate cancer.

PMID: 17334343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mod Pathol. 2007 Mar;20(3):397-404.

Differentiating Ewing's sarcoma from other round blue cell tumors using a RT-PCR 
translocation panel on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues.

Lewis TB(1), Coffin CM, Bernard PS.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, The ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental
Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a common malignancy of bone and soft tissue that occurs most
often in children and young adults. Differentiating Ewing's sarcoma from other
round blue cell tumors can be a diagnostic challenge because of their similarity 
in histology and clinical presentation. Thus, ancillary molecular tests for
detecting disease-defining translocations are important for confirming the
diagnosis. We analyzed 65 round blue cell tumors, including 53 Ewing's sarcoma
samples from 50 unique cases. Samples were processed for RNA from archived
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. Real-time RT-PCR assays specific 
for Ewing's sarcoma (EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1, EWS-ETV4, and EWS-FEV),
synovial sarcoma (SYT-SSX1 and SYT-SSX2), and rhabdomyosarcoma (PAX3-FKHR and
PAX7-FKHR) were tested across the samples. The translocation panel had a
sensitivity of 81% (43 out of 53 samples) for diagnosing Ewing's sarcoma when
using the histological criteria as the 'gold' standard. None of the Ewing's
specific translocations were found in the non-Ewing's samples (100% specificity).
Of the 43 samples with translocations detected, 26 (60%) had an EWS-FLI1 type 1
translocation, 13 (30%) had an EWS-FLI1 type 2 translocation, 3 (7%) had an
EWS-ERG translocation, 1 had an EWS-ETV1 translocation, and 1 sample had both an 
EWS-FLI1 type 1 and type 2 translocation. Our real-time RT-PCR assay for
detecting sarcoma translocations has high sensitivity and specificity for Ewing's
sarcoma and has clinical utility in differentiating small round blue cell tumors 
in the clinical lab.

PMID: 17334332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 May;46(5):440-50.

Cytogenetic patterns in ETV6/RUNX1-positive pediatric B-cell precursor acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: A Nordic series of 245 cases and review of the
literature.

Forestier E(1), Andersen MK, Autio K, Blennow E, Borgström G, Golovleva I, Heim
S, Heinonen K, Hovland R, Johannsson JH, Kerndrup G, Nordgren A, Rosenquist R,
Swolin B, Johansson B; Nordic Society of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology
(NOPHO); Swedish Cytogenetic Leukemia Study Group (SCLSG); NOPHO Leukemia
Cytogenetic Study Group (NLCSG).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Umeå, Umeå,
Sweden. erik.forestier@pediatri.umu.se

Between 1992 and 2004, 1,140 children (1 to<15 years) were diagnosed with B-cell 
precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in the Nordic countries. Of these,
288 (25%) were positive for t(12;21)(p13;q22) [ETV6/RUNX1]. G-banding analyses
were successful in 245 (85%); 43 (15%) were karyotypic failures. The modal
chromosome numbers, incidence, types, and numbers of additional abnormalities,
genomic imbalances, and chromosomal breakpoints in the 245 karyotypically
informative cases, as well as in 152 previously reported cytogenetically
characterized t(12;21)-positive ALLs in the same age group, were ascertained. The
most common modal numbers among the 397 cases were 46 (67%), 47 (16%), 48 (6%),
and 45 (5%). High-hyperdiploidy, triploidy, and tetraploidy were each found in
approximately 1%; none had less than 40 chromosomes. Secondary chromosomal
abnormalities were identified by chromosome banding in 248 (62%) of the 397 ALLs.
Of these, 172 (69%) displayed only unbalanced changes, 14 (6%) only balanced
aberrations, and 26 (10%) harbored both unbalanced and balanced abnormalities; 36
(15%) were uninformative because of incomplete karyotypes. The numbers of
secondary changes varied between 1 and 19, with a median of 2 additional
aberrations per cytogenetically abnormal case. The most frequent genomic
imbalances were deletions of 6q21-27 (18%), 8p11-23 (6%), 9p13-24 (7%), 11q23-25 
(6%), 12p11-13 (27%), 13q14-34 (7%), loss of the X chromosome (8%), and gains of 
10 (9%), 16 (6%), and 21 (29%); no frequent partial gains were noted. The
chromosome bands most often involved in structural rearrangements were 3p21 (2%),
5q13 (2%), 6q12 (2%), 6q14 (2%), 6q16 (2%), 6q21 (10%), 6q23 (6%), 6q25 (3%),
9p13 (2%), 11q13 (2%), 11q23 (2%), 12p11 (6%), 12p12 (7%), 12p13 (25%), 21q10
(6%), and 21q22 (6%). Considering that the t(12;21) is known to arise in utero
and that the postnatal latency period is protracted, additional mutations are
most likely necessary for overt ALL. The frequently rearranged chromosome regions
may harbor genes of importance for the transformation and/or progression of an
initial preleukemic t(12;21)-positive clone.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17285576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Nov;60(11):1238-43. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Frequency of the TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion is increased in moderate to poorly
differentiated prostate cancers.

Rajput AB(1), Miller MA, De Luca A, Boyd N, Leung S, Hurtado-Coll A, Fazli L,
Jones EC, Palmer JB, Gleave ME, Cox ME, Huntsman DG.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, Vancouver General Hospital, British
Columbia Cancer Agency, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

Comment in
    J Clin Pathol. 2007 Nov;60(11):1185-6.

BACKGROUND: Recent reports indicate that prostate cancers (CaP) frequently
over-express the potential oncogenes, ERG or ETV1. Many cases have chromosomal
rearrangements leading to the fusion of the 5' end of the androgen-regulated
serine protease TMPRSS2 (21q22.2) to the 3' end of either ERG (21q22.3) or ETV1
(7p21.3). The consequence of these rearrangements is aberrant androgen
receptor-driven expression of the potential oncogenes, ETV1 or ERG.
AIM: To determine the frequency of rearrangements involving TMPRSS2, ERG, or ETV1
genes in CaP of varying Gleason grades through fluorescence in situ hybridisation
(FISH) on CaP tissue microarrays (TMAs).
METHODS: Two independent assays, a TMPRSS2 break-apart assay and a three-colour
gene fusion FISH assay were applied to TMAs. FISH positive cases were confirmed
by reverse transcriptase (RT) PCR and DNA sequence analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 106/196 (54.1%) cases were analysed by FISH. None of the five
benign prostatic hyperplasia cases analysed exhibited these gene rearrangements. 
TMPRSS2:ERG fusion was found more frequently in moderate to poorly differentiated
tumours (35/86, 40.7%) than in well differentiated tumours (1/15, 6.7%, p =
0.017). TMPRSS2:ETV1 gene fusions were not detected in any of the cases tested.
TMPRSS2:ERG fusion product was verified by RT-PCR followed by DNA sequencing in
7/7 randomly selected positive cases analysed.
CONCLUSION: This study indicates that TMPRSS2:ERG gene rearrangements in CaP may 
be used as a diagnostic tool to identify prognostically relevant
sub-classifications of these cancers.

PMCID: PMC2095486
PMID: 17259299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cell Cycle. 2006 Dec;5(23):2753-9. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Expression of EWS-ETS fusions in NIH3T3 cells reveals significant differences to 
Ewing's sarcoma.

Braunreiter CL(1), Hancock JD, Coffin CM, Boucher KM, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas contain specific chromosomal translocations that fuse EWS to ETS
family members, including FLI, ERG, FEV, ETV1 and ETV4. Prior work has suggested 
that functional differences exist between some of these EWS-ETS fusions. However,
as the cell of origin of Ewing's sarcoma is unknown, this prior work was
conducted in NIH3T3 cells, which have not been validated as an appropriate model 
for the study of EWS-ETS fusions. To determine if NIH3T3 cells are a good model
for Ewing's sarcoma, we introduced all five EWS-ETS fusions into these cells, and
analyzed their phenotypes and gene expression patterns. EWS-FLI, EWS-ERG, and
EWS-FEV caused NIH3T3 cells to exhibit anchorage independent growth whereas
EWS-ETV1 and EWS-ETV4 did not. In contrast, all the EWS-ETS fusions induced tumor
formation in a xenograft model. We defined the core transcriptional profile of
the EWS-ETS fusions using cDNA microarrays, and compared these to data derived
from patient-derived Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. The NIH3T3 model did not
recapitulate the gene expression pattern of bona fide Ewing's sarcoma. Based on
these results, we conclude that while there may be functional differences between
the various EWS-ETS fusions, the NIH3T3 cell model is inadequate to study the
gene expression pattern induced by EWS-ETS proteins in Ewing's sarcoma. Thus,
data derived from the NIH3T3 model system needs to be appropriately validated
before they can be accepted as relevant to the human disease.

PMID: 17172842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10658-63.

TMPRSS2:ERG fusion by translocation or interstitial deletion is highly relevant
in androgen-dependent prostate cancer, but is bypassed in late-stage androgen
receptor-negative prostate cancer.

Hermans KG(1), van Marion R, van Dekken H, Jenster G, van Weerden WM, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Urology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Recently, a unique fusion between the prostate-specific, androgen-regulated
TMPRSS2 gene and the ETS genes ERG, ETV1, or ETV4 has been described in clinical 
prostate cancer. We investigated mechanisms of expression of four ETS genes, ERG,
ETV1, ETV4, and FLI1, in 11 xenografts representing different stages of prostate 
cancer. All five androgen-dependent xenografts showed as major transcript
overexpression of two splice variants of TMPRSS2:ERG, linking TMPRSS2 exon 1 or 2
sequences to ERG exon 4. In one of two androgen-sensitive xenografts, fusion
transcripts of TMPRSS2 and ETV1 were detected. Array-based comparative genomic
hybridization and interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization indicated both
interstitial deletions and translocations as mechanisms of TMPRSS2:ERG gene
fusion. Importantly, TMPRSS2 to ERG fusions were also observed in three of four
androgen-independent, androgen receptor (AR)-negative xenografts and in two
AR-negative clinical prostate cancer specimens; however, the fusion gene was not 
expressed. In almost all AR-negative tumor samples, overexpression of wild-type
ETV4 or FLI1 was detected. Combined, our observations indicate a key role of
fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS genes in most androgen-regulated prostate cancers,
which might be bypassed by androgen-independent expression of wild-type ETS
factors in late-stage disease.

PMID: 17108102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Bull Cancer. 2006 Oct;93(10):985-9.

[PEA3 family of transcription factors and the regulation of oncogenesis].

[Article in French]

de Launoit Y(1), Baert JL, Chotteau-Lelievre A, Monte D, Coutte L, Mauen S,
Firlej V, Degerny C, Verreman K.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, CNRS, Université de Lille I,
Université de Lille II, Institut Pasteur de Lille, BP447, 1 rue Calmette, 59021
Lille Cedex. yvan.delaunoit@ibl.fr

Erm, Er81, and Pea3 are the three members of the PEA3 group which belong to the
Ets transcription factors family. These proteins regulate transcription of
multiple target genes, such as those encoding several matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP), which are enzymes degrading the extracellular matrix during cancer
metastasis. In fact, PEA3-group genes are often overexpressed in different types 
of human cancers that also over-express these MMP and display a disseminating
phenotype. In experimental models, regulation of PEA3 group member expression has
been shown to influence the metastatic process, thus suggesting that these
factors play a key role in metastasis.

PMID: 17074657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cereb Cortex. 2007 Aug;17(8):1918-33. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Comparative analysis of layer-specific genes in Mammalian neocortex.

Watakabe A(1), Ichinohe N, Ohsawa S, Hashikawa T, Komatsu Y, Rockland KS,
Yamamori T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Brain Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology, 38
Nishigonaka Myodaiji, Okazaki 444-8585, Japan.

We examined the expression patterns of 4 layer-specific genes in monkey and mouse
cortices by fluorescence double in situ hybridization. Based on their
coexpression profiles, we were able to distinguish several subpopulations of deep
layer neurons. One group was characterized by the expression of ER81 and the lack
of Nurr1 mRNAs and mainly localized to layer 5. In monkeys, this neuronal group
was further subdivided by 5-HT2C receptor mRNA expression. The 5-HT2C(+)/ER81(+) 
neurons were located in layer 5B in most cortical areas, but they intruded layer 
6 in the primary visual area (V1). Another group of neurons, in monkey layer 6,
was characterized by Nurr1 mRNA expression and was further subdivided as
Nurr1(+)/connective tissue growth factor (CTGF)(-) and Nurr1(+)/CTGF(+) neurons
in layers 6A and 6B, respectively. The Nurr1(+)/CTGF(+) neurons coexpressed ER81 
mRNA in monkeys but not in mice. On the basis of tracer injections in 3 monkeys, 
we found that the Nurr1(+) neurons in layer 6A send some corticocortical, but not
corticopulvinar, projections. Although the Nurr1(+)/CTGF(-) neurons were
restricted to lateral regions in the mouse cortex, they were present throughout
the monkey cortex. Thus, an architectonic heterogeneity across areas and species 
was revealed for the neuronal subpopulations with distinct gene expression
profiles.

PMID: 17065549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Neoplasia. 2006 Oct;8(10):885-8.

Noninvasive detection of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion transcripts in the urine of men with 
prostate cancer.

Laxman B(1), Tomlins SA, Mehra R, Morris DS, Wang L, Helgeson BE, Shah RB, Rubin 
MA, Wei JT, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

We recently reported the identification of recurrent gene fusions in the majority
of prostate cancers involving the 5' untranslated region of the
androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS family members ERG, ETV1, and ETV4.
Here we report the noninvasive detection of these gene fusions in the urine of
patients with clinically localized prostate cancer. By quantitative polymerase
chain reaction, we assessed the expression of ERG and TMPRSS2:ERG transcripts in 
urine samples obtained after prostatic massage from 19 patients (11 prebiopsy and
8 pre-radical prostatectomy) with prostate cancer. We observed a strong
concordance between ERG overexpression and TMPRSS2:ERG expression, with 8 of 19
(42%) patients having detectable TMPRSS2:ERG transcripts in their urine.
Importantly, by fluorescence in situ hybridization, we confirmed the presence or 
the absence of TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusions in matched prostate cancer tissue samples
from three of three patients with fusion transcripts in their urine and from two 
of two patients without fusion transcripts in their urine. These results
demonstrate that TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusions can be detected in the urine of
patients with prostate cancer and support larger studies on prospective cohorts
for noninvasive detection of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC1715928
PMID: 17059688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Neoplasia. 2006 Oct;8(10):826-32.

TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion causing ERG overexpression precedes chromosome copy
number changes in prostate carcinomas and paired HGPIN lesions.

Cerveira N(1), Ribeiro FR, Peixoto A, Costa V, Henrique R, Jerónimo C, Teixeira
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

TMPRSS2-ETS gene fusions have been found recurrently in prostate carcinomas, but 
not in the presumed precursor lesion, high-grade prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (HGPIN). However, HGPIN lesions may share chromosomal changes with
prostate cancer. To determine the relative order of genetic events in prostate
carcinogenesis, we have analyzed 34 prostate carcinomas, 19 paired HGPIN lesions,
14 benign prostate hyperplasias, and 11 morphologically normal prostatic tissues 
for TMPRSS2-ERG and TMPRSS2-ETV1 rearrangements and genomic imbalances. TMPRSS2
exon 1 was fused in-frame with ERG exon 4 in 17 of 34 (50%) prostate carcinomas
and in 4 of 19 (21%) HGPIN lesions, but in none of controls. The findings were
further validated by sequencing analysis and by the real-time polymerase chain
reaction quantification of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion transcript and the ERG exons
5/6:exons 1/2 expression ratio. Chromosome copy number changes were detected by
comparative genomic hybridization in 42% of clinically confined carcinomas and in
none of the 16 HGPIN lesions analyzed. We demonstrate for the first time that the
TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene can be detected in a proportion of HGPIN lesions and that
this molecular rearrangement is an early event that may precede chromosome-level 
alterations in prostate carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1715930
PMID: 17032499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Dev Dyn. 2006 Nov;235(11):3039-50.

Neurotrophin-3 ameliorates sensory-motor deficits in Er81-deficient mice.

Li LY(1), Wang Z, Sedý J, Quazi R, Walro JM, Frank E, Kucera J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Two factors, the ETS transcription factor ER81 and skeletal muscle-derived
neurotrophin-3 (NT3), are essential for the formation of muscle spindles and the 
function of spindle afferent-motoneuron synapses in the spinal cord. Spindles
either degenerate completely or are abnormal, and spindle afferents fail to
project to spinal motoneurons in Er81 null mice; however, the interactions
between ER81 and NT3 during the processes of afferent neuron and muscle spindle
development are poorly understood. To examine if overexpression of NT3 in muscle 
rescues spindles and afferent-motoneuron connectivity in the absence of ER81, we 
generated myoNT3;Er81(-/-) double-mutant mice that selectively overexpress NT3 in
muscle in the absence of ER81. Spindle reflex arcs in myoNT3;Er81(-/-) mutants
differed greatly from Er81 null mice. Muscle spindle densities were greater and
more afferents projected into the ventral spinal cord in myoNT3;Er81(-/-) mice.
Spindles of myoNT3;Er81(-/-) muscles responded normally to repetitive muscle
taps, and the monosynaptic inputs from Ia afferents to motoneurons, grossly
reduced in Er81(-/-) mutants, were restored to wild-type levels in
myoNT3;Er81(-/-) mice. Thus, an excess of muscle-derived NT3 reverses deficits in
spindle numbers and afferent function induced by the absence of ER81. We conclude
that muscle-derived NT3 can modulate spindle density and afferent-motoneuron
connectivity independently of ER81.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2587023
PMID: 17013886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Br J Cancer. 2006 Oct 9;95(7):767-74. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

Improving the outcome of patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer
through rational drug development.

Attard G(1), Sarker D, Reid A, Molife R, Parker C, de Bono JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer
Research, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5PT, UK.

Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is now the second most common cause
of male cancer-related mortality. Although docetaxel has recently been shown to
extend the survival of patients with CRPC in two large randomised phase III
studies, subsequent treatment options remain limited for these patients. A
greater understanding of the molecular causes of castration resistance is
allowing a more rational approach to the development of new drugs and many new
agents are now in clinical development. Therapeutic targets include the adrenal
steroid synthesis pathway, androgen receptor signalling, the epidermal growth
factor receptor family, insulin growth factor-1 receptor, histone deacetylase,
heat shock protein 90 and the tumour vasculature. Drugs against these targets are
giving an insight into the molecular pathogenesis of this disease and promise to 
improve patient quality of life and survival. Finally, the recent discovery of
chromosomal translocations resulting in the upregulation of one of at least 3 ETS
genes (ERG, ETV1, ETV4) may lead to novel agents for the treatment of this
disease.

PMCID: PMC2360544
PMID: 16983403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Lab Invest. 2006 Nov;86(11):1099-102. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Bioinformatics approach leads to the discovery of the TMPRSS2:ETS gene fusion in 
prostate cancer.

Rubin MA(1), Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115-6110, USA. marubin@partners.org.or

Recurrent chromosomal rearrangements have not been well characterized in common
carcinomas. We describe the use of a novel bioinformatics approach to discover
candidate oncogenic chromosomal aberrations on the basis of outlier gene
expression called COPA (cancer outlier profile analysis). We demonstrate how this
approach led to the identification of gene fusions of the 5'-untranslated region 
of TMPRSS2 (21q22.3), an androgen regulated gene, with the ETS transcription
factor family members, either ERG (21q22.2), ETV1 (7p21.2), or ETV4(17q21). These
novel gene fusions suggest a mechanism for overexpression of the ETS genes in the
majority of prostate cancers identified through PSA screening. Considering the
high incidence of prostate cancer and the high frequency of this gene fusion, the
TMPRSS2-ETS gene fusions are the most common genetic aberration so far described 
in human malignancies. The clinical implications of this discovery are
significant for diagnosis and potentially for the development of targeted
therapy.

PMID: 16983328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 1;66(17):8337-41.

TMPRSS2:ERG fusion-associated deletions provide insight into the heterogeneity of
prostate cancer.

Perner S(1), Demichelis F, Beroukhim R, Schmidt FH, Mosquera JM, Setlur S,
Tchinda J, Tomlins SA, Hofer MD, Pienta KG, Kuefer R, Vessella R, Sun XW,
Meyerson M, Lee C, Sellers WR, Chinnaiyan AM, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
EBRC 442A, 221 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115-6110, USA.

Prostate cancer is a common and clinically heterogeneous disease with marked
variability in progression. The recent identification of gene fusions of the
5'-untranslated region of TMPRSS2 (21q22.3) with the ETS transcription factor
family members, either ERG (21q22.2), ETV1 (7p21.2), or ETV4 (17q21), suggests a 
mechanism for overexpression of the ETS genes in the majority of prostate
cancers. In the current study using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), we
identified the TMPRSS2:ERG rearrangements in 49.2% of 118 primary prostate
cancers and 41.2% of 18 hormone-naive lymph node metastases. The FISH assay
detected intronic deletions between ERG and TMPRSS2 resulting in TMPRSS2:ERG
fusion in 60.3% (35 of 58) of the primary TMPRSS2:ERG prostate cancers and 42.9% 
(3 of 7) of the TMPRSS2:ERG hormone-naive lymph node metastases. A significant
association was observed between TMPRSS2:ERG rearranged tumors through deletions 
and higher tumor stage and the presence of metastatic disease involving pelvic
lymph nodes. Using 100K oligonucleotide single nucleotide polymorphism arrays, a 
homogeneous deletion site between ERG and TMPRSS2 on chromosome 21q22.2-3 was
identified with two distinct subclasses distinguished by the start point of the
deletion at either 38.765 or 38.911 Mb. This study confirms that TMPRSS2:ERG is
fused in approximately half of the prostate cancers through deletion of genomic
DNA between ERG and TMPRSS2. The deletion as cause of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion is
associated with clinical features for prostate cancer progression compared with
tumors that lack the TMPRSS2:ERG rearrangement.

PMID: 16951139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Neoplasia. 2006 Jun;8(6):465-9.

Three-color FISH analysis of TMPRSS2/ERG fusions in prostate cancer indicates
that genomic microdeletion of chromosome 21 is associated with rearrangement.

Yoshimoto M(1), Joshua AM, Chilton-Macneill S, Bayani J, Selvarajah S, Evans AJ, 
Zielenska M, Squire JA.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Oncology, Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The recent description of novel recurrent gene fusions in approximately 80% of
prostate cancer (PCa) cases has generated increased interest in the search for
new translocations in other epithelial cancers and emphasizes the importance of
understanding the origins and biologic implications of these genomic
rearrangements. Analysis of 15 PCa cases by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction was used to detect six ERG-related gene fusion transcripts with
TMPRSS2. No TMPRSS2/ETV1 chimeric fusion was detected in this series. Three-color
fluorescence in situ hybridization confirms that TMPRSS2/ERG fusion may be
accompanied by a small hemizygous sequence deletion on chromosome 21 between ERG 
and TMPRSS2 genes. Analysis of genomic architecture in the region of genomic
rearrangement suggests that tracts of microhomology could facilitate TMPRSS2/ERG 
fusion events.

PMCID: PMC1601467
PMID: 16820092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jun;26(12):4529-38.

The LIM domain protein LPP is a coactivator for the ETS domain transcription
factor PEA3.

Guo B(1), Sallis RE, Greenall A, Petit MM, Jansen E, Young L, Van de Ven WJ,
Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Bldg.,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

PEA3 is a member of a subfamily of ETS domain transcription factors which is
regulated by a number of signaling cascades, including the mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase pathways. PEA3 activates gene expression and is thought to
play an important role in promoting tumor metastasis and also in neuronal
development. Here, we have identified the LIM domain protein LPP as a novel
coregulatory binding partner for PEA3. LPP has intrinsic transactivation
capacity, forms a complex with PEA3, and is found associated with PEA3-regulated 
promoters. By manipulating LPP levels, we show that it acts to upregulate the
transactivation capacity of PEA3. LPP can also functionally interact in a similar
manner with the related family member ER81. Thus, we have uncovered a novel
nuclear function for the LIM domain protein LPP as a transcriptional coactivator.
As LPP continually shuttles between the cell periphery and the nucleus, it
represents a potential novel link between cell surface events and changes in gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC1489114
PMID: 16738319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jul 1;15(13):2125-37. Epub 2006 May 22.

Fusion between CIC and DUX4 up-regulates PEA3 family genes in Ewing-like sarcomas
with t(4;19)(q35;q13) translocation.

Kawamura-Saito M(1), Yamazaki Y, Kaneko K, Kawaguchi N, Kanda H, Mukai H, Gotoh
T, Motoi T, Fukayama M, Aburatani H, Takizawa T, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) are highly malignant tumors arising from bone and
soft tissues that exhibit EWS-FLI1 or variant EWS-ETS gene fusions in more than
85% of the cases. Here we show that CIC, a human homolog of Drosophila capicua
which encodes a high mobility group box transcription factor, is fused to a
double homeodomain gene DUX4 as a result of a recurrent chromosomal translocation
t(4;19)(q35;q13). This translocation was seen in two cases of soft tissue sarcoma
diagnosed as Ewing-like sarcoma. CIC-DUX4 exhibits a transforming potential for
NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, and as a consequence of fusion with a C-terminal fragment of
DUX4, CIC acquires an enhanced transcriptional activity, suggesting that
expression of its downstream targets might be deregulated. Gene expression
analysis identified the ETS family genes, ERM/ETV5 and ETV1, as potential targets
for the gene product of CIC-DUX4. Indeed, CIC-DUX4 directly binds the ERM
promoter by recognizing a novel target sequence and significantly up-regulates
its expression. This study clarifies the function of CIC and its role in
tumorigenesis, as well as the importance of the PEA3 subclass of ETS family
proteins in the development of EFTs arising through mechanisms different from
those involving EWS-ETS chimeras. Moreover, the study identifies the role of DUX4
that is closely linked to facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy in
transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 16717057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Curr Opin Urol. 2006 May;16(3):123-31.

Molecular biology of prostate-cancer pathogenesis.

Shand RL(1), Gelmann EP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology and Medicine, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University, 3800 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The genetic and molecular basis of prostate-cancer
pathogenesis is reviewed.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several genetic loci have been found that are associated with
hereditary predisposition to prostate cancer, but they account for a small
fraction of all cases. A number of suppressor genes have been identified that are
activated by either complete or partial genetic loss in sporadic prostate cancer.
Chromosomal translocation results in transcriptional activation of truncated ETS 
transcription factors ERG and ETV1, the first candidates for dominant oncogenes
for prostate cancer. Lastly, the androgen receptor is active throughout the
course of prostate cancer and, in androgen-independent prostate cancer, takes on 
the role of a dominant oncogene as the target of gene amplification,
overexpression, and the activation of mutations.
SUMMARY: Genetic lesions responsible for familial and sporadic prostate cancer
are being revealed and they suggest that prostate cancer often initiates owing to
an increased susceptibility to oxidative damage; it then progresses by affecting 
transcription factors, the PI3 kinase pathway, and other growth stimulatory
pathways. The final common pathway after androgen ablation appears to be
activation of androgen receptor.

PMID: 16679847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Apr 15;166(2):173-9.

Molecular cytogenetic characterization of four previously established and two
newly established Ewing sarcoma cell lines.

Szuhai K(1), Ijszenga M, Tanke HJ, Rosenberg C, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box
9600, 2300RC, Leiden, The Netherlands. k.szuhai@lumc.nl

Most Ewing family tumors are identified by the characteristic translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12), resulting in a fusion protein EWS/FLI1 that acts as an
aberrant transcription factor. In a minority of cases, the EWS gene is fused to
another member of the ETS gene (ERG, ETV1, E1AF, and FEV). Though the oncogenic
transforming capability of the EWS/FLI1 protein is highly suggestive, the exact
pathway behind remains to be elucidated. The availability of cell lines may help 
in the understanding of underlying cellular processes. In this study, we have
established two new Ewing sarcoma cell lines and characterized them with
molecular cytogenetic tools. This technology was also applied on four other
previously published Ewing sarcoma cell lines. Our findings in relation to
previous data on similar tumors are discussed.

PMID: 16631476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 1;66(7):3396-400.

TMPRSS2:ETV4 gene fusions define a third molecular subtype of prostate cancer.

Tomlins SA(1), Mehra R, Rhodes DR, Smith LR, Roulston D, Helgeson BE, Cao X, Wei 
JT, Rubin MA, Shah RB, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301 Catherine
Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Although common in hematologic and mesenchymal malignancies, recurrent gene
fusions have not been well characterized in epithelial carcinomas. Recently,
using a novel bioinformatic approach, we identified recurrent gene fusions
between TMPRSS2 and the ETS family members ERG or ETV1 in the majority of
prostate cancers. Here, we interrogated the expression of all ETS family members 
in prostate cancer profiling studies and identified marked overexpression of ETV4
in 2 of 98 cases. In one such case, we confirmed the overexpression of ETV4 using
quantitative PCR, and by rapid amplification of cDNA ends, quantitative PCR, and 
fluorescence in situ hybridization, we show that the TMPRSS2 (21q22) and ETV4
(17q21) loci are fused in this case. This result defines a third molecular
subtype of prostate cancer and supports the hypothesis that dysregulation of ETS 
family members through fusions with TMRPSS2 may be an initiating event in
prostate cancer development.

PMID: 16585160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Mar;5(3):254-5. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

ETS-TMPRSS2 fusion gene products in prostate cancer.

Ahlers CM(1), Figg WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Section, Medical Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Genes playing a role in carcinogenesis have often been identified through
analysis of recurrent chromosomal rearrangements. Although such rearrangements
are well known in leukemias, lymphomas, and sarcomas, they have not been well
characterized in carcinomas. In the October 28, 2005 issue of Science, a study by
Tomlins et al. uses bioinformatics techniques to identify candidate oncogenic
chromosomal changes based on analysis of outlier gene expression. The authors
determined that two ETS transcription factors, ERG and ETV1 were outliers in
prostate cancer. The group reports recurrent fusions of the 5' untranslated
region of the TMPRSS2 gene to ERG and ETV1 in the majority of prostate cancer
samples containing the outlier expression. In cell lines containing the fusion
gene, androgen appears to play a role in mediating ETS overexpression. This
fusion gene product may play an important role in the development, diagnosis, and
treatment of prostate cancer.

PMID: 16575200  [PubMed]


210. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(7):2467-78.

Cooperative DNA binding with AP-1 proteins is required for transformation by
EWS-Ets fusion proteins.

Kim S(1), Denny CT, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology and UC Davis Cancer Center, University of
California at Davis, USA.

A key molecular event in the genesis of Ewing's sarcoma is the consistent
presence of chromosomal translocations that result in the formation of proteins
in which the amino terminus of EWS is fused to the carboxyl terminus, including
the DNA binding domain, of one of five different Ets family proteins. These
fusion proteins function as deregulated transcription factors, resulting in
aberrant control of gene expression. Recent data indicate that some EWS-Ets
target promoters, including the uridine phosphorylase (UPP) promoter, harbor
tandem binding sites for Ets and AP-1 proteins. Here we show that those Ets
family proteins that participate in Ewing's sarcoma, including Fli1, ERG, and
ETV1, cooperatively bind these tandem elements with Fos-Jun while other Ets
family members do not. Analysis of this cooperativity in vitro shows that (i)
many different spatial arrangements of the Ets and AP-1 sites support cooperative
binding, (ii) the bZIP motifs of Fos and Jun are sufficient to support this
cooperativity, and (iii) both the Ets domain and carboxy-terminal sequences of
Fli1 are important for cooperative DNA binding. EWS-Fli1 activates the expression
of UPP mRNA, is directly bound to the UPP promoter, and transforms 3T3
fibroblasts; in contrast, a C-terminally truncated mutant form of EWS-Fli1 that
cannot cooperatively bind DNA with Fos-Jun is defective in all of these
properties. The results show that the ability of EWS-Ets proteins to
cooperatively bind DNA with Fos-Jun is critical to the biologic activities of
these proteins. The results have implications for understanding the pathogenesis 
of Ewing's sarcoma. In addition, they may be relevant to the mechanisms of
Ras-dependent activation of genes that harbor tandem Ets and AP-1 binding sites.

PMCID: PMC1430316
PMID: 16537893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Dev Dyn. 2006 Apr;235(4):1081-9.

ETS transcription factor ER81 is required for the Pacinian corpuscle development.

Sedý J(1), Tseng S, Walro JM, Grim M, Kucera J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, U
nemocnice 3, 128-00 Prague, Czech Republic.

ER81, a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, is involved in
processes of specification of neuronal identity, control of sensory-motor
connectivity, and differentiation of muscle spindles. Spindles either degenerate 
or are abnormal in mutant mice lacking ER81. We examined whether ER81 is required
for the development of another class of mechanoreceptors, the Pacinian corpuscle.
ER81 was expressed by the inner core cells of the corpuscles, as reflected by
expression of the lacZ reporter gene in Er81(+/lacZ) mutants, thereby suggesting 
a role for ER81 in the corpuscle development. No Pacinian corpuscles or their
afferent nerve fibers were present in the crus of Er81 null mice at birth. Legs
of mutant embryos examined at E16.5 were also devoid of the corpuscles, but not
of their afferents. Thus, Pacinian corpuscles do not form, and their afferents do
not survive, in the absence of ER81. A deficiency of dorsal root ganglia neurons 
expressing calretinin, a marker for neurons subserving Pacinian corpuscles,
correlated with the absence of corpuscles and their afferents in Er81 null mice. 
These observations indicate a requirement for ER81 in the assembly of Pacinian
corpuscles and the survival of the sensory neurons that innervate them.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16493690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Feb;40(2):295-302. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Regional variation in mRNA transcript abundance within the ventricular wall.

Rosati B(1), Grau F, McKinnon D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Molecular Cardiology,
BST Room 124, Level 6, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8661, USA.

Previous studies have shown that regional variation in ion channel gene
expression contributes to electrical heterogeneity within the walls of the
cardiac ventricles. To map the extent of regional variation in gene expression in
the ventricular walls and to begin to understand its genesis we have performed a 
microarray analysis of gene expression in the epicardial and endocardial tissues 
of the rat adult left ventricle. While the vast majority of the genes are
expressed at uniform levels across the ventricular wall, a total of 36
transcripts (representing less than 0.1% of the genes expressed in the ventricle)
are expressed more abundantly in either epicardium or endocardium. One of these
differentially expressed genes is the sodium channel gene Scn5a, which is
expressed at higher levels in the endocardium than in the epicardium of rat
heart. The transcription factor genes Irx3, Irx5 and Etv1 were found to be
expressed in transmural gradients across the ventricular wall of rat heart and
also of canine heart. The Irx3 and Irx5 genes were expressed in an inverse
pattern to that of the Kcnd2 (Kv4.2) gene in rat heart, suggesting that these
transcription factors may act as negative regulators of Kcnd2 expression in vivo.

PMID: 16412459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biol Reprod. 2006 Apr;74(4):714-20. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Putative regulation of expression of members of the Ets variant 4 transcription
factor family and their downstream targets in the rat epididymis.

Yang L(1), Fox SA, Kirby JL, Troan BV, Hinton BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Several genes expressed in the initial segment of the epididymis depend on
factors from the testis that reach the epididymis via the luminal system. These
include gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase mRNA IV (Ggt_pr4), steroid 5 alpha
reductase (Srd5a1), glutathione peroxidase 5 (Gpx5), and cystatin-related
epididymal spermatogenic (Cst8) genes. Promoter analyses indicated that these
genes contain several ETS DNA-binding sites. Members of the polyomavirus enhancer
activator 3 (ETV4) family bind to ETS sites on the promoter of target genes to
regulate transcription. In this study, the role of ETV4 family members (ETV4,
ETV5, ETV1) in the transcription of initial segment specific genes was evaluated.
All three ETV4 family mRNAs are expressed in the principal cells of the initial
segment and depend upon the presence of testicular luminal fluid factors. ETV4
protein was localized to principal cell nuclei and displayed the highest
expression in the most proximal region of the initial segment. In addition, ETV4 
protein levels were diminished after loss of testicular luminal fluid factors. A 
dominant-negative construct of ETV5 was in vivo electroporated into the initial
segment to determine if ETV4 family members can regulate the transcription of
testicular luminal fluid factor-regulated genes. Quantitative PCR indicated that 
1 day postelectroporation, all three ETV4 family member mRNAs were significantly 
decreased. In addition, Ggt_pr4, Srd5a1, and Gpx5 mRNA levels were also
significantly decreased. The data suggest that ETV4 family members regulate their
own expression, and that they regulate transcription of a subset of genes that
are dependent upon testicular luminal fluid factors.

PMID: 16394217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Neuroscience. 2006;137(2):401-12. Epub 2005 Nov 14.

Er81 is expressed in a subpopulation of layer 5 neurons in rodent and primate
neocortices.

Yoneshima H(1), Yamasaki S, Voelker CC, Molnár Z, Christophe E, Audinat E,
Takemoto M, Nishiwaki M, Tsuji S, Fujita I, Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, 1-3 Machikaneyama, 
Toyonaka, Osaka 560-8531, Japan.

Laminar organization is a fundamental cytoarchitecture in mammalian CNS and a
striking feature of the neocortex. ER81, a transcription factor, has recently
been utilized as a marker of cells in the layer 5 of the neocortex. We further
pursued the distribution of ER81 to investigate the identity of the
ER81-expressing cells in the brain. Er81 transcript was expressed in a subset of 
pyramidal cells that were scattered throughout the entire width of layer 5. In
the rat cortex, Er81 transcripts were first detected in the ventricular zone at
E15, remained expressed in putative prospective layer 5 neurons during infant and
juvenile stages. The ER81-expressing subpopulation in adult layer 5 neurons did
not segregate with the phenotypes of the projection targets. By retrograde
labeling combined with immunohistochemistry or reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction analysis, we found ER81 expression in nearly all of the layer 5
neurons projecting to the spinal cord or to the superior colliculus, while in
only one-third of the layer 5 neurons projecting to the contralateral cortex.
Er81 was also detected in layer 5 neurons in a P2 Japanese macaque monkey but not
in adult monkey cortices. These findings suggest that a neuron class defined by a
molecular criterion does not necessarily segregate with that defined by an
anatomical criterion, that ER81 is involved in cell differentiation of a subset
of layer 5 projection neurons and that this mechanism is conserved among rodents 
and primates.

PMID: 16289830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Science. 2005 Oct 28;310(5748):644-8.

Recurrent fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor genes in prostate
cancer.

Tomlins SA(1), Rhodes DR, Perner S, Dhanasekaran SM, Mehra R, Sun XW, Varambally 
S, Cao X, Tchinda J, Kuefer R, Lee C, Montie JE, Shah RB, Pienta KJ, Rubin MA,
Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301 Catherine
Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0602, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2005 Oct 28;310(5748):603.
    Eur Urol. 2007 May;51(5):1443-4.

Recurrent chromosomal rearrangements have not been well characterized in common
carcinomas. We used a bioinformatics approach to discover candidate oncogenic
chromosomal aberrations on the basis of outlier gene expression. Two ETS
transcription factors, ERG and ETV1, were identified as outliers in prostate
cancer. We identified recurrent gene fusions of the 5' untranslated region of
TMPRSS2 to ERG or ETV1 in prostate cancer tissues with outlier expression. By
using fluorescence in situ hybridization, we demonstrated that 23 of 29 prostate 
cancer samples harbor rearrangements in ERG or ETV1. Cell line experiments
suggest that the androgen-responsive promoter elements of TMPRSS2 mediate the
overexpression of ETS family members in prostate cancer. These results have
implications in the development of carcinomas and the molecular diagnosis and
treatment of prostate cancer.

PMID: 16254181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Science. 2005 Oct 28;310(5748):603.

Medicine. Fused genes may help explain the origins of prostate cancer.

Marx J.

Comment on
    Science. 2005 Oct 28;310(5748):644-8.

PMID: 16254158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Oncol Rep. 2005 Nov;14(5):1189-97.

Gene expression profiling of the bone marrow mononuclear cells from patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome.

Qian J(1), Chen Z, Wang W, Cen J, Xue Y.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Research Division, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, First Affiliated 
Hospital of Soochow University, 96 Shizi Street, Suzhou 215006, P.R. China.

The gene expression pattern of bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMNCs) from 10
patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) was studied by two-color cDNA
microarray techniques. To confirm the microarray results, a semiquantitative
RT-PCR was performed to analyze gene expression in fifty additional MDS patients.
Ninety-five genes were shown to be abnormally expressed in at least five MDS
patients compared to normal controls, involving cell growth and differentiation
regulation, cell cycle control, signaling and redox; such as thrombospondin 1,
phosphatase and tensin homolog, MAD, DNA-damage-inducible transcript 3 (DDIT3),
ets variant gene 1 (ETV1), and G1 to S phase transition 1. CD36 was also revealed
up-regulated in 4 cases. MDS patients in early and advanced stages could be
clustered into two distinct groups by hierarchical clustering, wherein a case
with isolated thrombocytopenia and other RA patients were clustered into two
subgroups. Consistent expression patterns of 3/5 (60%) genes were confirmed by
semiquantitative RT-PCR. Further analysis showed the different transcript levels 
of RNAHP, DDIT3 in patients with MDS in different stages, AML, and normal
controls. Meanwhile, the different significance of RNAHP and ETV1 expression was 
revealed between RA and untypical anaplastic anemia, iron deficiency anemia, and 
megaloblastic anemia patients. We propose that the technology of microarray may
reveal the intrinsic molecular features and the expression levels of RNAHP,
DDIT3, and ETV1 may provide useful markers for the diagnosis of MDS.

PMID: 16211284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Reproduction. 2005 May;129(5):651-7.

Differential expression of the PEA3 subfamily of ETS transcription factors in the
mouse ovary and peri-implantation uterus.

Koo TB(1), Song H, Moon I, Han K, Chen C, Murphy K, Lim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The objective of the present investigation was to examine the spatio-temporal
expression of three members of the ETS family of transcription factors, ERM,
ER81, and PEA3, in the peri-implantation mouse uterus and in the ovary. These
three factors belong to the PEA3 subfamily and are known to mediate diverse
functions ranging from neuronal development to tumor progression. As
transcription factors, they regulate the expression of a number of genes with
various biological functions. Since several genes with known roles in the
reproductive processes have been shown to be under the regulation of one of these
factors, we sought to investigate the expression of ERM, ER81, and PEA3 in the
mouse ovary and uterus. Quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed that ERM, ER81, and
PEA3 were all expressed in the peri-implantation mouse uterus, with higher levels
of expression on days 4 and 5 of pregnancy. To determine the cell type-specific
expression of these factors, we employed in situ hybridization, the results of
which revealed that ERM was expressed in both the epithelium and the stroma on
days 4 and 5 of pregnancy. Uterine glands showed a high expression of ERM on
those days. ERM was also highly expressed in the corpora lutea of the mouse
ovary. Both ER81 and PEA3 were expressed at low levels in the stroma on days 4
and 5. On day 8, while ERM and PEA3 were mainly expressed in the embryo and were 
at low levels in the maternal decidua in a diffused pattern, ER81 was highly
expressed in the vascular bed of the mesometrial deciduum. Both ER81 and PEA3
were undetectable in the mouse ovary. Collectively, these data show that ERM is
implicated in the early event of implantation as well as in ovarian functions,
while ER81 is involved in the establishment of the maternal vasculature for
subsequent placental development. PEA3 is apparently an embryonic factor for
early embryogenesis.

PMID: 15855628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS Biol. 2005 May;3(5):e159. Epub 2005 Apr 26.

A developmental switch in the response of DRG neurons to ETS transcription factor
signaling.

Hippenmeyer S(1), Vrieseling E, Sigrist M, Portmann T, Laengle C, Ladle DR, Arber
S.

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, Department of Cell Biology, University of Basel, Switzerland.

Two ETS transcription factors of the Pea3 subfamily are induced in subpopulations
of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) sensory and spinal motor neurons by target-derived 
factors. Their expression controls late aspects of neuronal differentiation such 
as target invasion and branching. Here, we show that the late onset of ETS gene
expression is an essential requirement for normal sensory neuron differentiation.
We provide genetic evidence in the mouse that precocious ETS expression in DRG
sensory neurons perturbs axonal projections, the acquisition of terminal
differentiation markers, and their dependence on neurotrophic support. Together, 
our findings indicate that DRG sensory neurons exhibit a temporal developmental
switch that can be revealed by distinct responses to ETS transcription factor
signaling at sequential steps of neuronal maturation.

PMCID: PMC1084331
PMID: 15836427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Comp Neurol. 2005 May 23;486(1):76-88.

Expression patterns of the three Teashirt-related genes define specific
boundaries in the developing and postnatal mouse forebrain.

Caubit X(1), Tiveron MC, Cremer H, Fasano L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique et de physiologie du développement, Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale-Université de la Méditerranée, Campus de Luminy, Marseille, France.
caubit@ibdm.univ-mrs.fr

We compare the expression patterns of the three mouse Teashirt (mTsh) genes
during development of the forebrain and at a postnatal stage. During development,
mTsh genes are expressed in domains that are restricted both dorsoventrally and
rostrocaudally, with major changes in expression level coinciding with
compartment boundaries. Striking complementarities in the distribution of mTsh
transcripts were observed in the developing diencephalon, telencephalon, and
olfactory bulb (OB). A mTsh1-positive cell population is part of the DLX-positive
population localized in the dorsalmost portion of the lateral ganglionic eminence
(dLGE). Comparison of the mTsh1 expression domain with the domains of Er81 and
Islet1, which mark two distinct progenitor populations in the subventricular zone
of the LGE, suggests that mTsh1 marks OB interneuron progenitors. Furthermore,
the distinct expression patterns of mTsh1 and mTsh2 in the ventral LGE and the
dLGE highlight the differential contributions of these structures to the striatum
and the amydaloid complex. For Sey/Sey mutants, we show that Pax6 function is
critical for the correct specification of the mTsh1+ population in the dLGE
during embryogenesis. At postnatal stages in the OB, mTsh1 is expressed in
granule and periglomerular cells, which originate from the subpallium during
development. Furthermore, mTsh1+ cells line the walls of the anterior lateral
ventricle, a region that gives rise to the interneurons that migrate in the
rostral migratory streams and populate the OB postnatally. Our results suggest a 
role for mTsh genes in the establishment of regional identity and specification
of cell types in the developing and adult forebrain.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15834955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Neurosci. 2004 Dec 8;24(49):11171-81.

Defective postnatal neurogenesis and disorganization of the rostral migratory
stream in absence of the Vax1 homeobox gene.

Soria JM(1), Taglialatela P, Gil-Perotin S, Galli R, Gritti A, Verdugo JM,
Bertuzzi S.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute at Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche-Istituto di 
Tecnologie Biomediche, 20090 Segrate, Milan, Italy.

The subventricular zone (SVZ) is one of the sources of adult neural stem cells
(ANSCs) in the mouse brain. Precursor cells proliferate in the SVZ and migrate
through the rostral migratory stream (RMS) to the olfactory bulb (OB), where they
differentiate into granule and periglomerular cells. Few transcription factors
are known to be responsible for regulating NSC proliferation, migration, and
differentiation processes; even fewer have been found to be responsible for the
organization of the SVZ and RMS. For this reason, we studied the ventral anterior
homeobox (Vax1) gene in NSC proliferation and in SVZ organization. We found that 
Vax1 is strongly expressed in the SVZ and in the RMS and that, in the absence of 
Vax1, embryonic precursor cells proliferate 100 times more than wild-type
controls, in vitro. The SVZ of Vax1(-/-) brains is hyperplastic and mostly
disorganized, and the RMS is missing, causing a failure of precursor cell
migration to the OBs, which as a result are severely hypoplastic. Moreover, we
found that Vax1 is essential for the correct differentiation of ependyma and
astrocytes. Together, these data indicate that Vax1 is a potent regulator of SVZ 
organization and NSC proliferation, with important consequences on postnatal
neurogenesis.

PMID: 15590934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):5004-12. Epub 2004 Nov 23.

Systematic identification and analysis of mammalian small ubiquitin-like modifier
substrates.

Gocke CB(1), Yu H, Kang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, the University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) regulates diverse cellular processes through
its reversible, covalent attachment to target proteins. Many SUMO substrates are 
involved in transcription and chromatin structure. Sumoylation appears to
regulate the functions of target proteins by changing their subcellular
localization, increasing their stability, and/or mediating their binding to other
proteins. Using an in vitro expression cloning approach, we have identified 40
human SUMO1 substrates. The spectrum of human SUMO1 substrates identified in our 
screen suggests general roles of sumoylation in transcription, chromosome
structure, and RNA processing. We have validated the sumoylation of 24 substrates
in living cells. Analysis of this panel of SUMO substrates leads to the following
observations. 1) Sumoylation is more efficient in vitro than in living cells.
Polysumoylation occurs on several substrates in vitro. 2) SUMO isopeptidases have
little substrate specificity. 3) The SUMO ligases, PIAS1 and PIASxbeta, have
broader substrate specificities than does PIASy. 4) Although SUMO1 and SUMO2 are 
equally efficiently conjugated to a given substrate in vitro, SUMO1 conjugation
is more efficient in vivo. 5) Most SUMO substrates localize to the nucleus, and
sumoylation does not generally affect their subcellular localization. Therefore, 
sumoylation appears to regulate the functions of its substrates through multiple,
context-dependent mechanisms.

PMID: 15561718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mech Ageing Dev. 2004 Oct-Nov;125(10-11):719-32.

The regulation of COUP-TFII gene expression by Ets-1 is enhanced by the steroid
receptor co-activators.

Petit FG(1), Salas R, Tsai MJ, Tsai SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Recent phenotypic analysis of orphan nuclear receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream 
promoter-transcription factor II (COUP-TFII) [NR2F2] knockout mice shows that
COUP-TFII is involved in the angiogenic process in the developing embryos. Since 
Ets-1 expression is also correlated with angiogenesis, and both Ets-1 and
COUP-TFII mRNA are present in mesenchymal cells, we have sought to determine
whether Ets-1 is a potential regulator of COUP-TFII gene expression. For this
purpose, we performed transient transfection experiments using a luciferase
reporter construct containing the mouse COUP-TFII promoter. We found that the
COUP-TFII promoter activity is indeed regulated by Ets-1. We have identified two 
identical inverted potential ETS-binding sites located 47 nucleotides downstream 
of the start site. Mutation of both sites reduced the ability of Ets-1 to enhance
the COUP-TFII promoter activity. Furthermore, other members of the ETS family
such as Ets-2 or ETV1 are also potent regulators of the COUP-TFII promoter.
Finally, the induction of the COUP-TFII gene is strongly enhanced by the
expression of steroid receptor co-activator factors through a direct interaction 
with Ets-1. These results indicate that COUP-TFII is a potential downstream
target of Ets-1 and it may partially mediate the Ets-1 function in angiogenesis.

PMID: 15541767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Aug 2;84(15):1260-4.

[Transcriptome profiling of marrow mononuclear cells of patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome using cDNA microarray analysis].

[Article in Chinese]

Qian J(1), Chen ZX, Wang W, Cen JN, Xue YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Leukemia Research Division, First Affiliated 
Hospital, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the gene expression profiles of patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) and try to identify some genes with pathogenetic and diagnostic
relevance.
METHODS: The bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMNCs) of 10 patients with MDS,
including 4 cases of refractory anemia (RA), 1 case of refractory
thrombocytopenia (RTC), 4 cases of RA with excess blasts (RAEB), and 1 case of
RAEB in transformation (RAEBt), were isolated and the total RNA was extracted and
underwent transcriptome analysis by using customized cDNA microarray with 500
gene clones. Seventeen specimens of normal bone marrow, as controls, were
collected from the ribs of 17 patients with chest tumors. Cluster software was
used to make analysis. Semiquantitative RT-PCR was carried out to confirm the
results of microarray analysis.
RESULTS: 95 genes, such as the genes of thrombospondin 1 (THBS1), phosphatase and
tensin homolog (PTEN), MAX dimerization protein (MAD), DNA-damage-inducible
transcript 3 (DDIT3), ets variant gene 1 (ETV1), G1 to S phase transition 1
(GSPT1), were shown to be abnormally expressed in at least 5 MDS patients
compared to the normal controls, involving cell growth and differentiation
regulation, cell cycle control, signaling, and redox. The 10 MDS patients in
different stages were clustered into two distinct groups, whereas a case with
refractory thrombocytopenia and other RA patients were clustered into two
subgroups. Semiquantitative RT-PCR revealed the identical results in 3 (60%) of
the 5 genes determined by microarray analysis. Further analysis on samples from
50 MDS patients confirmed the different expression levels of RNA helicase-related
protein (RNAHP), GSPT1, and DDIT3 between the MDS patients and the normal
controls.
CONCLUSION: The technology of microarray can reveal the intrinsic molecular
features of MDS patients and the detection of DDIT3 and RNAHP expression may be
useful for the diagnosis of MDS.

PMID: 15387962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2004 Sep;(426):64-8.

hTERT Is highly expressed in Ewing's sarcoma and activated by EWS-ETS
oncoproteins.

Fuchs B(1), Inwards C, Scully SP, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Although the fusion proteins EWS-ETS are uniquely associated with Ewing's sarcoma
and have been shown to have transformational properties, they are not the only
determinants of oncogenesis. Therefore, before molecular-based therapy can be
initiated, a better understanding of the molecular network specific to Ewing's
sarcoma is mandatory. Specimens from 31 patients with Ewing's sarcoma were
analyzed immunohistochemically. We found that human telomerase reverse
transcriptase was expressed highly (78%) in Ewing's sarcoma. The mean followup
was 7 years (range, 1-21 years), and human telomerase reverse transcriptase
expression was correlated with outcome. Because we did not find an association
between expression pattern and survival, human telomerase reverse transcriptase
may not serve as a tumor marker in Ewing's sarcoma. However, the human telomerase
reverse transcriptase promoter is shown to be activated by the fusion proteins.
Therefore, transcriptional regulation via EWS-ETS may account for the high human 
telomerase reverse transcriptase expression in Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 15346053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. FEBS Lett. 2004 Apr 23;564(1-2):188-98.

Stimulation of hTAFII68 (NTD)-mediated transactivation by v-Src.

Lee HJ(1), Kim S, Pelletier J, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science,
Sogang University, Seoul 121-743, South Korea.

The three genes hTAF(II)68, EWS, and TLS (called the TET family) encode related
RNA binding proteins containing an RNA recognition motif and three glycine-,
arginine-, and proline-rich regions in the C-terminus and a degenerated repeat
containing the consensus sequence Ser-Tyr-Gly-Gln-Ser in the N-terminus. In many 
human cancers, the N-terminal portion of hTAF(II)68, EWS, or TLS is fused to the 
DNA binding domain of one of several transcription factors including Fli-1, ERG, 
ETV1, E1AF, WT1, ATF-1, CHOP, or TEC. We have recognized the presence of several 
potential tyrosine phosphorylation sites within the amino-terminal domain of
hTAF(II)68 and have investigated the potential effects of cytoplasmic signaling
on hTAF(II)68 function. Herein, we find that hTAF(II)68 is phosphorylated on
tyrosine residue(s) by ectopic expression of v-Src protein tyrosine kinase in
vitro and in vivo. The hTAF(II)68 protein can associated with the SH3 domains of 
several cell signaling proteins, including v-Src protein tyrosine kinase. We also
document that full-length v-Src can stimulate hTAF(II)68-mediated transcriptional
activation, whereas deletion mutants of v-Src are unable to exert this effect. In
addition, cellular Src activity appears important for hTAF(II)68 function since
hTAF(II)68-mediated transactivation is reduced in a dose-dependent fashion by
ectopic overexpression of a dominant-negative mutant of Src. Taken together, our 
results suggest that the biological activities of hTAF(II)68 are linked to the
cytoplasmic Src signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 15094065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Apr 1;91(5):896-903.

Ets proteins in biological control and cancer.

Hsu T(1), Trojanowska M, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, South Carolina, USA.

The Ets family consists of a large number of evolutionarily conserved
transcription factors, many of which have been implicated in tumor progression.
Extensive studies on this family of proteins have focused so far mainly on the
biochemical properties and cellular functions of individual factors. Since most
of the Ets factors can bind to the core consensus DNA sequence GGAA/T in vitro,
it has been a challenge to differentiate redundant from specific functions of
various Ets proteins in vivo. Recent findings, however, suggest that such
apparent redundancy may in fact be a central component of a network of
differentially regulated specific Ets factors, resulting in distinct biological
and pathological consequences. The programmed "Ets conversion" appears to play a 
critical role during tumor progression, especially in control of cellular changes
during epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis. Coordination of multiple
Ets gene functions also mediates interactions between tumor and stromal cells. As
such, these new insights may provide a novel view of the Ets gene family as well 
as a focal point for studying the complex biological control involved in tumor
progression.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2265084
PMID: 15034925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):14909-16. Epub 2004 Jan 27.

Concerted activation of ETS protein ER81 by p160 coactivators, the
acetyltransferase p300 and the receptor tyrosine kinase HER2/Neu.

Goel A(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Activator of thyroid and retinoic acid receptor (ACTR) is overexpressed in
approximately 60% of primary human breast tumors and belongs to the p160 steroid 
receptor coactivator family. In this study, we identified a novel interaction
partner of ACTR, the ETS transcription factor ER81 that is also heavily
implicated in mammary tumor formation. ACTR and related p160 family members
(steroid receptor coactivator-1 and glucocorticoid receptor-interacting protein-1
(GRIP-1)) augment ER81-mediated transcription. Although ACTR and GRIP-1 can
acetylate ER81, this posttranslational modification of ER81 is not required for
its stimulation by ACTR or GRIP-1. In addition, ACTR collaborates with the p300
coactivator, a joint interaction partner of ACTR and ER81, to stimulate ER81
function and the ability of p300 to acetylate ER81 is indispensable for this
collaboration. Furthermore, the receptor tyrosine kinase HER2/Neu, an oncoprotein
particularly found overexpressed in breast tumors, cooperates with both ACTR and 
p300 to stimulate ER81-mediated transcription. Thus, oncogenic HER2/Neu and ACTR 
may synergize to orchestrate mammary tumorigenesis through the dysregulation of
the transcription factor ER81 and its target genes.

PMID: 14747462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Science. 2004 Jan 2;303(5654):56-9.

Foxg1 suppresses early cortical cell fate.

Hanashima C(1), Li SC, Shen L, Lai E, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and the Department of Cell Biology, The
Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical Center, 
540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2004 Jan 2;303(5654):48-9.

During mammalian cerebral corticogenesis, progenitor cells become progressively
restricted in the types of neurons they can produce. The molecular mechanism that
determines earlier versus later born neuron fate is unknown. We demonstrate here 
that the generation of the earliest born neurons, the Cajal-Retzius cells, is
suppressed by the telencephalic transcription factor Foxg1. In Foxg1 null
mutants, we observed an excess of Cajal-Retzius neuron production in the cortex. 
By conditionally inactivating Foxg1 in cortical progenitors that normally produce
deep-layer cortical neurons, we demonstrate that Foxg1 is constitutively required
to suppress Cajal-Retzius cell fate. Hence, the competence to generate the
earliest born neurons during later cortical development is actively suppressed
but not lost.

PMID: 14704420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(1):25-35.

Upregulation of the Catalytic Telomerase Subunit by the Transcription Factor ER81
and Oncogenic HER2/Neu, Ras, or Raf.

Goueli BS(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

One hallmark of tumor formation is the transcriptional upregulation of human
telomerase reverse transcriptase, hTERT, and the resultant induction of
telomerase activity. However, little is presently understood about how hTERT is
differentially activated in tumor cells versus normal somatic cells.
Specifically, it is unclear if oncoproteins can directly elicit hTERT expression.
To this end, we now show that three oncoproteins, HER2/Neu, Ras, and Raf,
stimulate hTERT promoter activity via the ETS transcription factor ER81 and ERK
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases. Mutating ER81 binding sites in the hTERT
promoter or suppression of ERK MAP kinase-dependent phosphorylation of ER81
rendered the hTERT promoter unresponsive to HER2/Neu. Further, expression of
dominant-negative ER81 or inhibition of HER2/Neu significantly attenuated
telomerase activity in HER2/Neu-overexpressing SKBR3 breast cancer cells.
Moreover, HER2/Neu, Ras, and Raf collaborated with ER81 to enhance endogenous
hTERT gene transcription and telomerase activity in hTERT-negative,
nonimmortalized BJ foreskin fibroblasts. Accordingly, hTERT expression was
increased in HER2/Neu-positive breast tumors and breast tumor cell lines relative
to their HER2/Neu-negative counterparts. Collectively, our data elucidated a
mechanism whereby three prominent oncoproteins, HER2/Neu, Ras, and Raf, may
facilitate tumor formation by inducing hTERT expression in nonimmortalized cells 
via the transcription factor ER81.

PMCID: PMC303367
PMID: 14673140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 Nov;24(3):741-52.

Phenotypic and molecular identity of cells in the adult subventricular zone. in
vivo and after expansion in vitro.

Parmar M(1), Sjöberg A, Björklund A, Kokaia Z.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Division of Neurobiology, Lund University, BMC
A11, SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden. Malin.Parmar@mphy.lu.se

We have studied the molecular identity of adult mouse SVZ cells in situ, and
after isolation and expansion as neurospheres in vitro. The gene and protein
expression patterns of the adult cells have been compared to that of the cells
from the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE), their putative embryonic
counterparts. The LGE gives rise to both striatal projection neurons and
olfactory bulb interneurons via spatially and molecularly distinct progenitor
populations present in the SVZ of the LGE. These two populations are thought to
have a common origin in the GSH2 expressing cells of the embryonic LGE
ventricular zone. We found that a significant number of cells in the adult SVZ,
and in the in vitro expanded neurospheres, derived from the adult SVZ express
GSH2. However, under normal conditions, GSH2-expressing cells in the adult SVZ
and in the in vitro expanded neurospheres appear to specify only olfactory bulb
progenitors and not striatal progenitors.

PMID: 14664822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Neuron. 2003 Oct 30;40(3):501-14.

FAK deficiency in cells contributing to the basal lamina results in cortical
abnormalities resembling congenital muscular dystrophies.

Beggs HE(1), Schahin-Reed D, Zang K, Goebbels S, Nave KA, Gorski J, Jones KR,
Sretavan D, Reichardt LF.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Physiology, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. hbeggs@itsa.ucsf.edu

Targeted deletion of focal adhesion kinase (fak) in the developing dorsal
forebrain resulted in local disruptions of the cortical basement membrane located
between the neuroepithelium and pia-meninges. At disruption sites, clusters of
neurons invaded the marginal zone. Retraction of radial glial endfeet, midline
fusion of brain hemispheres, and gliosis also occurred, similar to type II
cobblestone lissencephaly as seen in congenital muscular dystrophy.
Interestingly, targeted deletion of fak in neurons alone did not result in
cortical ectopias, indicating that fak deletion from glia is required for
neuronal mislocalization. Unexpectedly, fak deletion specifically from meningeal 
fibroblasts elicited similar cortical ectopias in vivo and altered laminin
organization in vitro. These observations provide compelling evidence that FAK
plays a key signaling role in cortical basement membrane assembly and/or
remodeling. In addition, FAK is required within neurons during development
because neuron-specific fak deletion alters dendritic morphology in the absence
of lamination defects.

PMCID: PMC2758566
PMID: 14642275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Mar;25(3):325-32. Epub 2003 Nov 6.

Expression of ets-related transcriptional factor E1AF is associated with tumor
progression and over-expression of matrilysin in human gastric cancer.

Yamamoto H(1), Horiuchi S, Adachi Y, Taniguchi H, Nosho K, Min Y, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, South-1,
West-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan. h-yama@sapmed.ac.jp

Expression of E1AF/PEA3 (ETV4), an ets family transcriptional factor, has been
implicated in tumor progression through induction of matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP) expression. The aim of this study was to examine E1AF mRNA expression and
to determine whether it is correlated with progression of, and/or MMP expression 
in, human gastric cancer. Using the semi-quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), we analyzed 100 gastric cancer 
tissues for E1AF mRNA expression. Expression of ER81 (ETV1) and ERM (ETV5), the
other two members of the PEA3 subfamily, and Ets-1 and Ets-2 was also analyzed.
The results were correlated with clinicopathological characteristics and MMP
expression. Immunohistochemical analysis and an in vitro invasion assay were also
performed. E1AF mRNA expression was detected in 64% of the 100 gastric cancer
tissues, but was undetectable or only faintly detected in adjacent non-tumor
tissues. E1AF expression was significantly correlated with depth of invasion,
lymphatic and venous invasion, lymph node and distant metastasis, advance in
pathological tumor-node-metastasis stage and recurrence. Patients with
E1AF-positive tumors had significantly shorter overall and disease-free survival 
periods than did those with E1AF-negative tumors (P < 0.0001 and P < 0.0001,
respectively). E1AF expression retained its significant predictive value for
overall and disease-free survival in multivariate analysis that included
conventional clinicopathological factors (P = 0.0082 and P = 0.0096,
respectively). Among the MMPs analyzed, expression of matrilysin (MMP-7) was
significantly correlated with E1AF expression. Immunohistochemical expression of 
E1AF was predominantly observed at the invasive front, where the expression of
matrilysin was often co-localized. Antisense E1AF-transfected MKN45 gastric
cancer cells expressed reduced levels of matrilysin and were less invasive in
vitro than mock-transfected MKN45 cells. The results of this study suggest that
E1AF, the expression of which is closely correlated with the expression of
matrilysin, plays a key role in the progression of gastric cancer.

PMID: 14604892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. FEBS Lett. 2003 Oct 9;553(1-2):104-8.

Upregulation of the matrix metalloproteinase-1 gene by the Ewing's sarcoma
associated EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1 oncoproteins, c-Jun and p300.

Fuchs B(1), Inwards CY, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

The mechanisms of action of Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) associated EWS-ETS oncoproteins
have largely remained unresolved. Here, we analyzed how two EWS-ETS proteins,
EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1, in vitro activate the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1
promoter that is upregulated in a subset of EWSs. EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1 interact
with and thereby activate the MMP-1 promoter, which is potentiated by the
cofactor p300 and the proto-oncoprotein c-Jun. Further, EWS-ER81 binds to c-Jun
in vitro and in vivo. The interaction between c-Jun, p300 and EWS-ER81 or
EWS-Fli-1 may also be relevant to the regulation of other yet-to-be-identified
genes that are responsible for EWS formation.

PMID: 14550555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):44377-84. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

HER2/Neu- and TAK1-mediated up-regulation of the transforming growth factor beta 
inhibitor Smad7 via the ETS protein ER81.

Dowdy SC(1), Mariani A, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) plays an important role
in preventing tumor formation by blocking cell cycle progression. Accordingly,
many cancers demonstrate mutations in TGF-beta signaling components or enhanced
expression of inhibitors of the TGF-beta pathway such as Smad7. In this report we
show that the oncoprotein HER2/Neu is able to collaborate with the ETS
transcription factor ER81 to activate Smad7 transcription in breast, endometrial,
and ovarian cancer cell lines. ER81 binds to two ETS sites within the Smad7
promoter, and mutation of one of these ETS sites greatly decreases Smad7
induction by HER2/Neu and ER81. Furthermore, we show that Smad7 activation
involves the processing of signals from HER2/Neu to ER81 via the ERK
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. Thus, we have uncovered a novel
mechanism by which oncogenic HER2/Neu, in collaboration with ER81, can induce
carcinogenesis through Smad7 up-regulation. Moreover, we show that TAK1, a
TGF-beta-activated protein kinase, stimulates ER81 via the p38 mitogen-activated 
protein kinase pathway and thereby induces the Smad7 promoter. This suggests that
attenuation of TGF-beta signaling by activating Smad7 transcription may proceed
not only through TGF-beta receptor-regulated Smad proteins but also through an
independent pathway involving ER81 and TAK1.

PMID: 12947087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Brain Res Brain Res Protoc. 2003 Aug;12(1):35-40.

An abbreviated procedure for the cloning and identification of Ets transcription 
factors regulating the expression of the human presenilin 1 gene.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107,
USA.

We have previously defined a crucial DNA element controlling 90% of the
expression of the presenilin 1 gene at (-35 to +6). This region contains an Ets
transcription factor binding motif, and a two-basepair alteration within the core
sequence (GGAA to TTAA) of the Ets consensus also reduced transcription by over
90%. We have shown that Ets1/2 transcription factors bind specifically to the -10
Ets element and activate PS1 transcription. The identification of other
transcription factors recognizing specifically this promoter area should provide 
insights into the regulation of PS1. We have used the -10 Ets element as a bait
in yeast one hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library using a His3 reporter
construct. We describe an abbreviated one-hybrid protocol to screen cDNA
libraries. This assay selected four factors from the Ets family: Ets2, ER81, ERM 
and Elk1. We have also shown that specific DNA binding activity to the -10 Ets
element of PS1 could easily be detected in yeast clones by EMSAs including
protein extracts from yeast cells, thus confirming specific DNA binding activity 
without further sequencing and subcloning into suitable expression vectors.
Ultimately the identity of putative clones was confirmed by DNA sequencing. We
also confirmed the specific DNA binding properties of the factors identified by
showing that the proteins produced by in vitro translation of the entire cDNAs
from Elk1 and ER81 indeed binds specifically to the -10 region of the PS1
promoter.

PMID: 12928043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(17):6243-54.

Acetylation-mediated transcriptional activation of the ETS protein ER81 by p300, 
P/CAF, and HER2/Neu.

Goel A(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The regulated expression of the ETS transcription factor ER81 is a prerequisite
for normal development, and its dysregulation contributes to neoplasia. Here, we 
demonstrate that ER81 is acetylated by two coactivators/acetyltransferases, p300 
and p300- and CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) in vitro and in vivo. Whereas p300
acetylates two lysine residues (K33 and K116) within the ER81 N-terminal
transactivation domain, P/CAF targets only K116. Acetylation of ER81 not only
enhances its ability to transactivate but also increases its DNA binding activity
and in vivo half-life. Furthermore, oncogenic HER2/Neu, which induces
phosphorylation and thereby activation of ER81, was less able to activate
acetylation-deficient ER81 mutants, indicating that both acetyltransferase and
protein kinase-specific regulatory mechanisms control ER81 activity. Importantly,
HER2/Neu overexpression stimulates the ability of p300 to acetylate ER81, likely 
by inducing phosphorylation of p300 through the Ras-->Raf-->mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway. This represents a novel mechanism by which oncogenic
HER2/Neu, Ras, or Raf may promote tumor formation by enhancing acetylation not
only of ER81 but also of other downstream effector transcription factors as well 
as histones.

PMCID: PMC180970
PMID: 12917345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Pathol. 2003 Aug;200(5):568-76.

Association of ets-related transcriptional factor E1AF expression with tumour
progression and overexpression of MMP-1 and matrilysin in human colorectal
cancer.

Horiuchi S(1), Yamamoto H, Min Y, Adachi Y, Itoh F, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, South-1,
West-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan.

Expression of E1AF/PEA3 (ETV4), an ets family transcription factor, has been
implicated in the invasive potential of several cancer cell lines through
induction of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression. The aim of this study was
to examine E1AF mRNA expression and to determine whether it is correlated with
progression of, and/or MMP expression in, human colorectal cancer. Using the
semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), 100
colorectal cancer tissues were analysed for E1AF mRNA expression. Expression of
ER81 (ETV1) and ERM (ETV5), the other two members of the PEA3 subfamily, and
Ets-1 and Ets-2 was also analysed. The results were correlated with
clinicopathological characteristics and MMP expression. Immunohistochemical
analysis and an in vitro invasion assay were also performed. E1AF mRNA expression
was detected in 62% of the 100 colorectal cancer tissues, but was undetectable or
only faintly detected in adjacent non-tumour tissues. E1AF mRNA was detected in
all of the ten liver metastases from colorectal cancers. E1AF expression
correlated significantly with depth of invasion, lymphatic and venous invasion,
lymph node and distant metastasis, advance in pathological tumour-node-metastasis
stage, and recurrence. Patients with E1AF-positive tumours had significantly
shorter overall and disease-free survival periods than did those with
E1AF-negative tumours (p < 0.0001 and p < 0.0001, respectively). E1AF expression 
retained its significant predictive value for overall and disease-free survival
in multivariate analysis that included conventional clinicopathological factors
(p = 0.0066 and p = 0.0109, respectively). Among the MMPs analysed, expression of
MMP-1 and matrilysin correlated significantly with E1AF expression. In contrast, 
expression of ER81 and ERM did not correlate with clinicopathological
characteristics or the expression of these MMPs. Immunohistochemical expression
of E1AF was predominantly observed at the invasive front, where the expression of
MMP-1 and matrilysin and nuclear beta-catenin expression were often co-localized.
Antisense E1AF-transfected HT-29 colon cancer cells expressed reduced levels of
MMP-1 and matrilysin and were less invasive in vitro than neo-transfected HT-29
cells. The results of this study suggest that E1AF, the expression of which is
closely correlated with the expression of MMP-1 and matrilysin, plays a key role 
in the progression of colorectal cancer.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12898592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Neuroscience. 2003;120(2):379-85.

The differentiation potential of precursor cells from the mouse lateral
ganglionic eminence is restricted by in vitro expansion.

Skogh C(1), Parmar M, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Division of Neurobiology, Lund University,
Solvegatan 17, BMC A11, S-221 84 Lund, Sweden.

We have investigated whether the differentiation potential of attached cultures
derived from the mouse lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) is influenced by in
vitro expansion. Primary neuronal cultures derived from the LGE give rise to
neurons expressing the striatal projection neuron markers Islet1 (ISL1) and
dopamine and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of 32 kilodaltons (DARPP-32) as well
as the olfactory bulb interneuron marker Er81. Our previous results showed that
after expansion in vitro, LGE precursor cells can be induced to differentiate
into neurons which exhibit molecular characteristics of the LGE, such as the
homeobox transcription factors DLX and MEIS2. We show here that while attached
LGE cultures maintain Er81 expression through five passages, they lose the
ability to generate ISL1- or dopamine and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of 32
kilodaltons-expressing neurons already after the first passage. This indicates
that the expansion of LGE precursor cells restricts their differentiation
potential in vitro. Interestingly, the undifferentiated LGE cultures retain the
expression of both the Isl1 and Er81 genes, suggesting that precursor cells for
both striatal projection neurons and olfactory bulb interneurons are present in
these cultures. Thus the restriction in differentiation potential of the expanded
LGE cultures likely reflects deficiencies in the differentiation conditions used.

PMID: 12890509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 May 12;113(1-2):57-66.

Ets transcription factors ER81 and Elk1 regulate the transcription of the human
presenilin 1 gene promoter.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, 76107, USA.

We have previously defined a crucial DNA element controlling 90% of the
expression of the presenilin 1 gene at (-35 to +6). This region contains an Ets
transcription factor binding motif, and a 2-base pair alteration within the core 
sequence (GGAA to TTAA) of the Ets consensus also reduced transcription by over
90%. We have shown that Ets1/2 transcription factors bind specifically to the -10
Ets element and activate PS1 transcription. The identification of other
transcription factors recognizing specifically this promoter area should provide 
insights into the regulation of PS1. We have used the -10 Ets element as a bait
in yeast one hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library. This assay selected 
three factors from the Ets family: Ets2, ER81 and Elk1. We show that in vitro
translated ER81 indeed binds specifically to the -10 region of the PS1 promoter
and that ER81 activates by two- to threefold the basal transcription of a
presenilin-1 promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter synthetic gene
(-119, +178)PS1CAT in transient infection assays in neuroblastoma cells
(SK-N-SH). GABPalpha, a member of the Ets family closely related to Ets2 and also
containing a pointed domain, only increased PS1 transcription by about twofold.
Cotransfection of GABPbeta together with GABPalpha did not increase PS1
transcription. However, GABPbeta alone activated PS1 transcription by two- to
threefold. In contrast, the more distantly related Ets factor Elk1 repressed PS1 
transcription very effectively.

PMID: 12750007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Neuron. 2003 May 8;38(3):403-16.

Peripheral NT3 signaling is required for ETS protein expression and central
patterning of proprioceptive sensory afferents.

Patel TD(1), Kramer I, Kucera J, Niederkofler V, Jessell TM, Arber S, Snider WD.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

To study the role of NT3 in directing axonal projections of proprioceptive dorsal
root ganglion (DRG) neurons, NT3(-/-) mice were crossed with mice carrying a
targeted deletion of the proapoptotic gene Bax. In Bax(-/-)/NT3(-/-) mice,
NT3-dependent neurons survived and expressed the proprioceptive neuronal marker
parvalbumin. Initial extension and collateralization of proprioceptive axons into
the spinal cord occurred normally, but proprioceptive axons extended only as far 
as the intermediate spinal cord. This projection defect is similar to the defect 
in mice lacking the ETS transcription factor ER81. Few if any DRG neurons from
Bax(-/-)/NT3(-/-) mice expressed ER81 protein. Expression of a NT3 transgene in
muscle restored DRG ER81 expression in NT3(-/-) mice. Finally, addition of NT3 to
DRG explant cultures resulted in induction of ER81 protein. Our data indicate
that NT3 mediates the formation of proprioceptive afferent-motor neuron
connections via regulation of ER81.

PMID: 12741988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Biol Pharm Bull. 2003 May;26(5):585-8.

Diagnostic significance and clinical applications of chimeric genes in Ewing's
sarcoma.

Yoshino N(1), Kojima T, Asami S, Motohashi S, Yoshida Y, Chin M, Shichino H,
Yoshida Y, Nemoto N, Kaneko M, Mugishima H, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Narashinodai,
Funabashi-shi, Chiba, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is one of the most malignant bone and soft tissue tumors in 
childhood. Morphologically, ES belongs to the small round cell tumors (SRCT). ES,
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), and Askin's tumor are
classified as ES family tumors (ESFT) because they share a common chromosomal
translocation. The EWS-FLI1 chimeric gene is generated by t (11; 22). Other
reciprocal translocations resulting in formation of chimeric genes between EWS
and ETS family genes (ERG, ETV1, E1AF, and FEV) are t (21; 22), t (7; 22), t (17;
22), and t (2; 22), respectively. Although it is generally difficult to
distinguish ES from SRCT, we could easily and quickly distinguish ES from other
SRCT by using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). We looked
for specific chimeric genes in 23 tumor samples, including three ES clinical
samples. We detected five chimeric genes in the three ES samples. Three chimeric 
genes, all EWS-FLI1, were detected in one ES sample. Different chimeric genes,
EWS-ERG and EWS-ETV1, were detected in the other two ES samples. Moreover,
because we could not detect specific chimeric genes in samples from non-ESFT, it 
may be possible to use this technique to diagnose ESFT and to detect tumor cell
contamination before hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

PMID: 12736494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Oncogene. 2003 Feb 6;22(5):746-55.

Regulation of the ER81 transcription factor and its coactivators by mitogen- and 
stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1).

Janknecht R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. janknecht.ralf@mayo.edu

The transcription factor ER81 has been shown to be involved in ontogenesis and
breast tumor formation. ER81 is activated by many signals through phosphorylation
directly mediated by mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), but also by an
unknown protein kinase(s). Here, mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1
(MSK1), which itself is directly activated by distinct classes of MAPKs, is
identified to regulate ER81 function. MSK1 expression enhances ER81-dependent
transcription upon stimulation of especially the p38-MAPK pathway. Two serine
residues in ER81 are phosphorylated by MSK1, and mutating these serine residues
to alanines dramatically diminishes the ability of MSK1 to stimulate ER81.
However, mutation of the MSK1 phosphorylation sites in ER81 does not completely
abrogate the ability of MSK1 to activate ER81 function, suggesting that MSK1 may 
also target cofactors of ER81. Consistently, MSK1 interacts with two homologous
coactivators of ER81, CBP and p300, and stimulates the transactivation domains of
CBP. Thus, MSK1 may regulate ER81-dependent transcription via direct
phosphorylation of ER81 as well as via stimulation of CBP/p300, which might be
important for ER81's normal function and during mammary tumor formation.

PMID: 12569367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Neurosci. 2003 Jan 1;23(1):167-74.

Identification of two distinct progenitor populations in the lateral ganglionic
eminence: implications for striatal and olfactory bulb neurogenesis.

Stenman J(1), Toresson H, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) is known to give rise to striatal
projection neurons as well as interneurons, which migrate in the rostral
migratory stream (RMS) to populate the granule cell and glomerular layers of the 
olfactory bulb. Because all of these neuronal subtypes express Distalless-related
(DLX) homeobox proteins during their differentiation, we set out to further
characterize progenitors in the Dlx-positive domain of the LGE. Previous studies 
have shown that the LIM homeobox protein Islet1 (ISL1) marks the LGE
subventricular zone (SVZ) and differentiating striatal projection neurons.
However, ISL1 is not expressed in neurons of the developing olfactory bulb or the
RMS. We show here that the dorsal-most portion of the Dlx-expressing region of
the LGE SVZ lacks ISL1 cells. This dorsal domain, however, contains cells that
express the ETS transcription factor Er81, which is also expressed in granule and
periglomerular cells of the developing and adult olfactory bulb. Moreover, the
adult SVZ and RMS contain numerous Er81-positive cells. Fate-mapping studies
using Dlx5/6-cre transgenic mice demonstrate that Er81-positive cells in the
granule cell and glomerular layers of the olfactory bulb derive from the
Dlx-expressing SVZ region. These findings suggest that the LGE SVZ contains two
distinct progenitor populations: a DLX(+);ISL1(+) population representing
striatal progenitors and a DLX(+);Er81(+) population comprising olfactory bulb
interneuron progenitors. In support of this, mice mutant for the homeobox genes
Gsh2 and Gsh1/2, which show olfactory bulb defects, exhibit dramatically reduced 
numbers of Er81-positive cells in the LGE SVZ as well as in the olfactory bulb
mantle.

PMID: 12514213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):365-8.

Expression of the ETS transcription factor ER81 in the developing chick and mouse
hindbrain.

Zhu Y(1), Guthrie S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College, Guy's Campus,
London, UK.

ER81 is an ETS domain-containing transcription factor, which is expressed in
various developing tissues and organs of the embryo and in pools of developing
spinal motor neurons and proprioceptive sensory neurons. Analysis of mice lacking
ER81 function showed that this gene played an important role in the establishment
of sensory-motor circuitry in the spinal cord. Here, we investigate the
expression pattern of er81 in the hindbrain of both chick and mouse embryos. We
find that er81 is expressed in a subpopulation of inferior olive neurons, which
send their projections to the caudal cerebellum.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):4879-89.

Differential expression of a transcription regulatory factor, the LIM domain only
4 protein Lmo4, in muscle sensory neurons.

Chen HH(1), Yip JW, Stewart AF, Frank E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

In the stretch-reflex system, proprioceptive sensory neurons make selective
synaptic connections with different subsets of motoneurons, according to the
peripheral muscles they supply. To examine the molecular mechanisms that may
influence the selection of these synaptic targets, we constructed single-cell
cDNA libraries from sensory neurons that innervate antagonist muscles.
Differential screening of these libraries identified a transcription regulatory
co-factor of the LIM homeodomain proteins, the LIM domain only 4 protein Lmo4,
expressed in most adductor but few sartorius sensory neurons. Differential
patterns of Lmo4 expression were also seen in sensory neurons supplying three
other muscles. A subset of motoneurons also expresses Lmo4 but the pattern of
expression is not specific for motor pools. Differential expression of Lmo4
occurs early, as neurons develop their characteristic LIM homeodomain protein
expression patterns. Moreover, ablation of limb buds does not block Lmo4
expression, suggesting that an intrinsic program controls the early differential 
expression of Lmo4. LIM homeodomain proteins are known to regulate several
aspects of sensory and motor neuronal development. Our results suggest that Lmo4 
may participate in this differentiation by regulating the transcriptional
activity of LIM homeodomain proteins.

PMID: 12397097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 8;277(45):42669-79. Epub 2002 Sep 3.

Regulation of the ETS transcription factor ER81 by the 90-kDa ribosomal S6 kinase
1 and protein kinase A.

Wu J(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The ETS transcription factor ER81 is activated in response to many signals via
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). However, ER81 is not only
phosphorylated on MAPK sites but also at other sites that impact on its
transactivation potential. Here we describe that the 90-kDa ribosomal S6 kinase 1
(RSK1), a protein kinase downstream of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
(ERK) subclass of MAPKs, binds to ER81, phosphorylates it, and enhances
ER81-dependent transcription. Two in vivo RSK1 phosphorylation sites within ER81,
Ser(191) and Ser(216), were identified, whose mutation to alanine reduces ER81
activity upon ERK-MAPK stimulation. Furthermore, RSK1 activates the ER81 cofactor
CREB-binding protein and may thereby augment ER81-dependent transcription.
Similar to RSK1, the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylates ER81 on
Ser(191)/Ser(216). Additionally, PKA targets ER81 on Ser(334) in vivo.
Surprisingly, phosphorylation of Ser(334) severely reduces the DNA-binding
ability of ER81 but also enhances the transactivation potential of ER81. These
counteractive effects of PKA phosphorylation on ER81-dependent transcription may 
cause the selective up-regulation of promoters with high but not low affinity for
ER81. Collectively, we have identified mechanisms for how two distinct signaling 
pathways with different effector protein kinases, RSK1 and PKA, converge on ER81,
which may regulate ER81 function during development and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12213813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biol Pharm Bull. 2002 Aug;25(8):991-4.

Detection of chimeric genes in Ewing's sarcoma and its clinical applications.

Kojima T(1), Asami S, Chin M, Yoshida Y, Mugishima H, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Funabashi, Chiba,
Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES), most commonly an undifferentiated tumor of bone, belongs to
the enigmatic diagnostic category of small round cell tumors (SRCT) of childhood.
The consistent presence of the translocation t (11; 22) in the vast majority of
tumors provides evidence for a common histogenesis in ES and its family of tumors
(ESFT), and also provides a unique diagnostic characteristic to discriminate this
tumor family from SRCT. Molecular analysis of this translocation has revealed
that it forms a chimeric gene between EWS on chromosome 22 and FLI-1 on
chromosome 11. Similarly, the variant t (21; 22), t (7; 22), t (17; 22), and t
(2; 22) rearrangements also form chimeric genes between regions of EWS and the
ETS gene family (ERG, ETV1, E1AF, and FEV). Detection of these specific chimeric 
genes would provide a method for diagnosis of ESFT. We have developed a procedure
for simultaneous detection of the chimeric genes by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with a mixture of primers. We conclude that
the detecting those chimeric genes by this method can be easy and useful for
diagnosis of ESFT. Moreover, by defining the specific chimeric gene it is
possible to detect the tumor cell contamination in autologous blood stem cell
transplantation.

PMID: 12186432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Cell Biochem. 2002;86(1):174-83.

Regulation of Her2/neu promoter activity by the ETS transcription factor, ER81.

Bosc DG(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First
Street SW, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Overexpression of the HER2/Neu receptor is correlated to a poor prognosis in
tumor patients and leads to stimulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signaling pathways, which in turn activate transcription factors, such as 
the ETS protein ER81. Here, we have analyzed whether, on the other hand, ER81 may
regulate the Her2/neu gene. Indeed, ER81, together with its co-activators, p300
and CBP, activates the Her2/neu promoter, and this activation is enhanced upon
stimulation of MAPK pathways as well as by oncogenic HER2/Neu protein.
Furthermore, ER81 interacts with one ETS binding site in the Her2/neu promoter,
whose mutation decreases ER81-mediated transcription. Activation of the Her2/neu 
promoter is also diminished upon mutation of MAPK-dependent phosphorylation sites
in ER81 or upon deletion of ER81 transactivation domains. In addition, the ER81
DNA-binding domain on its own functions as a dominant-negative molecule,
effectively repressing any stimulation of the Her2/neu promoter. Altogether, our 
results show that ER81 is a component of a positive regulatory feedback loop, in 
which the HER2/Neu protein activates ER81, as well as p300/CBP via MAPKs causing 
the upregulation of the Her2/neu gene.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12112028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Apr 26;293(1):61-71.

Lack of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 and -3 expression in Ewing sarcoma may
be due to loss of accessibility of the MMP regulatory element to the specific
fusion protein in vivo.

Yabe H(1), Fukuma M, Urano F, Yoshida K, Kato S, Toyama Y, Hata J, Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma is a malignant bone and soft tissue tumor of children and young
adults, which is known to be highly aggressive and invasive. It expresses
specific chimeric genes (EWS-FLI-1, EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1, and EWS-E1AF), the 3'
portions of which are all members of the ETS family. ETS-related proteins, such
as FLI-1, ERG, and E1AF, transactivate the promoters of matrix metalloproteinase 
(MMP) genes, which play important roles in the processes of invasion and
metastasis. Therefore, we hypothesize that the Ewing sarcoma-specific chimeric
genes also transactivate the MMP genes, contributing to the tumor's invasiveness 
and propensity for metastasis. To verify this hypothesis, we investigated the
expression of MMPs in eight Ewing sarcoma cell lines. Surprisingly, MMP-1 and
MMP-3 were not expressed at all in any of the cell lines. MMP-9 was expressed in 
four out of the eight cell lines, and MMP-2 and MT1-MMP in all of the cell lines.
Ewing sarcoma-specific chimeric genes have been shown to transactivate the
promoter of the MMP-1 gene by the reporter assay, and bind to the putative
recognition sites in the MMP regulatory elements by the gel shift assay. However,
an in vivo formaldehyde cross-linking study revealed that the chimeric protein
did not bind to the predicted ETS recognition sites in the regulatory elements of
the MMPs. These results indicate that the absence of the MMP expression in the
tumor cells is at least in part due to the loss of accessibility of the ETS
recognition sites in the regulatory elements of the MMP genes. Therefore, we
should be careful before theorizing simply that a putative binding site is
essential for the transcription of critical genes, since the binding of this
fusion protein was found to be modulated in tumor cells in this study.

PMID: 12054564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Transgenic Res. 2002 Apr;11(2):123-31.

Ectopic expression of the ets transcription factor ER81 in transgenic mouse
mammary gland enhances both urokinase plasminogen activator and stromelysin-1
transcription.

Netzer S(1), Leenders F, Dumont P, Baert JL, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8526 CNRS, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The PEA3 group members PEA3, ER81 and ERM, which are highly conserved
transcription factors from the Ets family, are over-expressed in metastatic
mammary tumors. In the current study, we present the characterization of a
transgenic mouse strain which over-expresses ER81 in the mammary gland via the
long terminal repeat of the mouse mammary tumor virus (LTR-MMTV). Although six
genotypically positive transgenic lines were identified, only one expressed the
ectopic transcript with an exclusive expression in the lactating and
late-pregnancy (18th day) mammary glands. No mammary tumor or mammary
deregulation appeared after 2 years of ectopic ER81 expression following
lactation. We then sought to identify ER81 target genes, and the urokinase
plasminogen activator (uPA) and the stromelysin-1, two enzymes involved in
extracellular matrix degradation, were found to be transcriptionally upregulated 
in lactating mammary glands over-expressing ER81. Since these enzymes are
involved in metastasis, this murine model could be further used to enhance
mammary cancer metastatic process by crossing these animals with mice carrying
non-metastatic mammary tumors. We thus created a transgenic mouse model
permitting the over-expression of a functionally active Ets transcription factor 
in the mammary gland without perturbing its development.

PMID: 12054346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Dev Dyn. 2002 Mar;223(3):389-401.

Formation of supernumerary muscle spindles at the expense of Golgi tendon organs 
in ER81-deficient mice.

Kucera J(1), Cooney W, Que A, Szeder V, Stancz-Szeder H, Walro J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston University, 80 East Concord Street, Boston, MA
02118, USA. jkucera@bu.edu

ER81, a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, is essential for the
formation of connections between sensory and motor neurons in the spinal cord.
Mice lacking Er81 genes exhibit reduced monosynaptic sensory-motoneuron
connectivity in response to muscle nerve stimulation. Proximal muscle nerve
stimulation elicits fewer monosynaptic potentials than stimulation of distal
nerves in hindlimbs, a deficit that is paralleled by a paucity of muscle spindles
in proximal muscles (Arber et al., 2000). We examined whether a presence of
spindles innervated by afferents in distal muscles correlated with the increased 
preservation of monosynaptic sensory-motor potentials in distal muscle nerves.
Not only were spindles and Ia afferents present, but also they were supernumerary
in distal muscles such as the soleus, medial gastrocnemius, and extensor hallucis
longus. Concomitantly, a deficiency of Golgi tendon organs (GTOs) and Ib
afferents was observed in distal muscles, as if supernumerary spindles formed at 
the expense of tendon organs in the absence of Er81. Thus, ER81 may be involved
in mechanisms that regulate acquisition of the Ia and Ib phenotypes by subsets of
proprioceptive muscle afferents. Segmental differences in muscle spindle and GTO 
dependence on ER81 suggest that more than one ETS transcription factor may
participate in the regulation of limb proprioceptive system assembly in the
mouse.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11891988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Curr Biol. 2001 Nov 13;11(22):1739-48.

The pea3 subfamily ets genes are required for HER2/Neu-mediated mammary
oncogenesis.

Shepherd TG(1), Kockeritz L, Szrajber MR, Muller WJ, Hassell JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, McMaster University, 1280
Main Street, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The PEA3 Ets transcription factor is overexpressed in the vast
majority of human breast tumors and in nearly all of those of the
HER2/Neu-positive subclass. PEA3 is also overexpressed in various transgenic
mouse models of this disease. Whether PEA3 plays an essential role in
HER2/Neu-mediated oncogenesis has heretofore not been addressed.
RESULTS: Here, we report that each of the three highly related ets genes of the
pea3 subfamily (pea3, er81, and erm) were coordinately overexpressed in mammary
tumors of MMTV-neu transgenic mice. Other ets genes normally expressed in the
mammary gland were not upregulated in these tumors. Expression of a
dominant-negative pea3 transgene under the control of the MMTV promoter in
mammary epithelial cells of MMTV-neu transgenic mice dramatically delayed the
onset of mammary tumors and reduced the number and size of such tumors in
individual mice. Those tumors that arose in bitransgenic mice expressed the
MMTV-neu transgene, but not the MMTV-dominant-negative pea3 transgene.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings imply that one or more of the PEA3 subfamily Ets
proteins or other Ets proteins with related DNA binding specificity play an
essential role in Neu-mediated mammary oncogenesis. Hence, agents that inhibit
the expression or activity of the PEA3 subfamily proteins may prove efficacious
in the treatment of breast cancer.

PMID: 11719215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 11;277(2):1002-12. Epub 2001 Oct 26.

ERM transactivation is up-regulated by the repression of DNA binding after the
PKA phosphorylation of a consensus site at the edge of the ETS domain.

Baert JL(1), Beaudoin C, Coutte L, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8526 CNRS/Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie de Lille, BP
447, 1 rue Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex, France.

The final step of the transduction pathway is the activation of gene
transcription, which is driven by kinase cascades leading to changes in the
activity of many transcription factors. Among these latter, PEA3/E1AF, ER81/ETV1,
and ERM, members of the well conserved PEA3 group from the Ets family are
involved in these processes. We show here that protein kinase A (PKA) increases
the transcriptional activity of human ERM and human ETV1, through a Ser residue
situated at the edge of the ETS DNA-binding domain. PKA phosphorylation does not 
directly affect the ERM transactivation domains but does affect DNA binding
activity. Unphosphorylated wild-type ERM bound DNA avidly, whereas after PKA
phosphorylation it did so very weakly. Interestingly, S367A mutation
significantly reduced the ERM-mediated transcription in the presence of the
kinase, and the DNA binding of this mutant, although similar to that of
unphosphorylated wild-type protein, was insensitive to PKA treatment. Mutations, 
which may mimic a phosphorylated serine, converted ERM from an efficient
DNA-binding protein to a poor DNA binding one, with inefficiency of PKA
phosphorylation. The present data clearly demonstrate a close correlation between
the capacity of PKA to increase the transactivation of ERM and the drastic
down-regulation of the binding of the ETS domain to the targeted DNA. What we
thus demonstrate here is a relatively rare transcription activation mechanism
through a decrease in DNA binding, probably by the shift of a non-active form of 
an Ets protein to a PKA-phosphorylated active one, which should be in a
conformation permitting a transactivation domain to be active.

PMID: 11682477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mech Dev. 2001 Oct;108(1-2):191-5.

Expression patterns of the Ets transcription factors from the PEA3 group during
early stages of mouse development.

Chotteau-Lelievre A(1), Dolle P, Peronne V, Coutte L, de Launoit Y, Desbiens X.

Author information: 
(1)Mécanismes du Développement et de la Cancérisation, UMR 8526 CNRS/Institut
Pasteur de Lille - Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1 rue Calmette, BP 447, 59021
Lille Cedex, France. anne.chotteau@ibl.fr

erm, er81 and pea3 are three related genes that define a novel Ets-related
subfamily of transcription factors. The expression patterns of these genes has
been previously characterized in the mouse from embryonic day (E) 9.5 to birth
(Oncogene 15 (1997) 937). In this study, we report differential expression
patterns of the PEA3 group genes during early mouse post-implantation
development. erm and pea3 expression patterns were partly overlapping. erm was
activated prior to pea3 in the distal tip of the embryonic epiblast but, at
primitive streak-stages, both genes were coexpressed in the posterior region of
the embryo in epiblast, primitive streak and adjacent mesoderm. Similar erm and
pea3 expression patterns were seen later in posterior neural plate, presomitic
and lateral mesoderm, mesonephros, and tail bud. Only erm, however, was expressed
in specific brain regions corresponding to prospective midbrain and ventral
forebrain. erm was also strongly expressed as early as E8 in the developing
branchial region, especially at the level of branchial pouches, whereas pea3
transcripts appeared later in frontonasal and first arch mesenchyme. er81
transcripts were not detected prior to E9.0-9.5, suggesting that this gene may
not be involved in early developmental events.

PMID: 11578874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):41856-61. Epub 2001 Sep 10.

Cell type-specific inhibition of the ETS transcription factor ER81 by
mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated protein kinase 2.

Janknecht R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA. janknecht.ralf@mayo.edu

Mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated protein kinase 2 (MK2) is an important
intracellular mediator of stress signals. In this report, a novel target of MK2
has been identified, the ETS transcription factor family member ER81, whose
dysregulation contributes to tumorigenesis and whose normal function is required 
during development. MK2 phosphorylates ER81 in vitro within its central
inhibitory domain, and overexpression of MK2 leads to increased in vivo
phosphorylation of ER81. Two serine residues, ER81 amino acids 191 and 216, were 
identified as MK2 phosphorylation sites. MK2 suppresses basal ER81-dependent
transcription, and this suppressive effect is alleviated upon mutation of the MK2
phosphorylation sites in a cell type-specific manner. However, MK2 can also
interfere with ER81-mediated transcription independently of serine 191 and serine
216 phosphorylation. Furthermore, MK2 overexpression counteracts the stimulation 
of ER81 activity by p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. Altogether, MK2 may
regulate ER81 transcriptional activity in a cell type-specific manner and thereby
modulate various physiological processes beyond stress responses.

PMID: 11551945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6443-54.

Mouse models in the study of the Ets family of transcription factors.

Bartel FO(1), Higuchi T, Spyropoulos DD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29425, USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors is one of a growing number of master
regulators of development. This family was originally defined by the presence of 
a conserved DNA binding domain, the Ets domain. To date, nearly 30 members of
this family have been identified and implicated in a wide range of physiological 
and pathological processes. Despite the likely importance of Ets-family members, 
each of their precise roles has not been delineated. Herein, we describe the
elucidation of essential functions of a few of these family members in vivo using
knockout mouse models. Of the knockouts generated to date, the majority shows
important functions in hematopoiesis, ranging from PU.1, a principle regulator of
myelo-lymphopoiesis, to Spi-B which regulates the proper function of terminally
differentiated cells. Ets1 was shown to be of intermediate importance as a
regulator of pan-lymphoid development. Other Ets family members such as Fli1 and 
TEL1 display distinct and/or overlapping functions in vasculo/angiogenesis,
hemostasis and hematopoiesis. The remaining knockouts generated, Ets2 and Er81,
show non-hematopoietic defects related to extraembryonic development and
neurogenesis, respectively. The pioneering group of knockout models described
reveals only the most distinct functions of each of these Ets family members. A
better understanding of the roles and hierarchies of Ets family members in
cellular differentiation will come with the generation of new null alleles in
previously untargeted family members, more mutant alleles in members already
disrupted, double knockouts, ES cell differentiation and chimera rescue
experiments, and tissue-specific inducible knockouts.

PMID: 11175360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(19):7300-10.

Phosphorylation of ETS transcription factor ER81 in a complex with its
coactivators CREB-binding protein and p300.

Papoutsopoulou S(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo
Graduate School, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The ETS protein ER81 is a DNA-binding factor capable of enhancing gene
transcription and is implicated in cellular transformation, but presently the
mechanisms of its actions are unclear. In this report, ER81 is shown to
coimmunoprecipitate with the transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein
(CBP) and the related p300 protein (together referred to as CBP/p300). Moreover, 
confocal laser microscopic studies demonstrated that ER81 and p300 colocalized to
nuclear speckles. In vitro and in vivo interaction studies revealed that ER81
amino acids 249 to 429, which encompass the ETS DNA-binding domain, are
responsible for binding to CBP/p300. However, mutation of a putative
protein-protein interaction motif, LXXLL, in the ETS domain of ER81 did not
affect interaction with CBP/p300, whereas DNA binding of ER81 was abolished.
Furthermore, two regions within CBP, amino acids 451 to 721 and 1891 to 2175, are
capable of binding to ER81. Consistent with the physical interaction between ER81
and the coactivators CBP and p300, ER81 transcriptional activity was potentiated 
by CBP/p300 overexpression. Moreover, an ER81-associated protein kinase activity 
was enhanced upon p300 overexpression. This protein kinase phosphorylates ER81 on
serines 191 and 216, and mutation of these phosphorylation sites increased ER81
transcriptional activity in Mv1Lu cells but not in HeLa cells. Altogether, our
data elucidate the mechanism of how ER81 regulates gene transcription, through
interaction with the coactivators CBP and p300 and an associated kinase that may 
cell type specifically modulate the ability of ER81 to activate gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC86284
PMID: 10982847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2000;480:107-16.

The PEA3 group of ETS-related transcription factors. Role in breast cancer
metastasis.

de Launoit Y(1), Chotteau-Lelievre A, Beaudoin C, Coutte L, Netzer S, Brenner C, 
Huvent I, Baert JL.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8526 CNRS-Institut Pasteur, Institut de Biologie de Lille, France.

The ets genes encode eukaryotic transcription factors that are involved in
tumorigenesis and developmental processes. The signature of the Ets family is the
ETS-domain, which binds to sites containing a central 5'-GGAA/T-3' motif. They
can be sub-classified primarily because of the high amino acid conservation in
their ETS-domains and, in addition, in the conservation of other domains
generally characterized as transactivating. This is the case for the PEA3 group, 
which is currently made up of three members, PEA3/E1AF, ER81/ETV1 and ERM, which 
are more than 95% identical in the ETS-domain and more than 85% in the
transactivation acidic domain. The members of the PEA3 group are activated
through both the Ras-dependent and other kinase pathways, a function which
emphasizes their involvement in several oncogenic mechanisms. The expression
pattern of the three PEA3 group genes during mouse embryogenesis suggests that
they are differentially regulated, probably to serve important functions such as 
tissue interaction. Although the target genes of these transcription factors are 
multiple, their most frequently studied role concerns their involvement in the
metastatic process. In fact, PEA3 group members are over-expressed in metastatic 
human breast cancer cells and mouse mammary tumors, a feature which suggests a
function of these transcription factors in mammary oncogenesis. Moreover, when
they are ectopically over-expressed in non-metastatic breast cancer cells, these 
latter become metastatic with the activation of transcription of matrix
metalloproteinases or adhesion molecules, such as ICAM-1.

PMID: 10959416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Oncogene. 2000 Aug 3;19(33):3799-804.

A novel zinc finger gene is fused to EWS in small round cell tumor.

Mastrangelo T(1), Modena P, Tornielli S, Bullrich F, Testi MA, Mezzelani A,
Radice P, Azzarelli A, Pilotti S, Croce CM, Pierotti MA, Sozzi G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors share recurrent translocations that fuse EWS from 
22q12 to five different members of transcription factors namely FLI-1, ERG, ETV1,
E1AF and FEV. Different classes of DNA binding proteins, ATF1, WT1 and CHOP are
fused to EWS generating distinct tumor phenotypes: clear cell sarcoma,
desmoplastic small round cell tumor, and myxoid liposarcoma, respectively. We
have cloned a novel gene located at 22q12 fused to EWS by a submicroscopic
inversion of 22q in a small round cell sarcoma showing a translocation
(t(1;22)(p36.1;q12). The gene, designated ZSG (Zinc finger Sarcoma Gene), is a
putative Cys2-His2 zinc finger protein which contains a POZ transcriptional
repressor-like domain at the N-terminus. The rearrangement involves intron 8 of
EWS and exon 1 of ZSG creating a chimeric sequence containing the transactivation
domain of EWS fused to zinc finger domain of ZSG. This product lacks the
transcriptional repressor domain at the N-terminus of ZSG. A rearrangement of the
second ZSG allele was also found in tumor cells. This is the first example of an 
intra-chromosomal rearrangement of chromosome 22, undetectable by cytogenetics,
activating EWS in soft tissue sarcoma.

PMID: 10949935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cell. 2000 May 26;101(5):485-98.

ETS gene Er81 controls the formation of functional connections between group Ia
sensory afferents and motor neurons.

Arber S(1), Ladle DR, Lin JH, Frank E, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Center for Neurobiology
and Behavior, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The connections formed between sensory and motor neurons (MNs) play a critical
role in the control of motor behavior. During development, the axons of
proprioceptive sensory neurons project into the spinal cord and form both direct 
and indirect connections with MNs. Two ETS transcription factors, ER81 and PEA3, 
are expressed by developing proprioceptive neurons and MNs, raising the
possibility that these genes are involved in the formation of sensory-motor
connections. Er81 mutant mice exhibit a severe motor discoordination, yet the
specification of MNs and induction of muscle spindles occurs normally. The motor 
defect in Er81 mutants results from a failure of group Ia proprioceptive
afferents to form a discrete termination zone in the ventral spinal cord. As a
consequence there is a dramatic reduction in the formation of direct connections 
between proprioceptive afferents and MNs. ER81 therefore controls a late step in 
the establishment of functional sensory-motor circuitry in the developing spinal 
cord.

PMID: 10850491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Neuron. 2000 Apr;26(1):233-45.

Cortical degeneration in the absence of neurotrophin signaling: dendritic
retraction and neuronal loss after removal of the receptor TrkB.

Xu B(1), Zang K, Ruff NL, Zhang YA, McConnell SK, Stryker MP, Reichardt LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

To examine functions of TrkB in the adult CNS, TrkB has been removed from neurons
expressing CaMKII, primarily pyramidal neurons, using Cre-mediated recombination.
A floxed trkB allele was designed so that neurons lacking TrkB express
tau-beta-galactosidase. Following trkB deletion in pyramidal cells, their
dendritic arbors are altered, and cortical layers II/III and V are compressed,
after which there is an apparent loss of mutant neurons expressing the
transcription factor SCIP but not of those expressing Otx-1. Loss of neurons
expressing SCIP requires deletion of trkB within affected neurons; reduction of
neuronal ER81 expression does not, suggesting both direct and indirect effects of
TrkB loss. Thus, TrkB is required for the maintenance of specific populations of 
cells in the adult neocortex.

PMID: 10798407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 15;60(6):1536-40.

EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, and EWS-ETV1 oncoproteins of Ewing tumor family all suppress
transcription of transforming growth factor beta type II receptor gene.

Im YH(1), Kim HT, Lee C, Poulin D, Welford S, Sorensen PH, Denny CT, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, DBS, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5055, USA.

Ewing sarcoma-specific chromosomal translocations fuse the EWS gene to a subset
of ets transcription factor family members, most commonly the FLI1 gene and less 
frequently ERG, ETV1, E1A-F, or FEV. These fusion proteins are thought to act as 
aberrant transcription factors that bind DNA through their ets DNA binding
domain. Recently, we have shown (K-B. Hahm et al., Nat. Genet., 23: 222-227,
1999) that the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) type II receptor
(TGF-beta RII), a putative tumor suppressor gene, is a target of the EWS-FLI1
fusion protein. Here, we also examined effects of EWS-ETV1 and EWS-ERG on
expression of the TGF-beta RII gene. We show that relative to the control,
NIH-3T3 cell lines stably transfected with the EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, or EWS-ETV1
gene fusion express reduced levels of TGF-beta RII mRNA and protein, and that
these cell lines have reduced TGF-beta sensitivity. Cotransfection of these
fusion genes and the TGF-beta RII promoter suppresses TGF-beta RII promoter
activity and also FLI1-, ERG-, or ETV1-induced promoter activity. These results
indicate that transcriptional repression of TGF-beta RII is an important target
of the EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, or EWS-ETV1 oncogene, and that EWS-ets fusion proteins 
may function as dominant negative forms of ets transcription factors.

PMID: 10749119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Lab Invest. 1999 Dec;79(12):1535-43.

EWS/ETS fusion genes induce epithelial and neuroectodermal differentiation in NIH
3T3 fibroblasts.

Teitell MA(1), Thompson AD, Sorensen PH, Shimada H, Triche TJ, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California at Los Angeles, USA. mteitell@ucla.edu

Ewing's sarcoma is the least differentiated member of the peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal (pPNET) tumor family. Chromosomal translocations involving the
EWS gene and five different Ets family transcription factor genes create fusion
genes encoding aberrant transcription factors and are implicated in the vast
majority of Ewing's sarcoma cases. Here, NIH 3T3 fibroblasts were infected with
control (tk-neo or RAS) and two different EWS/ETS-expressing retroviruses. In
vitro studies of established polyclonal lines expressing the two EWS/ETS genes,
either EWS/FLI1 or EWS/ETV1, showed induction of cytokeratin 15 gene expression. 
Both fusion genes also caused characteristic gross morphologic, histologic, and
ultrastructural changes in NIH 3T3 cells when transformed cell lines were
injected into CB-17-scid mice. Native NIH 3T3 cells with a spindled cell
morphology were converted to polygonal cells with high nucleo-cytoplasmic ratios 
that continued to express abundant cytokeratin. Extracellular collagen deposition
was abolished, rough endoplasmic reticulum was markedly diminished, and
rudimentary cell-cell attachments appeared. Most strikingly, neurosecretory-type 
dense core granules like those seen in pPNET were now evident. This murine model,
created in mesenchyme-derived NIH 3T3 cells, demonstrated new characteristics of 
both neuroectodermal and epithelial differentiation and resembled small round
cell tumors microscopically.

PMID: 10616204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Oncogene. 1999 Nov 4;18(46):6278-86.

Characterization of the human and mouse ETV1/ER81 transcription factor genes:
role of the two alternatively spliced isoforms in the human.

Coutte L(1), Monté D, Imai K, Pouilly L, Dewitte F, Vidaud M, Adamski J, Baert
JL, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8526 CNRS, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.

The Ets transcription factors of the PEA3 group--E1AF/PEA3, ETV1/ER81 and
ERM--are almost identical in the ETS DNA-binding and the transcriptional acidic
domains. To accelerate our understanding of the molecular basis of putative
diseases linked to ETV1 such as Ewing's sarcoma we characterized the human ETV1
and the mouse ER81 genes. We showed that these genes are both encoded by 13 exons
in more than 90 kbp genomic DNA, and that the classical acceptor and donor
splicing sites are present in each junction except for the 5' donor site of
intron 9 where GT is replaced by TT. The genomic organization of the ETS and
acidic domains in the human ETV1 and mouse ER81 (localized to chromosome 12)
genes is similar to that observed in human ERM and human E1AF/PEA3 genes.
Moreover, as in human ERM and human E1AF/PEA3 genes, a first untranslated exon is
upstream from the first methionine, and the mouse ER81 gene transcription is
regulated by a 1.8 kbp of genomic DNA upstream from this exon. In human, the
alternative splicing of the ETV1 gene leads to the presence (ETV1 alpha) or the
absence (ETV1 beta) of exon 5 encoding the C-terminal part of the transcriptional
acidic domain, but without affecting the alpha helix previously described as
crucial for transactivation. We demonstrated here that the truncated isoform
(human ETV1 beta) and the full-length isoform (human ETV1 alpha) bind similarly
specific DNA Ets binding sites. Moreover, they both activate transcription
similarly through the PKA-transduction pathway, so suggesting that this
alternative splicing is not crucial for the function of this protein as a
transcription factor. The comparison of human ETV1 alpha and human ETV1 beta
expression in the same tissues, such as the adrenal gland or the bladder, showed 
no clear-cut differences. Altogether, these data open a new avenue of
investigation leading to a better understanding of the functional role of this
transcription factor.

PMID: 10597226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Haematologica. 1999 Nov;84(11):1012-5.

Detection of EWS chimeric transcripts by nested RT-PCR to allow reinfusion of
uncontaminated peripheral blood stem cells in high-risk Ewing's tumor in
childhood.

Montanaro L(1), Pession A, Trerè D, Vici M, Prete A, Paolucci G, Derenzini M.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Citopatologia; Clinica Pediatrica, Università degli Studi di
Bologna, Policlinico S. Orsola, Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Ewing's tumors (ET) are primary malignancies of bone
and soft tissues characterized in at least 96% of cases by specific fusion
transcripts originating from recurrent chromosomal translocations. Clinical
protocols for high-risk metastatic ETs include high-dose radiation/chemotherapy
followed by autologous peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) reinfusion. We used
nested reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to search for the
presence of ET-specific transcripts in PBSC collections from patients with
high-risk ET in order to collect harvests free from neoplastic cells but still
sufficient to obtain early stable engraftment.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Thirty-seven harvest samples from 15 ET patients treated with
mobilizing chemotherapy were analyzed. Nested RT-PCR was performed to detect
ET-specific transcripts in RNA extracted from the PBSC collections.
RESULTS: A total of 30 harvests was performed. On average, 2 harvests (range 1-4)
were sufficient to collect the minimum required number of mononuclear cells (2.5

PMID: 10553162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5506-13.

Divergent Ewing's sarcoma EWS/ETS fusions confer a common tumorigenic phenotype
on NIH3T3 cells.

Thompson AD(1), Teitell MA, Arvand A, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Labs, University of 
California at Los Angeles, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas express chimeric transcription factors resulting from a fusion
of the amino terminus of the EWS gene to the carboxyl terminus of one of five ETS
proteins. While the majority of tumors express EWS/FLI1 fusions, some Ewing's
tumors contain variant chimeras such as EWS/ETV1 that have divergent ETS
DNA-binding domains. In spite of their structural differences, both EWS/ETS
fusions up regulate EAT-2, a previously described EWS/FLI1 target gene. In
contrast to EWS/FLI1, NIH3T3 cells expressing EWS/ETV1 cannot form colonies in
soft agar though coexpression of a dominant negative truncated ETV1 construct
attenuates EWS/FLI1 mediated anchorage independent growth. When EWS/ETV1 or
EWS/FLI1 expressing NIH3T3 cells are injected into SCID mice, tumors form more
often and faster than with NIH-3T3 cells with empty vector controls. The
tumorigenic potency of each EWS/ETS fusion is linked to its C-terminal structure,
with the FLI1 C-terminus confering a greater tumorigenic potential than the
corresponding ETV1 domain. The resulting EWS/ETV1 and EWS/FLI1 tumors closely
resemble each other at both a macroscopic and a microscopic level. These tumors
differ greatly from tumors formed by NIH3T3 cells expressing activated RAS. These
data indicate that in spite of their structural differences, EWS/ETV1 and
EWS/FLI1 promote oncogenesis via similar biologic pathways.

PMID: 10523827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Korean Med Sci. 1998 Aug;13(4):355-60.

Phylogenetically interrelated ETS genes, ETV1, ERM and E1A-F locate on different 
chromosomes.

Jeon IS(1), Shapiro DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN, USA.

ETV1, ERM and E1A-F are members of the multigene ETS domain containing a class of
transcription factors, first identified in the genome of the avian retrovirus
E26. Based upon extensive homology between these genes within their ETS domain
(96% identity each other), these three genes comprise a distinct sub-family of
ETS genes as a human PEA3 sub-family. By analyzing somatic cell hybrid
segregating human chromosomes, the genes encoding ETV1, ERM and E1A-F were
localized to human chromosome 7, 3 and 17, respectively. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization confirmed these assignments and allowed mapping of the genes to
7p22 (ETV1), 3q29 (ERM) and 17q12 (E1A-F). These results suggest the ancestral
PEA3 gene may have duplicated first, then dispersed to other chromosomal
locations.

PMCID: PMC3054419
PMID: 9741538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1998 Jul;89(7):703-11.

Molecular analysis of Ewing's sarcoma: another fusion gene, EWS-E1AF, available
for diagnosis.

Urano F(1), Umezawa A, Yabe H, Hong W, Yoshida K, Fujinaga K, Hata J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo.

Ewing's sarcoma, one of the most malignant tumors of children and young adults,
expresses specific chimeric genes, e.g. EWS-FLI-1, EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1 and EWS-FEV.
In this paper, we extensively characterized a new fusion gene, EWS-EIAF by means 
of whole cDNA sequencing, RNA blot analysis, DNA blot analysis and chromosomal
analysis, and showed it to be available for the diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma and 
to participate in the oncogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma. Furthermore, we conducted a
genetic analysis of Ewing family tumors in conjunction with immunohistochemical
analysis and ultrastructural analysis. Our results demonstrate some limitations
of both genetic analysis and histopathological analysis, and establish the
relationship between neurogenic phenotypes and chimera genes.

PMID: 9738976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mod Pathol. 1998 Aug;11(8):747-53.

Small round-cell type of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

Abe S(1), Imamura T, Park P, Nakano H, Okita H, Hata J, Tateishi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Teikyo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Five cases of primitive, small, round-cell tumor that are a type of hitherto
unclassified neurogenic sarcoma are described. The tumors were located deep
within the soft tissue of the trunks and limbs without association with major
nerves. The histologic features consisted mainly of uniform, small, round, tumor 
cells with scanty cytoplasm. Foci of uniform, short, spindle-shaped tumor cells
arranged in whorl-like patterns were observed in some areas. Although the
immunoreactivity for the neural markers, Leu-7 and MIC-2, was not marked, cell
processes and fragmentous basal laminae, which are ultrastructural neural
features, were found in both spindle-shaped and round tumor cells. In four cases,
EWS chimeric transcripts were analyzed by reverse-transcription polymerase chain 
reaction. EWS chimeric mRNA (EWS-FLI-1, EWS-ERG, EWS-E1AF, EWS-ETV1, EWS-FEV) was
not detected in any cases. The tumors were not consistent with peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumor. We propose them as a small round-cell type of
MPNST that might differentiate toward the immature neural cells.

PMID: 9720503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Semin Oncol. 1997 Oct;24(5):515-25.

Immunohistochemical and molecular genetic approaches to soft tissue tumor
diagnosis: a primer.

Hibshoosh H(1), Lattes R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons Columbia
University New York, NY 10032, USA.

During the past two decades we have witnessed the identification of an expanding 
list of immunohistochemical and molecular markers linked to histopathologically
defined subtypes of tumors. These markers offer new insights and approaches to
the classification of tumors with important prognostic and/or therapeutic
implications. We review the potentially diagnostic immunohistochemical and
molecular markers of soft tissue tumors (STTs). The immunohistochemical markers
reviewed include vimentin, cytokeratin, desmin, HHF35, S100, myoD1,
alpha1-antitrypsin, vascular markers (factor VIII, CD31, CD34), MIC2, and others.
The potentially diagnostic chromosomal translocations and associated genes
identified in STT include Ewing's/PNET t(11;22)(q24;q12)(FLI1;EWS),
t(21;22)(q22;q12)(ERG; EWS); t(7;22)(p22;q12)(ETV1;EWS); desmoplastic small round
cell tumor t(11;22)(p13;q12)(WT1;EWS); extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma
t(9;22)(q22;q12) (TEC(CHN);EWS); malignant ectomesenchymoma
t(11;22)(q24;q12)(FLI1;EWS); alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma
t(2;13)(q35;q14)(PAX-3;FKHR); t(1;13) (p36;q14)(PAX-7;FKHR); myxoid and round
cell liposarcoma t(12;16)(q13;p11)(CHOP;TLS(FUS)); synovial sarcoma
t(X;18)(p11;q11)(SSX1&2;SYT), and others. The nature, utility, and limitations of
these markers in diagnostic settings are explored.

PMID: 9344317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 18;15(8):937-52.

Differential expression patterns of the PEA3 group transcription factors through 
murine embryonic development.

Chotteau-Lelièvre A(1), Desbiens X, Pelczar H, Defossez PA, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Mécanismes du Développement et de la Cancérisation, UMR 319 CNRS/Institut
Pasteur de Lille-Institut de Biologie de Lille, France.

ERM, ER81 and PEA3 are three highly related transcription factors belonging to
the ETS family. Together they form the PEA3 group within this family. Little data
is yet available regarding the roles of these three genes during embryonic
development. A prerequisite to investigations in this field is to obtain an
accurate spatio-temporal expression map for the erm, er81 and pea3 genes. To this
end, we have used in situ hybridization to compare their expression patterns
during critical stages of murine embryogenesis. We report that all three genes
are expressed in numerous developing organs coming from different embryonic
tissues. The three genes appeared co-expressed in different organs but presented 
specific sites of expression, so that the resultant expression pattern could in
fact reveal several distinct functions depending upon isolated and/or various
combinations of the PEA3 member expression. These results suggest that erm, er81 
and pea3 genes are differentially regulated, probably to serve important
functions as cell proliferation control, tissue interaction mediator or cell
differentiation, all over successive steps of the mouse organogenesis.

PMID: 9285689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1997 Aug;97(1):12-9.

Multiple chromosomal mechanisms generate an EWS/FLI1 or an EWS/ERG fusion gene in
Ewing tumors.

Desmaze C(1), Brizard F, Turc-Carel C, Melot T, Delattre O, Thomas G, Aurias A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Genetics, Curie Institute, Paris, France.

The t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is found in about 85% of Ewing tumors and
leads in all cases to an EWS/FLI1 fusion gene. In a few instances, complex
translocations, involving chromosomes 11, 22 and a third chromosome or other
variant translocations not involving chromosome 11 also have been reported. These
rearrangements generate an active fusion gene between the EWS gene and either the
human FLI1 gene or other members of the ETS gene family: the ERG gene localized
in band 21q22.2, the ETV1 gene localized in band 7p22, or the E1AF gene localized
in band 17q12. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) on interphase
nuclei or metaphases, we report here the characterization of particular
karyotypes in Ewing tumors, namely a complex t(2;11;22) translocation, a variant 
t(12;22) translocation, and one Ewing tumor without specific rearrangements but
with an EWS/ERG fusion gene demonstrated by molecular analysis. These molecular
cytogenetic methods allowed us (1) to precisely localize the genomic breakpoints 
within-EWSR1 and EWSR2 and to identify the chromosome carrying the fusion gene;
(2) to determine the nature of events generating the fusion genes; (3) to
demonstrate that some variant translocations represent masked complex
translocations; and (4) to show that the generation of an EWS/ERG fusion gene
cannot be obtained through a simple balanced translocation.

PMID: 9242212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Oncogene. 1997 Mar 13;14(10):1159-64.

A new member of the ETS family fused to EWS in Ewing tumors.

Peter M(1), Couturier J, Pacquement H, Michon J, Thomas G, Magdelenat H, Delattre
O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Transfert, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

As a result of chromosome translocations, the EWS gene is fused to a variety of
transcription factors in human solid neoplasia. In Ewing tumors EWS can be fused 
to four different members of the ETS family, namely FLI-1, ERG, ETV1 and E1AF. We
have identified a new member of the ETS family, called FEV, which is fused to EWS
in a subset of Ewing tumors. FEV encodes a 238 amino acid protein which contains 
an ETS DNA binding domain closely related to that of FLI-1 and ERG. However, the 
N-terminal portion of FEV is only 42 amino acids long which suggests that FEV is 
lacking important transcription regulatory domains contained in FLI-1 and ERG
N-terminal parts. The C-terminal end of FEV is rich in alanine residues which may
indicate that FEV is a transcription repressor. The FEV gene is encoded by three 
exons and is located on chromosome 2. FEV expression was only detected in adult
prostate and small intestine but not in other adult nor in fetal tissues, thus
indicating that FEV has a restricted expression pattern. Following a scheme
similar to previously described translocations in Ewing tumors, a t(2;22)
chromosome translocation fuses the N-terminal domain of EWS to the ETS DNA
binding domain of FEV.

PMID: 9121764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Int J Cancer. 1997 Mar 4;70(5):590-7.

Expression of the PEA3 group of ETS-related transcription factors in human
breast-cancer cells.

Baert JL(1), Monté D, Musgrove EA, Albagli O, Sutherland RL, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The PEA3 group of transcription factors belongs to the ets family and is composed
of 3 known members, PEA3, ERM and ER81, which are more than 95% identical within 
the DNA-binding ETS domain and exhibit 50% aa identity overall. Recently,
transgenic mice bearing the c-erbB-2/neu oncogene have been shown to over-express
PEA3 mRNA in mammary adenocarcinomas, suggesting a role for this gene family in
mammary tumorigenesis. In the present work we characterized the mRNA expression
levels of PEA3-group genes in a series of human epithelial breast cell lines.
Each of the 3 genes was highly expressed in normal human HMEC 1001-7 and HMEC
219-4 cells. In breast-cancer cell lines, the 3 genes were highly expressed in
the ER- MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-330, MDA-MB-231 and BT-20 cell lines, but not in the
ER+ MDA-MB-134-VI and ZR-75-1 cells. In an attempt to characterize the PEA3-group
proteins in breast-cancer cells, we first produced and characterized specific
antibodies against each of these 3 proteins. The anti-ERM and anti-ER81
antibodies recognized specific strong bands at approximately 72 kDa and 62 kDa,
corresponding to ERM and ER81, respectively, in MDA-MB-231 and Hs-578T cells
expressing significant levels of the 3 mRNAs. No protein was detected in MCF-7
cells expressing low levels of mRNA for PEA3-group-family genes, or in ZR-75-1
cells, where mRNA was undetectable by Northern blot. Although in vitro-translated
PEA3 is specifically immunoprecipitated by anti-PEA3 anti-serum, we were unable
to immunoprecipitate PEA3 protein from MDA-MB-231 and Hs-578T cells. In order to 
study the transcription factor activity of ERM, PEA3 and ER81 proteins in
mammary-cancer cells, we tested their ability to transactivate a reporter plasmid
containing 3 Ets-binding sites, and were able to show that, in all the
breast-cancer cells tested, transfected ERM, PEA3 and ER81 are able to
transactivate. Although the target genes of the PEA3 group of transcription
factors in breast-cancer cells have yet to be determined, these genes have a
potential role in the regulation of growth and the progression of human breast
cancer.

PMID: 9052761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Mar;18(3):228-31.

EWS-ERG fusion transcript produced by chromosomal insertion in a Ewing sarcoma.

Kaneko Y(1), Kobayashi H, Handa M, Satake N, Maseki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Chemotherapy, Saitama Cancer Center Hospital, Japan.

The EWS gene is fused in Ewing sarcoma-like tumors by a chromosomal translocation
to one of the four ETS-family genes: FLI1, ERG, ETV1, and E1AF. The orientation
of EWS and FLI1 on chromosomes 22 and 11, respectively, is 5' centromeric and 3' 
telomeric, whereas that of ERG on chromosome 21 is the reverse. Although 10% of
Ewing-family tumors express the EWS-ERG fusion transcript, there have been no
reports on tumors with t(21;22)(q22;q12) identified by banding cytogenetics. We
found the karyotype 50, XY, +8, +8, +12, +mar in all metaphase cells from a
tumor. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis
performed on the tumor and direct sequencing of the products identified the
EWS-ERG fusion transcript. Subsequent two-color fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis with EWS and ERG clones showed the fused signals on
the der(21) chromosome, but no ERG signals on the chromosome 22 homologs. Thus,
our RT-PCR and FISH analyses indicated that the chromosome 22 fragment containing
the 5' portion of EWS had been inverted and inserted into chromosome 21 and had
fused to the 3' portion of ERG. This subtle chromosome aberration could not be
identified by routine cytogenetics. A chromosomal inversion/insertion has also
been described in acute leukemia with the MLL-AF10 fusion gene, and this may be a
common pathway for producing fusion of reverse-oriented genes in leukemias and
solid tumors.

PMID: 9071576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1550-6.

Analysis of the ERK-stimulated ETS transcription factor ER81.

Janknecht R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

A plethora of extracellular signals leads to the stimulation of Ras, which
triggers intracellular protein kinase cascades, resulting in activation of
transcription factors and thus in enhanced gene activity. In this report, it is
demonstrated that the ETS transcription factor ER81, which appears to be
localized within the cell nucleus by virtue of its DNA binding domain, is
transcriptionally activated by oncogenic Ras. Since this activation was dependent
on the presence of Raf-1 and ERK-1, ER81 is a target of the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK
signaling cascade. Consistently, activated ERK-1 is capable to phosphorylate
ER81. However, the carboxy-terminal region of ER81, which contains no potential
ERK phosphorylation sites, is also transcriptionally activated by ERK-1,
suggesting that an ERK-stimulated protein kinase phosphorylates and thus
stimulates ER81 activity. Two acidic stretches of amino acids, which are
conserved in the related PEA3 and ERM proteins, are localized within the
amino-and carboxy-terminal transactivation domains of ER81. In addition, an
inhibitory domain may dampen the activation function of these two domains. In
conclusion, ER81 is a target of Ras-dependent signaling cascades and may thus
contribute to the nuclear response upon stimulation of cells and also to cellular
transformation due to oncogenic Ras.

PMCID: PMC231140
PMID: 8657129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1995 Sep;4(3):162-73.

The emerging molecular genetics of sarcoma translocations.

Ladanyi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York
10021, USA.

Many types of sarcomas are characterized by specific chromosomal translocations
which are likely to be of etiologic significance. The recent elucidation of the
molecular structure of the several of these translocations has revealed some
striking similarities. Nearly all appear to result in the production of novel,
tumor-specific chimeric transcription factors. Furthermore, six of the
translocations, namely the t(11;22), t(21;22), and t(7;22) of Ewing's sarcoma,
the t(12;22) of clear cell sarcoma, the t(12;16) of myxoid liposarcoma, and the
t(11;22) of desmoplastic small round cell tumor, achieve this following a
peculiar pattern, consisting in the fusion of a gene with an RNA-binding domain
(EWS or TLS) with a transcription factor gene (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ATF-1, CHOP, or
WT1). The observation that the different translocation partners of the EWS gene
are specifically associated with several distinct types of primitive sarcomas
suggests a model in which the translocation partner supplying the DNA-binding
domain confers the target specificity of the transcriptional activation mediated 
by these chimeric proteins, whereas the partner supplying the N-terminal domain
and promoter region determines their transactivation potential and expression
level. Further analysis of the normal functions and expression patterns of these 
genes should yield insights into the histogenesis of these different tumor types 
and into normal tissue development and differentiation. Clinically, our new
understanding of the molecular structure of these translocations opens new
avenues for molecular diagnosis and investigative therapeutics.

PMID: 7493135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Oncogene. 1995 Aug 17;11(4):771-9.

Molecular characterization of the ets-related human transcription factor ER81.

Monté D(1), Coutte L, Baert JL, Angeli I, Stéhelin D, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160-Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The PEA3 group is a homogeneous group of the ets transcription factor family and 
is composed of three known members, PEA3, ERM and ER81, which, on the amino acid 
(AA) level, are more than 95% identical within the DNA-binding domain (the Ets
domain), more than 85% within a 32 AA domain (the acidic domain) localized in the
amino-terminus and almost 50% identical overall. By screening a human kidney cDNA
library with a specific probe obtained from mouse ER81, we isolated two clones of
1.6 and 1.5 kb in length encoding a 458 AA open reading frame. When compared to
mouse ER81, the present human ER81 lacks the last 13 AA of the acidic domain and 
the 5 AA contiguous to the carboxy-terminal part of the acidic domain. Of the 458
AA of the human ER81 protein, 97% are identical to mouse ER81. Gel shift analysis
indicates that the full-length human ER81 protein is able to bind specifically to
an oligonucleotide containing the binding sites recognized by most of the Ets
proteins. By transient expression in RK13 mammalian cells, human ER81 protein
transactivated a reporter plasmid containing Ets binding sites, indicating that
this molecule is a bonafide transcriptional activator, while by expression in
Cos-1 transfected cells, we detected the presence of human ER81 protein in the
nucleus using immunocytochemistry. In human tissues, ER81 mRNA is very highly
expressed in brain, highly expressed in testis, lung and heart, moderately in
spleen, small intestine, pancreas and colon, weakly in liver, prostate and
thymus, very weakly in skeletal muscle, kidney and ovary and not in placenta and 
peripheral blood leukocytes. Analysis of human solid or haematopoietic tumour
cell lines showed that most of them did not express ER81 detectably. Database
searches revealed that ETV1 mRNA is highly similar to human ER81 described here, 
although it contains the full-length acidic domain present in mouse ER81. By
screening a genomic DNA library, we characterized the intron-exon junction within
the acidic domain of human ER81 and we showed that this junction corresponds to
the site where the remaining AA of the acidic domain of ETV1 or mouse ER81 are
inserted.

PMID: 7651741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Oncogene. 1995 Mar 16;10(6):1229-34.

A variant Ewing's sarcoma translocation (7;22) fuses the EWS gene to the ETS gene
ETV1.

Jeon IS(1), Davis JN, Braun BS, Sublett JE, Roussel MF, Denny CT, Shapiro DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38101.

Most Ewing's sarcomas or related primitive neuroectodermal tumors have the
(11;22)(q24;q12) or less frequently the (21;22)(q22;q12) translocation. These
rearrangements fuse the EWS gene on chromosome 22q12 to either the FLI1 or ERG
genes, both members of the ETS family of transcription factors. Simple variant
chromosomal translocations have been occasionally described in these tumors. We
have identified a third Ewing's sarcoma translocation, the t(7;22)(p22;q12), that
fuses EWS to the human homologue of the murine ETS gene ER81. This gene,
designated ETV1 (for ETS Translocation Variant), is located on chromosome band
7p22. Identical EWS nucleotide sequences found in the majority of EWS-FLI1 and
EWS-ERG chimeric transcripts are fused to a portion of ETV1 encoding an ETS
domain with sequence specific DNA-binding activity. These findings confirm that
the fusion of EWS to different ETS family members can result in a similar tumor
phenotype.

PMID: 7700648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Crit Care Med. 1982 Sep;10(9):593-6.

Extravascular lung water values in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass
surgery.

Sivak ED, Starr NJ, Graves JW, Cosgrove DM, Borsh J, Estafanous FG.

Using a commercially produced lung water computer, we measured extravascular
thermal volume (ETVL) to study changes in extravascular lung water (EVLW) caused 
by coronary artery bypass surgery. The normal baseline ETVL before anesthesia was
5.47 +/- 1.67 (SD) ml/kg. ETVL was not significantly changed 2 h after surgery
but was significantly lower (P less than 0.05) 24 h later in 9 patients. There
was no relationship between P(A-a)O2/FIO2 ratios and values of ETV1.

PMID: 6980772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


