
1. Blood. 2015 Nov 12;126(20):2344-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-07-655530. Epub 2015
Oct 5.

ETV3-NCOA2 in indeterminate cell histiocytosis: clonal translocation supports sui
generis.

Brown RA(1), Kwong BY(2), McCalmont TH(3), Ragsdale B(4), Ma L(1), Cheung C(1),
Rieger KE(5), Arber DA(1), Kim J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA. (3)Departments of Pathology and Dermatology, Dermatopathology Service,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. (4)Western
Pathology, Inc, San Luis Obispo, CA. (5)Departments of Pathology and Dermatology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.

PMID: 26438513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Development. 2013 Aug;140(15):3095-106. doi: 10.1242/dev.093716. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

ERF and ETV3L are retinoic acid-inducible repressors required for primary
neurogenesis.

Janesick A(1), Abbey R, Chung C, Liu S, Taketani M, Blumberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, 2011 Biological Sciences 3,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA.

Cells in the developing neural tissue demonstrate an exquisite balance between
proliferation and differentiation. Retinoic acid (RA) is required for neuronal
differentiation by promoting expression of proneural and neurogenic genes. We
show that RA acts early in the neurogenic pathway by inhibiting expression of
neural progenitor markers Geminin and Foxd4l1, thereby promoting differentiation.
Our screen for RA target genes in early Xenopus development identified Ets2
Repressor Factor (Erf) and the closely related ETS repressors Etv3 and Etv3-like 
(Etv3l). Erf and Etv3l are RA responsive and inhibit the action of ETS genes
downstream of FGF signaling, placing them at the intersection of RA and growth
factor signaling. We hypothesized that RA regulates primary neurogenesis by
inducing Erf and Etv3l to antagonize proliferative signals. Loss-of-function
analysis showed that Erf and Etv3l are required to inhibit proliferation of
neural progenitors to allow differentiation, whereas overexpression of Erf led to
an increase in the number of primary neurons. Therefore, these RA-induced ETS
repressors are key components of the proliferation-differentiation switch during 
primary neurogenesis in vivo.

PMID: 23824578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Feb;138(1):37-45. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2408-2.
Epub 2013 Jan 18.

Frequent copy number gains at 1q21 and 1q32 are associated with overexpression of
the ETS transcription factors ETV3 and ELF3 in breast cancer irrespective of
molecular subtypes.

Mesquita B(1), Lopes P, Rodrigues A, Pereira D, Afonso M, Leal C, Henrique R,
Lind GE, Jerónimo C, Lothe RA, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Rua Dr. António
Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal.

Several ETS transcription factors are involved in the pathogenesis of human
cancers by different mechanisms. As gene copy number gain/amplification is an
alternative mechanism of oncogenic activation and 1q gain is the most common copy
number change in breast carcinoma, we investigated how that genomic change
impacts in the expression of the three 1q ETS family members ETV3, ELK4, and
ELF3. We have first evaluated 141 breast carcinomas for genome-wide copy number
changes by chromosomal CGH and showed that 1q21 and 1q32 were the two chromosome 
bands with most frequent genomic copy number gains. Second, we confirmed by FISH 
with locus-specific BAC clones that cases showing 1q gain/amplification by CGH
showed copy number increase of the ETS genes ETV3 (located in 1q21~23), ELF3, and
ELK4 (both in 1q32). Third, gene expression levels of the three 1q ETS genes, as 
well as their potential targets MYC and CRISP3, were evaluated by quantitative
real-time PCR. We here show for the first time that the most common genomic copy 
number gains in breast cancer, 1q21 and 1q32, are associated with overexpression 
of the ETS transcription factors ETV3 and ELF3 (but not ELK4) at these loci
irrespective of molecular subtypes. Among the three 1q ETS genes, ELF3 has a
relevant role in breast carcinogenesis and is also the most likely target of the 
1q copy number increase. The basal-like molecular subtype presented the worst
prognosis regarding disease-specific survival, but no additional prognostic value
was found for 1q copy number status or ELF3 expression. In addition, we show that
there is a correlation between the expression of the oncogene MYC, irrespectively
of copy number gain at its loci in 8q24, and the expression of both the
transcriptional repressor ETV3 and the androgen respondent ELK4.

PMID: 23329352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Sci Signal. 2011 Oct 25;4(196):rs11. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002010.

Large-scale discovery of ERK2 substrates identifies ERK-mediated transcriptional 
regulation by ETV3.

Carlson SM(1), Chouinard CR, Labadorf A, Lam CJ, Schmelzle K, Fraenkel E, White
FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) extracellular signal-regulated kinase
2 (ERK2) is ubiquitously expressed in mammalian tissues and is involved in a wide
range of biological processes. Although MAPKs have been intensely studied,
identification of their substrates remains challenging. We have optimized a
chemical genetic system using analog-sensitive ERK2, a form of ERK2 engineered to
use an analog of adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP), to tag and isolate ERK2
substrates in vitro. This approach identified 80 proteins phosphorylated by ERK2,
13 of which are known ERK2 substrates. The 80 substrates are associated with
diverse cellular processes, including regulation of transcription and
translation, mRNA processing, and regulation of the activity of the Rho family
guanosine triphosphatases. We found that one of the newly identified substrates, 
ETV3 (a member of the E twenty-six family of transcriptional regulators), was
extensively phosphorylated on sites within canonical and noncanonical ERK motifs.
Phosphorylation of ETV3 regulated transcription by preventing its binding to DNA 
at promoters for several thousand genes, including some involved in negative
feedback regulation of itself and of upstream signals.

PMCID: PMC3779841
PMID: 22028470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Virchows Arch. 2011 Apr;458(4):421-30. doi: 10.1007/s00428-011-1053-6. Epub 2011 
Feb 12.

Analysis of select members of the E26 (ETS) transcription factors family in
colorectal cancer.

Deves C(1), Renck D, Garicochea B, da Silva VD, Giulianni Lopes T, Fillman H,
Fillman L, Lunardini S, Basso LA, Santos DS, Batista EL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Molecular and Functional Biology (CP-BMF), Pontificia
Universidade Catolica do Rio Grande do Sul, Av. Ipiranga 6681 Bld. 92A, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil.

The E-twenty-six (ETS) family of transcription factors is known to act as
positive or negative regulators of the expression of genes that are involved in
diverse biological processes, including those that control cellular
proliferation, differentiation, hematopoiesis, apoptosis, metastasis, tissue
remodeling, and angiogenesis. Identification of target gene promoters of normal
and oncogenic transcription factors provides new insights into the regulation of 
genes that are involved in the control of normal cell growth and differentiation.
The aim of the present investigation was to analyze the differential expression
of 11 ETS (ELF-3, ESE3, ETS1, ETV3, ETV4, ETV6, NERF, PDEF, PU1, Spi-B, and
Spi-C) as potential markers for prognostic of colorectal cancer. A series of
paired tissue biopsies consisting of a tumor and a non-affected control sample
were harvested from 28 individuals suffering from diagnosed colorectal lesions.
Total RNA was isolated from the samples, and after reverse transcription,
differential expression of the select ETS was carried out through real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Tumor staging as determined by histopathology was
carried out to correlate the degree of tumor invasiveness with the expression of 
the ETS genes. The results demonstrated a different quantitative profile of
expression in tumors and normal tissues. ETV4 was significantly upregulated with 
further increase in the event of lymph node involvement. PDEF and Spi-B presented
downregulation, which was more significant when lymph node involvement was
present. These findings were supported by immunohistochemistry of tumoral
tissues. The results suggest that select ETS may serve as potential markers of
colorectal cancer invasiveness and metastasis.

PMID: 21318373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. BMC Cancer. 2010 May 12;10:195. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-195.

A new method to detect loss of heterozygosity using cohort heterozygosity
comparisons.

Green MR(1), Jardine P, Wood P, Wellwood J, Lea RA, Marlton P, Griffiths LR.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, Griffith Institute for Health & Medical Research,
Griffith University, Parklands Drive, Southport, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) is an important marker for one of the
'two-hits' required for tumor suppressor gene inactivation. Traditional methods
for mapping LOH regions require the comparison of both tumor and patient-matched 
normal DNA samples. However, for many archival samples, patient-matched normal
DNA is not available leading to the under-utilization of this important resource 
in LOH studies. Here we describe a new method for LOH analysis that relies on the
genome-wide comparison of heterozygosity of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) between cohorts of cases and un-matched healthy control samples. Regions
of LOH are defined by consistent decreases in heterozygosity across a genetic
region in the case cohort compared to the control cohort.
METHODS: DNA was collected from 20 Follicular Lymphoma (FL) tumor samples, 20
Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) tumor samples, neoplastic B-cells of 10
B-cell Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (B-CLL) patients and Buccal cell samples
matched to 4 of these B-CLL patients. The cohort heterozygosity comparison method
was developed and validated using LOH derived in a small cohort of B-CLL by
traditional comparisons of tumor and normal DNA samples, and compared to the only
alternative method for LOH analysis without patient matched controls. LOH
candidate regions were then generated for enlarged cohorts of B-CLL, FL and DLBCL
samples using our cohort heterozygosity comparison method in order to evaluate
potential LOH candidate regions in these non-Hodgkin's lymphoma tumor subtypes.
RESULTS: Using a small cohort of B-CLL samples with patient-matched normal DNA we
have validated the utility of this method and shown that it displays more
accuracy and sensitivity in detecting LOH candidate regions compared to the only 
alternative method, the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) method. Subsequently, using
B-CLL, FL and DLBCL tumor samples we have utilised cohort heterozygosity
comparisons to localise LOH candidate regions in these subtypes of non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma. Detected LOH regions included both previously described regions of LOH 
as well as novel genomic candidate regions.
CONCLUSIONS: We have proven the efficacy of the use of cohort heterozygosity
comparisons for genome-wide mapping of LOH and shown it to be in many ways
superior to the HMM method. Additionally, the use of this method to analyse SNP
microarray data from 3 common forms of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma yielded interesting
tumor suppressor gene candidates, including the ETV3 gene that was highlighted in
both B-CLL and FL.

PMCID: PMC2885361
PMID: 20462409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Immunol. 2007 Dec 1;179(11):7215-9.

Cutting edge: A transcriptional repressor and corepressor induced by the
STAT3-regulated anti-inflammatory signaling pathway.

El Kasmi KC(1), Smith AM, Williams L, Neale G, Panopoulos AD, Watowich SS, Häcker
H, Foxwell BM, Murray PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2008 Mar 1;180(5):3612. Panopolous, Athanasia [corrected to
Panopoulos, Athanasia D].

IL-10 regulates anti-inflammatory signaling via the activation of STAT3, which in
turn controls the induction of a gene expression program whose products execute
inhibitory effects on proinflammatory mediator production. In this study we show 
that IL-10 induces the expression of an ETS family transcriptional repressor,
ETV3, and a helicase family corepressor, Strawberry notch homologue 2 (SBNO2), in
mouse and human macrophages. IL-10-mediated induction of ETV3 and SBNO2
expression was dependent upon both STAT3 and a stimulus through the TLR pathway. 
We also observed that ETV3 expression was strongly induced by the STAT3 pathway
regulated by IL-10 but not by STAT3 signaling activated by IL-6, which cannot
activate the anti-inflammatory signaling pathway. ETV3 and SBNO2 repressed
NF-kappaB- but not IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)-activated transcriptional
reporters. Collectively our data suggest that ETV3 and SBNO2 are components of
the pathways that contribute to the downstream anti-inflammatory effects of
IL-10.

PMID: 18025162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell Cycle. 2007 Jul 1;6(13):1594-604. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Differential repression of c-myc and cdc2 gene expression by ERF and PE-1/METS.

Hester KD(1), Verhelle D, Escoubet-Lozach L, Luna R, Rose DW, Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

The molecular mechanisms that control the proliferation and differentiation of
specific cell types remain poorly understood. Positive ETS factors play important
roles in mediating proliferative responses to Ras/MAPK signaling in many cell
types following mitogenic stimulation. PE-1/METS, a member of the ETS-domain
family transcription factors that functions as a transcriptional repressor, can
block mitogenic responses mediated by positively acting Ets factors. The
anti-proliferative functions of PE-1/METS require its interaction with DP103, a
multifunctional DEAD-box protein that mediates interactions with corepressor
proteins and acts in a cooperative manner with Rb family members and to repress
cell cycle control genes. ETS-2 repressor factor (ERF) is structurally related to
and also functions as a transcriptional repressor, but endogenous target genes
and mechanisms of repression remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate that like
PE-1/METS, ERF-mediated repression also requires DP103, and that ERF negatively
regulates the c-myc and cdc2 genes. In contrast to PE-1/METS, however,
ERF-mediated repression of these genes is inactivated by MAPK signaling through
phosphorylation sites that are ERF-specific. Furthermore, constitutive activation
of the Ras/MAPK pathway in RAW 264.7 cells transformed by the v-Abelson leukemia 
virus is associated with constitutive inactivation of ERF in this cell type. We
propose that ERF and PE-1/METS function to impose 'repression checkpoints' on a
subset of cell cycle control genes that are differentially regulated by growth
factor signaling pathways that control proliferation and differentiation and that
ERF is targeted for inactivation by transforming oncogenes such as vAbl.

PMID: 17525531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17772-84. Epub 2004 Jan 30.

PE-1/METS, an antiproliferative Ets repressor factor, is induced by CREB-1/CREM-1
during macrophage differentiation.

Sawka-Verhelle D(1), Escoubet-Lozach L, Fong AL, Hester KD, Herzig S, Lebrun P,
Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California at
San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

The molecular mechanisms involved in regulating the balance between cellular
proliferation and differentiation remain poorly understood. Members of the
Ets-domain family of transcription factors are candidates for proteins that might
differentially regulate cell cycle control and cell type-specific genes during
the differentiation of myeloid progenitor cells. The Ets repressor PE-1/METS has 
been suggested to contribute to growth arrest during terminal macrophage
differentiation by repressing Ets target genes involved in Ras-dependent
proliferation. An important feature of this regulatory model is that PE-1/METS is
itself induced by the program of macrophage differentiation elicited by M-CSF.
Here, we present evidence that the PE-1/METS gene is a transcriptional target of 
the cyclic AMP response element-binding protein-1 (CREB-1). CREB-1 expression is 
dramatically up-regulated during macrophage differentiation and phosphorylation
of CREB-1 and the related factor CREM-1 are stimulated by M-CSF in a
SAPK2/p38-dependent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate
that CREB-1/CREM-1 are recruited to the PE-1/METS promoter as well as to the
promoters of other genes that are up-regulated during terminal macrophage
differentiation. Overexpression of CREB-1 stimulates the activities of the
PE-1/METS, and macrosialin promoters, while expression of a dominant negative
form of CREB-1 during macrophage differentiation inhibits expression of the
PE-1/METS and macrosialin genes. Inhibition of CREB function also results in
reduced expression of CD54 and impaired cell adhesion. Taken together, these
findings reveal new roles of CREB-1/CREM-1 as regulators of macrophage
differentiation.

PMID: 14754893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Sep;145(2):152-60.

Transcriptional profiling in hepatoblastomas using high-density oligonucleotide
DNA array.

Nagata T(1), Takahashi Y, Ishii Y, Asai S, Nishida Y, Murata A, Koshinaga T,
Fukuzawa M, Hamazaki M, Asami K, Ito E, Ikeda H, Takamatsu H, Koike K, Kikuta A, 
Kuroiwa M, Watanabe A, Kosaka Y, Fujita H, Miyake M, Mugishima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Medicine, Nihon University, School of Medicine, 30-1
Oyaguchikami-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan. tnagata@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

Hepatoblastoma is a common hepatic tumor in children. Although evidence regarding
cytogenetic and molecular genetic alterations in hepatoblastomas has been
reported, the molecular events affecting the biologic characteristics of this
tumor, including alterations of the gene expression profile, are largely unknown.
To identify genes differentially expressed between nondiseased liver (NDL) and
hepatoblastoma tumor (HBT), we analyzed the gene expression profile in 14 NDL and
16 HBT samples using a high-density oligonucleotide DNA array. Using Mann-Whitney
U test followed by the k-nearest neighbor algorithm, we identified 26 genes
(predictor genes) that were able to assign unknown samples derived from NDL and
HBT to either the NDL group or HBT group with 100% accuracy. Using a
cross-validation approach, we confirmed that the k-nearest neighbor algorithm
assigned the particular samples derived from NDL and HBT to either the NDL or HBT
group with 93.3% (28/30 samples) accuracy. In the 26 predictor genes, we found
alteration of the expression of genes regulating cell division (NAP1L1, STMN1,
CCNG2, and CDC7L1) and tumor cell growth (IGF2 and IGFBP4) in HBT. Four predictor
genes (ETV3, TPR, CD34, and NR1I3) were also found to be mapped to the
chromosomal region 1q21 approximately q32, which has been reported to be
frequently involved in the development of hepatoblastoma. The findings obtained
in this study suggest that alteration of the expression of some genes regulating 
cell division and tumor cell growth may be characteristics of the gene expression
profile in HBT, and that alteration of the expression of the four predictor genes
mapped to chromosomal region 1q21 approximately q32 may also contribute to the
differences in gene expression profile between NDL and HBT.

PMID: 12935928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Genomics. 1994 Mar 15;20(2):291-4.

PE-1, a novel ETS oncogene family member, localizes to chromosome 1q21-q23.

Klemsz M(1), Hromas R, Raskind W, Bruno E, Hoffman R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University Medical Center,
Indianapolis 46202.

The v-ets oncogene family shares a conserved peptide motif called the ETS domain 
that mediates sequence-specific DNA binding. This motif is unique among
transcription factor families. Using partially degenerate oligonucleotides from
conserved regions of the ETS domain and the polymerase chain reaction, we
isolated a new member of the v-ets family designated PE-1 from HL60 cells. PE-1
was expressed as an approximately 7.5-kb transcript in most cell lines tested. In
the hairy cell leukemia line Eskol, there was an additional 1.8-kb transcript
observed. PE-1 was the most common ETS domain gene found in CD34+HLA-DR-
hematopoietic progenitors. PE-1 was localized to human chromosome 1q21-q23 using 
both in situ chromosomal hybridization and human-hamster hybrids.

PMID: 8020980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


