
1. PLoS Biol. 2016 Feb 19;14(2):e1002382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002382.
eCollection 2016.

Ret and Etv4 Promote Directed Movements of Progenitor Cells during Renal
Branching Morphogenesis.

Riccio P(1), Cebrian C(1), Zong H(2,)(3), Hippenmeyer S(4), Costantini F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York, United States of America. (2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and
Cancer Biology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville,
Virginia, United States of America. (3)Center for Brain Immunology and Glia,
University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, United
States of America. (4)Developmental Neurobiology, IST Austria (Institute of
Science and Technology Austria), Klosterneuburg, Austria.

Branching morphogenesis of the epithelial ureteric bud forms the renal collecting
duct system and is critical for normal nephron number, while low nephron number
is implicated in hypertension and renal disease. Ureteric bud growth and
branching requires GDNF signaling from the surrounding mesenchyme to cells at the
ureteric bud tips, via the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase and coreceptor Gfra1; Ret
signaling up-regulates transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5, which are also
critical for branching. Despite extensive knowledge of the genetic control of
these events, it is not understood, at the cellular level, how renal branching
morphogenesis is achieved or how Ret signaling influences epithelial cell
behaviors to promote this process. Analysis of chimeric embryos previously
suggested a role for Ret signaling in promoting cell rearrangements in the
nephric duct, but this method was unsuited to study individual cell behaviors
during ureteric bud branching. Here, we use Mosaic Analysis with Double Markers
(MADM), combined with organ culture and time-lapse imaging, to trace the
movements and divisions of individual ureteric bud tip cells. We first examine
wild-type clones and then Ret or Etv4 mutant/wild-type clones in which the mutant
and wild-type sister cells are differentially and heritably marked by green and
red fluorescent proteins. We find that, in normal kidneys, most individual tip
cells behave as self-renewing progenitors, some of whose progeny remain at the
tips while others populate the growing UB trunks. In Ret or Etv4 MADM clones, the
wild-type cells generated at a UB tip are much more likely to remain at, or move 
to, the new tips during branching and elongation, while their Ret-/- or Etv4-/-
sister cells tend to lag behind and contribute only to the trunks. By tracking
successive mitoses in a cell lineage, we find that Ret signaling has little
effect on proliferation, in contrast to its effects on cell movement. Our results
show that Ret/Etv4 signaling promotes directed cell movements in the ureteric bud
tips, and suggest a model in which these cell movements mediate branching
morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4760680
PMID: 26894589  [PubMed - in process]


2. Brain Res Bull. 2016 Mar;121:215-26. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.02.010.
Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor promotes vesicular glutamate transporter 3
expression and neurite outgrowth of dorsal root ganglion neurons through the
activation of the transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5.

Liu D(1), Liu Z(2), Liu H(3), Li H(4), Pan X(5), Li Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012,
China. Electronic address: cyyzld@163.com. (2)Department of Anatomy, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address:
zhen@sdu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Rheumatology, Shandong University Qilu
Hospital, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address: huaxiangliu@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, Shandong University Qilu Hospital, Jinan 250012,
China. Electronic address: lihao462929@163.com. (5)Department of Otolaryngology, 
Shandong University Qilu Hospital, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address:
13606371129@163.com. (6)Department of Anatomy, Shandong University School of
Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address: zli@sdu.edu.cn.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is critical for sensory neuron survival 
and is necessary for vesicular glutamate transporter 3 (VGLUT3) expression.
Whether the transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 are involved in these
BDNF-induced effects remains unclear. In the present study, primary cultured
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons were used to test the link between BDNF and
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 on VGLUT3 expression and neurite outgrowth.
BDNF promoted the mRNA and protein expression of Etv4 and Etv5 in DRG neurons.
These effects were blocked by extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2) inhibitor PD98059 but not phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
LY294002 or phospholipase C-<U+03B3> (PLC-<U+03B3>) inhibitor U73122. Etv4 siRNA and Etv5 siRNA
effectively blocked the VGLUT3 expression and neurite elongation induced by BNDF.
The overexpression of Etv4 or Etv5 potentiated the effects of BNDF-induced
neurite elongation and growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43), medium
neurofilament (NF-M), and light neurofilament (NF-L) expression while these
effects could be inhibited by Etv4 and Etv5 siRNA. These data imply that Etv4 and
Etv5 are essential transcription factors in modulating BDNF/TrkB
signaling-mediated VGLUT3 expression and neurite outgrowth. BDNF, through the
ERK1/2 signaling pathway, activates Etv4 and Etv5 to initiate GAP-43 expression, 
promote neurofilament (NF) protein expression, induce neurite outgrowth, and
mediate VGLUT3 expression for neuronal function improvement. The biological
effects initiated by BDNF/TrkB signaling linked to E26 transformation-specific
(ETS) transcription factors are important to elucidate neuronal differentiation, 
axonal regeneration, and repair in various pathological states.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876757  [PubMed - in process]


3. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 15;411(2):231-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.035. Epub 2016 
Jan 29.

Epithelial cell fate in the nephron tubule is mediated by the ETS transcription
factors etv5a and etv4 during zebrafish kidney development.

Marra AN(1), Wingert RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Zebrafish Research, Center for
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Zebrafish Research, 
Center for Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, IN 46556, USA. Electronic address: rwingert@nd.edu.

Kidney development requires the differentiation and organization of discrete
nephron epithelial lineages, yet the genetic and molecular pathways involved in
these events remain poorly understood. The embryonic zebrafish kidney, or
pronephros, provides a simple and useful model to study nephrogenesis. The
pronephros is primarily comprised of two types of epithelial cells: transportive 
and multiciliated cells (MCCs). Transportive cells occupy distinct tubule
segments and are characterized by the expression of various solute transporters, 
while MCCs function in fluid propulsion and are dispersed in a "salt-and-pepper" 
fashion within the tubule. Epithelial cell identity is reliant on interplay
between the Notch signaling pathway and retinoic acid (RA) signaling, where RA
promotes MCC fate by inhibiting Notch activity in renal progenitors, while Notch 
acts downstream to trigger transportive cell formation and block adoption of an
MCC identity. Previous research has shown that the transcription factor ets
variant 5a (etv5a), and its closely related ETS family members, are required for 
ciliogenesis in other zebrafish tissues. Here, we mapped etv5a expression to
renal progenitors that occupy domains where MCCs later emerge. Thus, we
hypothesized that etv5a is required for normal development of MCCs in the
nephron. etv5a loss of function caused a decline of MCC number as indicated by
the reduced frequency of cells that expressed the MCC-specific markers outer
dense fiber of sperm tails 3b (odf3b) and centrin 4 (cetn4), where rescue
experiments partially restored MCC incidence. Interestingly, deficiency of ets
variant 4 (etv4), a related gene that is broadly expressed in the posterior
mesoderm during somitogenesis stages, also led to reduced MCC numbers, which were
further reduced by dual etv5a/4 deficiency, suggesting that both of these ETS
factors are essential for MCC formation and that they also might have redundant
activities. In epistatic studies, exogenous RA treatment expanded the etv5a
domain within the renal progenitor field and RA inhibition blocked etv5a in this 
populace, indicating that etv5a acts downstream of RA. Additionally, treatment
with exogenous RA partially rescued the reduced MCC phenotype after loss of
etv5a. Further, abrogation of Notch with the small molecule inhibitor DAPT
increased the renal progenitor etv5a expression domain as well as MCC density in 
etv5a deficient embryos, suggesting Notch acts upstream to inhibit etv5a. In
contrast, etv4 levels in renal progenitors were unaffected by changes in RA or
Notch signaling levels, suggesting a possible non-cell autonomous role during
pronephros formation. Taken together, these findings have revealed new insights
about the genetic mechanisms of epithelial cell development during nephrogenesis.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4783290 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26827902  [PubMed - in process]


4. Gastrointest Tumors. 2015 Sep;2(2):83-8. doi: 10.1159/000430881. Epub 2015 May
29.

Unusual Clinical Presentation of Gastrointestinal Clear Cell Sarcoma.

Raskin GA(1), Pozharisski KM(1), Iyevleva AG(2), Rikov IV(3), Orlova RV(3),
Imyanitov EN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Russian Research Center for Radiology and Surgical Technologies, Saint
Petersburg, Russia. (2)N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, Saint Petersburg,
Russia ; Saint Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint Petersburg,
Russia. (3)Saint Petersburg State University, Medical Faculty, Saint Petersburg, 
Russia. (4)N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; Saint
Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; Saint
Petersburg State University, Medical Faculty, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; I.I.
Mechnikov North-Western State Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Use of molecular assays is gradually becoming a mandatory part of the
clinical management of soft tissue tumors, however the choice and the
interpretation of these tests may present a challenge.
SUMMARY: This report demonstrates an unusual presentation of sarcoma, which was
initially diagnosed as a tumor of unknown primary site. Given the presence of
vimentin, Fli-1, CD99 and S100 markers, lack of immunostaining for melan A,
HMB45, MITF, synaptophysin, CD56, myf4, CKAE1/3 and WT-1, as well as the presence
of EWSR1 translocation determined by a break-apart FISH assay, Ewing's sarcoma
(ES) diagnosis seemed to be well justified. However, polymerase chain reaction
testing for ES-specific rearrangements (EWSR1/FLI1, EWSR1/ERG, EWSR1/ETV1,
EWSR1/ETV4, EWS/FEV) failed to confirm the ES origin of the neoplastic tissue. We
further considered clinical, morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular
diagnostic features of other types of EWSR1-rearranged sarcomas and performed
molecular testing for gastrointestinal clear cell sarcoma. The polymerase chain
reaction assay revealed EWSR1ex7/ATF1ex5 fusion, thus confirming the latter
diagnosis. Subsequent high-precision computed tomography of the abdominal cavity 
revealed a 5-cm tumor of the small bowel, which was subjected to surgical
resection.
KEY MESSAGE: This report exemplifies that the use of anonymous cytogenetic
assays, such as break-apart FISH EWSR1 testing, may not be sufficient even in
case of a perfect match with relevant morphological and immunohistochemical tumor
features.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: Explicit identification of the translocation gene
partners is indeed important for proper sarcoma diagnosis management.

PMCID: PMC4668799
PMID: 26675070  [PubMed]


5. Cell. 2015 Dec 3;163(6):1457-67. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.076. Epub 2015 Nov
25.

ß-Cell Insulin Secretion Requires the Ubiquitin Ligase COP1.

Suriben R(1), Kaihara KA(2), Paolino M(1), Reichelt M(3), Kummerfeld SK(4),
Modrusan Z(5), Dugger DL(1), Newton K(1), Sagolla M(3), Webster JD(3), Liu J(4), 
Hebrok M(2), Dixit VM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (2)Diabetes Center, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143 USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Genentech, 1 
DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (4)Department of Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. 
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. (6)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South
San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. Electronic address: dixit@gene.com.

A variety of signals finely tune insulin secretion by pancreatic ß cells to
prevent both hyper-and hypoglycemic states. Here, we show that post-translational
regulation of the transcription factors ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 by the ubiquitin
ligase COP1 (also called RFWD2) in ß cells is critical for insulin secretion.
Mice lacking COP1 in ß cells developed diabetes due to insulin granule docking
defects that were fully rescued by genetic deletion of Etv1, Etv4, and Etv5.
Genes regulated by ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 in the absence of mouse COP1 were enriched
in human diabetes-associated genes, suggesting that they also influence human
ß-cell pathophysiology. In normal ß cells, ETV4 was stabilized upon membrane
depolarization and limited insulin secretion under hyperglycemic conditions.
Collectively, our data reveal that ETVs negatively regulate insulin secretion for
the maintenance of normoglycemia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26627735  [PubMed - in process]


6. Dev Cell. 2015 Nov 9;35(3):322-32. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.10.006.

FGF-Regulated ETV Transcription Factors Control FGF-SHH Feedback Loop in Lung
Branching.

Herriges JC(1), Verheyden JM(1), Zhang Z(2), Sui P(1), Zhang Y(3), Anderson
MJ(3), Swing DA(4), Zhang Y(1), Lewandoski M(3), Sun X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA. (2)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA; Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (3)Cancer and Developmental Biology Lab, National
Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (4)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program,
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (5)Laboratory of Genetics,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address:
xsun@wisc.edu.

The mammalian lung forms its elaborate tree-like structure following a largely
stereotypical branching sequence. While a number of genes have been identified to
play essential roles in lung branching, what coordinates the choice between
branch growth and new branch formation has not been elucidated. Here we show that
loss of FGF-activated transcription factor genes, Etv4 and Etv5 (collectively
Etv), led to prolonged branch tip growth and delayed new branch formation.
Unexpectedly, this phenotype is more similar to mutants with increased rather
than decreased FGF activity. Indeed, an increased Fgf10 expression is observed,
and reducing Fgf10 dosage can attenuate the Etv mutant phenotype. Further
evidence indicates that ETV inhibits Fgf10 via directly promoting Shh expression.
SHH in turn inhibits local Fgf10 expression and redirects growth, thereby
initiating new branches. Together, our findings establish ETV as a key node in
the FGF-ETV-SHH inhibitory feedback loop that dictates branching periodicity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4763945 [Available on 2016-11-09]
PMID: 26555052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS Genet. 2015 Oct 9;11(10):e1005599. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005599.
eCollection 2015.

ACLY and ACC1 Regulate Hypoxia-Induced Apoptosis by Modulating ETV4 via
a-ketoglutarate.

Keenan MM(1), Liu B(1), Tang X(1), Wu J(1), Cyr D(2), Stevens RD(3), Ilkayeva
O(3), Huang Z(4), Tollini LA(1), Murphy SK(4), Lucas J(2), Muoio DM(3), Kim
SY(5), Chi JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America; Center for Genomic and 
Computational Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
United States of America. (2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.
(3)Sarah W Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America; Duke Institute of
Molecular Physiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
United States of America. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of
Gynecologic Oncology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
United States of America. (5)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

In order to propagate a solid tumor, cancer cells must adapt to and survive under
various tumor microenvironment (TME) stresses, such as hypoxia or lactic
acidosis. To systematically identify genes that modulate cancer cell survival
under stresses, we performed genome-wide shRNA screens under hypoxia or lactic
acidosis. We discovered that genetic depletion of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACACA
or ACC1) or ATP citrate lyase (ACLY) protected cancer cells from hypoxia-induced 
apoptosis. Additionally, the loss of ACLY or ACC1 reduced levels and activities
of the oncogenic transcription factor ETV4. Silencing ETV4 also protected cells
from hypoxia-induced apoptosis and led to remarkably similar transcriptional
responses as with silenced ACLY or ACC1, including an anti-apoptotic program.
Metabolomic analysis found that while a-ketoglutarate levels decrease under
hypoxia in control cells, a-ketoglutarate is paradoxically increased under
hypoxia when ACC1 or ACLY are depleted. Supplementation with a-ketoglutarate
rescued the hypoxia-induced apoptosis and recapitulated the decreased expression 
and activity of ETV4, likely via an epigenetic mechanism. Therefore, ACC1 and
ACLY regulate the levels of ETV4 under hypoxia via increased a-ketoglutarate.
These results reveal that the ACC1/ACLY-a-ketoglutarate-ETV4 axis is a novel
means by which metabolic states regulate transcriptional output for life vs.
death decisions under hypoxia. Since many lipogenic inhibitors are under
investigation as cancer therapeutics, our findings suggest that the use of these 
inhibitors will need to be carefully considered with respect to oncogenic
drivers, tumor hypoxia, progression and dormancy. More broadly, our screen
provides a framework for studying additional tumor cell stress-adaption
mechanisms in the future.

PMCID: PMC4599891
PMID: 26452058  [PubMed - in process]


8. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):27037-48. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4815.

C-kit signaling promotes proliferation and invasion of colorectal mucinous
adenocarcinoma in a murine model.

Tan J(1,)(2), Yang S(1,)(2,)(3), Shen P(1,)(3), Sun H(1,)(2,)(3), Xiao J(1,)(3), 
Wang Y(1,)(2), Wu B(1,)(2,)(3), Ji F(1,)(2,)(3), Yan J(1), Xue H(1), Zhou
D(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, P. R. China. (2)Beijing Key
Laboratory of Cancer Invasion and Metastasis Research, Beijing 100069, P. R.
China. (3)Cancer Institute of Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, P. R.
China.

It was reported that the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family often highly
expressed in several mucinous carcinomas. In the present study, we established a 
murine model of colorectal mucinous adenocardinoma (CRMAC) by treating C57 mice
[both wild type (WT) and loss-of-function c-kit mutant type (Wads-/-)] with
AOM+DSS for 37 weeks and found that c-kit, a member of RTK family, clearly
enhanced the tumor cell proliferation by decreasing p53 and increasing cyclin D1 
through AKT pathway. Significantly, c-kit strongly promoted tumor cell
invasiveness by increasing ETV4, which induced MMP7 expression and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) via ERK pathway. In vitro up- or
down-regulating c-kit activation in human colorectal cancer HCT-116 cells further
consolidated these results. In conclusion, our data suggested that the c-kit
signaling obviously promoted proliferation and invasion of CRMAC. Therefore,
targeting the c-kit signaling and its downstream molecules might provide the
potential strategies for treatment of patients suffering from CRMAC in the
future.

PMCID: PMC4694972
PMID: 26356816  [PubMed - in process]


9. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):28755-73. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4810.

Triple-layer dissection of the lung adenocarcinoma transcriptome: regulation at
the gene, transcript, and exon levels.

Hsu MK(1), Wu IC(2), Cheng CC(3), Su JL(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Hsieh CH(7), Lin YS(1),
Chen FC(1,)(2,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao-Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Population Health Sciences, National
Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan. (3)National Institute of Cancer
Research, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan. (4)Graduate
Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan. (6)Center for 
Molecular Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (7)Cloud
Computing and System Integration Division, National Center for High-Performance
Computing, Taichung, Taiwan. (8)Department of Dentistry, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Lung adenocarcinoma is one of the most deadly human diseases. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying this disease, particularly RNA splicing, have
remained underexplored. Here, we report a triple-level (gene-, transcript-, and
exon-level) analysis of lung adenocarcinoma transcriptomes from 77 paired tumor
and normal tissues, as well as an analysis pipeline to overcome genetic
variability for accurate differentiation between tumor and normal tissues. We
report three major results. First, more than 5,000 differentially expressed
transcripts/exonic regions occur repeatedly in lung adenocarcinoma patients.
These transcripts/exonic regions are enriched in nicotine metabolism and
ribosomal functions in addition to the pathways enriched for differentially
expressed genes (cell cycle, extracellular matrix receptor interaction, and axon 
guidance). Second, classification models based on rationally selected transcripts
or exonic regions can reach accuracies of 0.93 to 1.00 in differentiating tumor
from normal tissues. Of the 28 selected exonic regions, 26 regions correspond to 
alternative exons located in such regulators as tumor suppressor (GDF10), signal 
receptor (LYVE1), vascular-specific regulator (RASIP1), ubiquitination mediator
(RNF5), and transcriptional repressor (TRIM27). Third, classification systems
based on 13 to 14 differentially expressed genes yield accuracies near 100%.
Genes selected by both detection methods include C16orf59, DAP3, ETV4, GABARAPL1,
PPAR, RADIL, RSPO1, SERTM1, SRPK1, ST6GALNAC6, and TNXB. Our findings imply a
multilayered lung adenocarcinoma regulome in which transcript-/exon-level
regulation may be dissociated from gene-level regulation. Our described method
may be used to identify potentially important genes/transcripts/exonic regions
for the tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma and to construct accurate tumor vs. 
normal classification systems for this disease.

PMCID: PMC4745690
PMID: 26356813  [PubMed - in process]


10. Development. 2015 Aug 1;142(15):2696-703. doi: 10.1242/dev.122044.

Yap and Taz are required for Ret-dependent urinary tract morphogenesis.

Reginensi A(1), Hoshi M(2), Boualia SK(3), Bouchard M(3), Jain S(2), McNeill
H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada 
M5G 1X5 reginensi@lunenfeld.ca mcneill@lunenfeld.ca. (2)Departments of Internal
Medicine (Renal Division) and Pathology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (3)Goodman Cancer Research Centre and
Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Canada H3A 1A3.
(4)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada 
M5G 1X5 Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 
M5G 1X5 reginensi@lunenfeld.ca mcneill@lunenfeld.ca.

Despite the high occurrence of congenital abnormalities of the lower urinary
tract in humans, the molecular, cellular and morphological aspects of their
development are still poorly understood. Here, we use a conditional knockout
approach to inactivate within the nephric duct (ND) lineage the two effectors of 
the Hippo pathway, Yap and Taz. Deletion of Yap leads to hydronephrotic kidneys
with blind-ending megaureters at birth. In Yap mutants, the ND successfully
migrates towards, and contacts, the cloaca. However, close analysis reveals that 
the tip of the Yap(-/-) ND forms an aberrant connection with the cloaca and does 
not properly insert into the cloaca, leading to later detachment of the ND from
the cloaca. Taz deletion from the ND does not cause any defect, but analysis of
Yap(-/-);Taz(-/-) NDs indicates that both genes play partially redundant roles in
ureterovesical junction formation. Aspects of the Yap(-/-) phenotype resemble
hypersensitivity to RET signaling, including excess budding of the ND, increased 
phospho-ERK and increased expression of Crlf1, Sprouty1, Etv4 and Etv5.
Importantly, the Yap(ND) (-/-) ND phenotype can be largely rescued by reducing
Ret gene dosage. Taken together, these results suggest that disrupting Yap/Taz
activities enhances Ret pathway activity and contributes to pathogenesis of lower
urinary tract defects in human infants.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4529030 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26243870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Oncol. 2015 Nov;9(9):1852-67. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2015.07.001. Epub 2015
Jul 15.

PEA3 transcription factors are downstream effectors of Met signaling involved in 
migration and invasiveness of Met-addicted tumor cells.

Kherrouche Z(1), Monte D(2), Werkmeister E(3), Stoven L(1), De Launoit Y(1),
Cortot AB(4), Tulasne D(5), Chotteau-Lelievre A(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, SIRIC ONCOLille, Lille 59021, France. (2)CNRS USR 3078,
Institut de Recherche Interdisciplinaire, Université de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq 
59658, France. (3)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur 
de Lille, Université de Lille, SIRIC ONCOLille, Lille 59021, France; BioImaging
Center Lille Nord de France, Lille 59021, France. (4)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de
Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille, SIRIC
ONCOLille, Lille 59021, France; Thoracic Oncology Department, Lille University
Hospital, Université de Lille, France. (5)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de 
Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille, SIRIC ONCOLille, Lille
59021, France. Electronic address: david.tulasne@ibl.cnrs.fr.

Various solid tumors including lung or gastric carcinomas display aberrant
activation of the Met receptor which correlates with aggressive phenotypes and
poor prognosis. Although downstream signaling of Met is well described, its
integration at the transcriptional level is poorly understood. We demonstrate
here that in cancer cells harboring met gene amplification, inhibition of Met
activity with tyrosine kinase inhibitors or specific siRNA drastically decreased 
expression of ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5, three transcription factors constituting the
PEA3 subgroup of the ETS family, while expression of the other members of the
family were less or not affected. Similar link between Met activity and PEA3
factors expression was found in lung cancer cells displaying resistance to EGFR
targeted therapy involving met gene amplification. Using silencing experiments,
we demonstrate that the PEA3 factors are required for efficient migration and
invasion mediated by Met, while other biological responses such as proliferation 
or unanchored growth remain unaffected. PEA3 overexpression or silencing revealed
that they participated in the regulation of the MMP2 target gene involved in
extracellular matrix remodeling. Our results demonstrated that PEA3-subgroup
transcription factors are key players of the Met signaling integration involved
in regulation of migration and invasiveness.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26238631  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22460-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.675595. Epub
2015 Jul 29.

ETS-related transcription factors ETV4 and ETV5 are involved in proliferation and
induction of differentiation-associated genes in embryonic stem (ES) cells.

Akagi T(1), Kuure S(2), Uranishi K(3), Koide H(3), Costantini F(4), Yokota T(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan,
tadayuki@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)the Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Helsinki, 00790 Helsinki, Finland, and. (3)From the Department of Stem Cell
Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa University, 13-1
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan. (4)the Department of Genetics
and Development, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York 10032.
(5)From the Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan,
tyokota@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

The pluripotency and self-renewal capacity of embryonic stem (ES) cells is
regulated by several transcription factors. Here, we show that the ETS-related
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 (Etv4/5) are specifically expressed in
undifferentiated ES cells, and suppression of Oct3/4 results in down-regulation
of Etv4/5. Simultaneous deletion of Etv4 and Etv5 (Etv4/5 double knock-out (dKO))
in ES cells resulted in a flat, epithelial cell-like appearance, whereas the
morphology changed into compact colonies in a 2i medium (containing two
inhibitors for GSK3 and MEK/ERK). Expression levels of self-renewal marker genes,
including Oct3/4 and Nanog, were similar between wild-type and dKO ES cells,
whereas proliferation of Etv4/5 dKO ES cells was decreased with overexpression of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (p16/p19, p15, and p57). A differentiation
assay revealed that the embryoid bodies derived from Etv4/5 dKO ES cells were
smaller than the control, and expression of ectoderm marker genes, including
Fgf5, Sox1, and Pax3, was not induced in dKO-derived embryoid bodies. Microarray 
analysis demonstrated that stem cell-related genes, including Tcf15, Gbx2, Lrh1, 
Zic3, and Baf60c, were significantly repressed in Etv4/5 dKO ES cells. The
artificial expression of Etv4 and/or Etv5 in Etv4/5 dKO ES cells induced
re-expression of Tcf15 and Gbx2. These results indicate that Etv4 and Etv5,
potentially through regulation of Gbx2 and Tcf15, are involved in the ES cell
proliferation and induction of differentiation-associated genes in ES cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566222 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26224636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jun;9(6):2886-2894. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

Relative mRNA expression of prostate-derived E-twenty-six factor and E-twenty-six
variant 4 transcription factors, and of uridine phosphorylase-1 and thymidine
phosphorylase enzymes, in benign and malignant prostatic tissue.

Cavazzola LR(1), Carvalhal GF(2), Deves C(1), Renck D(1), Almeida R(2), Santos
DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Molecular and Functional Biology, Pontifical Catholic
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul 90619-900,
Brazil. (2)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, Pontifical Catholic
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul 90619-900,
Brazil.

Prostate cancer is the most frequent urological tumor, and the second most common
cancer diagnosed in men. Incidence and mortality are variable and appear to
depend on behavioral factors and genetic predisposition. The prostate-derived
E-twenty-six factor (PDEF) and E-twenty-six variant 4 (ETV4) transcription
factors, and the thymidine phosphorylase (TP) and uridine phosphorylase-1 (UP-1) 
enzymes, are reported to be components of the pathways leading to tumorigenesis
and/or metastasis in a number of tumors. The present study aimed to analyze the
mRNA expression levels of these proteins in prostatic cancerous and benign
tissue, and their association with clinical and pathological variables. Using
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, the mRNA expression
levels of PDEF, ETV4, TP and UP-1 were studied in 52 tissue samples (31 of benign
prostatic hyperplasia and 21 of prostate adenocarcinomas) obtained from patients 
treated by transurethral resection of the prostate or by radical prostatectomy.
Relative expression was assessed using the <U+2206>-CT method. Data was analyzed using
Spearman's tests for correlation. P<0.05 was considered to indicate a
statistically significant difference. The results revealed that PDEF, ETV4, UP-1 
and TP were expressed in 85.7, 90.5, 95.2 and 100% of the prostate cancer
samples, and in 90.3, 96.8, 90.3 and 96.8% of the benign samples, respectively.
PDEF and ETV4 exhibited a significantly higher relative expression level in the
tumor samples compared with their benign counterparts. The relative expression of
TP and UP-1 did not differ significantly between benign and cancerous prostate
tissues. The relative expression of TP was moderately and significantly
correlated with the expression of ETV4 in the benign tissues. The relative
expression of UP-1 was significantly lower in T3 compared with T1 and T2 cancers.
These findings indicate that PDEF, ETV4, TP and UP-1 are typically expressed in
benign and malignant prostatic tissues. Further studies are necessary to define
the role of these proteins as therapeutic targets in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4473672
PMID: 26137165  [PubMed]


14. Ann Neurol. 2015 Sep;78(3):355-74. doi: 10.1002/ana.24443. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

CIC inactivating mutations identify aggressive subset of 1p19q codeleted gliomas.

Gleize V(1), Alentorn A(1,)(2), Connen de Kérillis L(1), Labussière M(1),
Nadaradjane AA(1), Mundwiller E(3), Ottolenghi C(4), Mangesius S(1), Rahimian
A(5), Ducray F(6); POLA network, Mokhtari K(1,)(5,)(7), Villa C(7), Sanson
M(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Université, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Inserm, CNRS, UM 75, U 1127, UMR
7225, ICM, Paris, France. (2)AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service
de Neurologie 2, Paris, France. (3)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, 
Plateforme de Génotypage et Séquençage, Paris, France. (4)Biochimie Métabolique, 
Université Paris Descartes et Inserm U1124, Paris, France. (5)AP-HP,
Onconeurothèque, Paris, France. (6)Hôpital Neurologique, Service de Neurologie B,
Lyon, France. (7)AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Laboratoire de
Neuropathologie R Escourolle, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: CIC gene is frequently mutated in oligodendroglial tumors with 1p19q
codeletion. However, clinical and biological impact remain poorly understood.
METHODS: We sequenced the CIC gene on 127 oligodendroglial tumors (109 with the
1p19q codeletion) and analyzed patients' outcome. We compared magnetic resonance 
imaging, transcriptomic profile, and CIC protein expression of CIC wild-type (WT)
and mutant gliomas. We compared the level of expression of CIC target genes on
Hs683-IDH1(R132H) cells transfected with lentivirus encoding mutant and WT CIC.
RESULTS: We found 63 mutations affecting 60 of 127 patients, virtually all 1p19q 
codeleted and IDH mutated (59 of 60). In the 1p19q codeleted gliomas, CIC
mutations were associated with a poorer outcome by uni- (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001) and
multivariate analysis (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.016). CIC mutation prognostic impact was validated
on the TCGA cohort. CIC mutant grade II codeleted gliomas spontaneously grew
faster than WTs. Transcriptomic analysis revealed an enrichment of proliferative 
pathways and oligodendrocyte precursor cell gene expression profile in CIC mutant
gliomas, with upregulation of normally CIC repressed genes ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and 
CCND1. Various missense mutations resulted in CIC protein expression loss.
Moreover, a truncating CIC mutation resulted in a defect of nuclear targeting of 
CIC protein to the nucleus in a human glioma cell line expressing IDH1(R132H) and
overexpression of CCND1 and other new target genes of CIC, such as DUSP4 and
SPRED1.
INTERPRETATION: CIC mutations result in protein inactivation with upregulation of
CIC target genes, activation of proliferative pathways, inhibition of
differentiation, and poorer outcome in patients with a 1p19q codeleted glioma.

© 2015 American Neurological Association.

PMID: 26017892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 9;112(23):E3050-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1508057112. Epub 2015 May 26.

Systematic transcriptome analysis reveals tumor-specific isoforms for ovarian
cancer diagnosis and therapy.

Barrett CL(1), DeBoever C(2), Jepsen K(3), Saenz CC(4), Carson DA(5), Frazer
KA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Moores Cancer Center, Department of Pediatrics and Rady Children's Hospital.
(2)Moores Cancer Center, Bioinformatics and Systems Biology. (3)Institute for
Genomic Medicine. (4)Department of Medicine. (5)Moores Cancer Center, Department 
of Medicine, Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 dcarson@ucsd.edu. (6)Moores Cancer
Center, Department of Pediatrics and Rady Children's Hospital, Institute for
Genomic Medicine.

Tumor-specific molecules are needed across diverse areas of oncology for use in
early detection, diagnosis, prognosis and therapy. Large and growing public
databases of transcriptome sequencing data (RNA-seq) derived from tumors and
normal tissues hold the potential of yielding tumor-specific molecules, but
because the data are new they have not been fully explored for this purpose. We
have developed custom bioinformatic algorithms and used them with 296 high-grade 
serous ovarian (HGS-OvCa) tumor and 1,839 normal RNA-seq datasets to identify
mRNA isoforms with tumor-specific expression. We rank prioritized isoforms by
likelihood of being expressed in HGS-OvCa tumors and not in normal tissues and
analyzed 671 top-ranked isoforms by high-throughput RT-qPCR. Six of these
isoforms were expressed in a majority of the 12 tumors examined but not in 18
normal tissues. An additional 11 were expressed in most tumors and only one
normal tissue, which in most cases was fallopian or colon. Of the 671 isoforms,
the topmost 5% (n = 33) ranked based on having tumor-specific or highly
restricted normal tissue expression by RT-qPCR analysis are enriched for
oncogenic, stem cell/cancer stem cell, and early development loci--including
ETV4, FOXM1, LSR, CD9, RAB11FIP4, and FGFRL1. Many of the 33 isoforms are
predicted to encode proteins with unique amino acid sequences, which would allow 
them to be specifically targeted for one or more therapeutic
strategies--including monoclonal antibodies and T-cell-based vaccines. The
systematic process described herein is readily and rapidly applicable to the more
than 30 additional tumor types for which sufficient amounts of RNA-seq already
exist.

PMCID: PMC4466751
PMID: 26015570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 29;290(22):13692-709. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.646737. Epub
2015 Apr 12.

Structures of the Ets Protein DNA-binding Domains of Transcription Factors Etv1, 
Etv4, Etv5, and Fev: DETERMINANTS OF DNA BINDING AND REDOX REGULATION BY
DISULFIDE BOND FORMATION.

Cooper CD(1), Newman JA(1), Aitkenhead H(1), Allerston CK(1), Gileadi O(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus
Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom. (2)From the
Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research
Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom
opher.gileadi@sgc.ox.ac.uk.

Ets transcription factors, which share the conserved Ets DNA-binding domain,
number nearly 30 members in humans and are particularly involved in developmental
processes. Their deregulation following changes in expression, transcriptional
activity, or by chromosomal translocation plays a critical role in
carcinogenesis. Ets DNA binding, selectivity, and regulation have been
extensively studied; however, questions still arise regarding binding specificity
outside the core GGA recognition sequence and the mode of action of Ets
post-translational modifications. Here, we report the crystal structures of Etv1,
Etv4, Etv5, and Fev, alone and in complex with DNA. We identify previously
unrecognized features of the protein-DNA interface. Interactions with the DNA
backbone account for most of the binding affinity. We describe a highly
coordinated network of water molecules acting in base selection upstream of the
GGAA core and the structural features that may account for discrimination against
methylated cytidine residues. Unexpectedly, all proteins crystallized as
disulfide-linked dimers, exhibiting a novel interface (distant to the DNA
recognition helix). Homodimers of Etv1, Etv4, and Etv5 could be reduced to
monomers, leading to a 40-200-fold increase in DNA binding affinity. Hence, we
present the first indication of a redox-dependent regulatory mechanism that may
control the activity of this subset of oncogenic Ets transcription factors.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4447949
PMID: 25866208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Prostate. 2015 Jul 1;75(10):1051-62. doi: 10.1002/pros.22989. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Molecular profiling of ETS and non-ETS aberrations in prostate cancer patients
from northern India.

Ateeq B(1), Kunju LP(2,)(3,)(4), Carskadon SL(2,)(3), Pandey SK(1), Singh G(5),
Pradeep I(5), Tandon V(6), Singhai A(7), Goel A(8), Amit S(9), Agarwal A(9),
Dinda AK(5), Seth A(10), Tsodikov A(11), Chinnaiyan AM(2,)(3,)(4,)(12),
Palanisamy N(2,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kanpur, India. (2)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan. (4)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (5)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. (6)Digdarshika Pathology Laboratory, Lucknow,
India. (7)Department of Pathology, King George's Medical University, Lucknow,
India. (8)Department of Urology, King George's Medical University, Lucknow,
India. (9)Department of Pathology, GSVM Medical College, Kanpur, India.
(10)Department of Urology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India. (11)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. (12)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (13)Department of Urology, Henry Ford Health System,
Detroit, Michigan.

BACKGROUND: Molecular stratification of prostate cancer (PCa) based on genetic
aberrations including ETS or RAF gene-rearrangements, PTEN deletion, and SPINK1
over-expression show clear prognostic and diagnostic utility. Gene rearrangements
involving ETS transcription factors are frequent pathogenetic somatic events
observed in PCa. Incidence of ETS rearrangements in Caucasian PCa patients has
been reported, however, occurrence in Indian population is largely unknown. The
aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of the ETS and RAF kinase gene 
rearrangements, SPINK1 over-expression, and PTEN deletion in this cohort.
METHODS: In this multi-center study, formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) PCa 
specimens (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>121) were procured from four major medical institutions in India. 
The tissues were sectioned and molecular profiling was done using
immunohistochemistry (IHC), RNA in situ hybridization (RNA-ISH) and/or
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
RESULTS: ERG over-expression was detected in 48.9% (46/94) PCa specimens by IHC, 
which was confirmed in a subset of cases by FISH. Among other ETS family members,
while ETV1 transcript was detected in one case by RNA-ISH, no alteration in ETV4 
was observed. SPINK1 over-expression was observed in 12.5% (12/96) and PTEN
deletion in 21.52% (17/79) of the total PCa cases. Interestingly, PTEN deletion
was found in 30% of the ERG-positive cases (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.017) but in only one case with 
SPINK1 over-expression (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.67). BRAF and RAF1 gene rearrangements were
detected in ~1% and ~4.5% of the PCa cases, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report on comprehensive molecular profiling of the
major spectrum of the causal aberrations in Indian men with PCa. Our findings
suggest that ETS gene rearrangement and SPINK1 over-expression patterns in North 
Indian population largely resembled those observed in Caucasian population but
differed from Japanese and Chinese PCa patients. The molecular profiling data
presented in this study could help in clinical decision-making for the pursuit of
surgery, diagnosis, and in selection of therapeutic intervention.

© 2015 The Authors. The Prostate, published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25809148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Dev Biol. 2015 Apr 1;400(1):139-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.01.023. Epub 2015
Feb 9.

Region-specific regulation of cell proliferation by FGF receptor signaling during
the Wolffian duct development.

Okazawa M(1), Murashima A(2), Harada M(3), Nakagata N(4), Noguchi M(5), Morimoto 
M(5), Kimura T(6), Ornitz DM(7), Yamada G(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Osaka, Japan. (2)Department of Developmental Genetics,
Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera,
Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. (3)Department of Clinical Anatomy, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo, Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku 113-8519, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Division of Reproductive
Engineering, Center for Animal Resources and Development, Kumamoto University,
2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (5)Laboratory for Lung Development, RIKEN 
Center for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuou-ku, Kobe
650-0047, Hyogo, Japan. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Osaka,
Japan. (7)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (8)Department of Developmental Genetics,
Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera,
Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. Electronic address: transg8@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

The Wolffian duct (WD) is a primordium of the male reproductive tract and kidney 
collecting duct system. Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs), members of
the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family, are essential for kidney development. 
Although the functions of FGFR signaling in kidney morphogenesis have been
analyzed, their function in WD development has not been comprehensively
investigated. Here, we demonstrate that Fgfr2 is the major Fgfr gene expressed
throughout the WD epithelia and that it is essential for the maintenance of the
WD, specifically in the caudal part of the WD. Hoxb7-Cre mediated inactivation of
Fgfr2 in the mouse WD epithelia resulted in the regression of the caudal part of 
the WD and abnormal male reproductive tract development. Cell proliferation and
expression of the downstream target genes of RTK signaling (Etv4 and Etv5) were
decreased in the caudal part of the WD epithelia in the mutant embryos. Cranial
(rostral) WD formation and ureteric budding were not affected. Ret, Etv4, and
Etv5 expression were sustained in the ureteric bud of the mutant embryos. Taken
together, these data suggest region-specific requirements for FGFR2 signaling in 
the developing caudal WD epithelia.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4382079
PMID: 25678108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cancer Discov. 2015 May;5(5):550-63. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-1050. Epub 2015
Feb 4.

Suppression of CHK1 by ETS Family Members Promotes DNA Damage Response Bypass and
Tumorigenesis.

Lunardi A(1), Varmeh S(1), Chen M(1), Taulli R(1), Guarnerio J(1), Ala U(1),
Seitzer N(1), Ishikawa T(1), Carver BS(2), Hobbs RM(1), Quarantotti V(1), Ng
C(1), Berger AH(1), Nardella C(1), Poliseno L(1), Montironi R(3), Castillo-Martin
M(4), Cordon-Cardo C(4), Signoretti S(5), Pandolfi PP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Department of 
Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan
Kettering Institute, Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (3)Institute of Pathological Anatomy
and Histopathology, Polytechnic University of the Marche Region (Ancona), United 
Hospitals, Ancona, Italy. (4)Department of Pathology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York. (5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (6)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center,
Department of Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. ppandolf@bidmc.harvard.edu.

The ETS family of transcription factors has been repeatedly implicated in
tumorigenesis. In prostate cancer, ETS family members, such as ERG, ETV1, ETV4,
and ETV5, are frequently overexpressed due to chromosomal translocations, but the
molecular mechanisms by which they promote prostate tumorigenesis remain largely 
undefined. Here, we show that ETS family members, such as ERG and ETV1, directly 
repress the expression of the checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1), a key DNA damage
response cell-cycle regulator essential for the maintenance of genome integrity. 
Critically, we find that ERG expression correlates with CHK1 downregulation in
human patients and demonstrate that Chk1 heterozygosity promotes the progression 
of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia into prostatic invasive
carcinoma in Pten(+) (/-) mice. Importantly, CHK1 downregulation sensitizes
prostate tumor cells to etoposide but not to docetaxel treatment. Thus, we
identify CHK1 as a key functional target of the ETS proto-oncogenic family with
important therapeutic implications.SIGNIFICANCE: Genetic translocation and
aberrant expression of ETS family members is a common event in different types of
human tumors. Here, we show that through the transcriptional repression of CHK1, 
ETS factors may favor DNA damage accumulation and consequent genetic instability 
in proliferating cells. Importantly, our findings provide a rationale for testing
DNA replication inhibitor agents in ETS-positive TP53-proficient tumors.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25653093  [PubMed - in process]


20. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 10;6(7):5217-36.

Specific and redundant activities of ETV1 and ETV4 in prostate cancer
aggressiveness revealed by co-overexpression cellular contexts.

Mesquita D(1), Barros-Silva JD(1), Santos J(1), Skotheim RI(2,)(3), Lothe
RA(2,)(3), Paulo P(1,)(2,)(3), Teixeira MR(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cancer Genetics Group - CI-IPOP, Portuguese
Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal. (2)Department of Cancer Prevention,
Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Nydalen, Oslo, Norway. (3)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (4)Department of Pathology and
Molecular Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS),
University of Porto, Portugal.

Genomic rearrangements involving ETS transcription factors are found in 50-70% of
prostate carcinomas. While the large majority of the rearrangements involve ERG, 
around 10% involve members of the PEA3 subfamily (ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5). Using a
panel of prostate cancer cell lines we found co-overexpression of ETV1 and ETV4
in two cell line models of advanced prostate cancer (MDA-PCa-2b and PC3) and
questioned whether these PEA3 family members would cooperate in the acquisition
of oncogenic properties or show functional redundancy. Using shRNAs we found that
ETV1 and ETV4 have partially overlapping functions, with ETV1 being more relevant
for cell invasion and ETV4 for anchorage-independent growth. In vitro expression 
signatures revealed the regulation of both specific and shared candidate targets 
that may resemble cellular mechanisms in vivo by interaction with the same
intermediate partners. By combining the phenotypic impact data and the gene
expression profiles of in vitro models with clinico-pathological features and
gene expression profiles of ETS-subtyped tumors, we identified a set of eight
genes associated with advanced stage and a set of three genes associated with
higher Gleason score, supporting an oncogenic role of ETV1 and ETV4
overexpression and revealing gene sets that may be useful as prognostic markers.

PMCID: PMC4467144
PMID: 25595908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3565-72. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2993-7. Epub 2014
Dec 28.

Overexpression of ETV4 is associated with poor prognosis in prostate cancer:
involvement of uPA/uPAR and MMPs.

Qi M(1), Liu Z, Shen C, Wang L, Zeng J, Wang C, Li C, Fu W, Sun Y, Han B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shandong University Medical School, Jinan, 250012,
China.

ETS gene fusions involving ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and FLI1 define a distinct
class of prostate cancer (PCa), and this might have a bearing on diagnosis,
prognosis, and rational therapeutic targeting. In the current study, we focused
on the clinicopathological significance of ETV4 in Chinese PCa patients and the
mechanisms whereby ETV4 overexpression mediates tumor invasion in the prostate.
Overall, ETV4 overexpression was identified in 30.4 % (45/148) of PCa cases by
immunohistochemistry. Accordingly, ETV4 was rearranged in only 1.6 % (2/128) of
PCa patients. Clinically, ETV4 overexpression was significantly correlated with
Gleason score (P = 0.045) and pathological tumor stage (P = 0.041). Multivariate 
Cox regression analysis indicated that ETV4 is an unfavorable independent
prognostic factor (P = 0.040). Functional studies further showed that small
interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of ETV4 significantly decreases proliferation
and invasion of PC-3 cell and partially reverses epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in vitro. Notably, ETV4 knockdown significantly downregulated
expression of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor (uPAR) at
messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that ETV4 regulates uPA expression through direct binding to its
promoter region. Additionally, ETV4 knockdown was also observed to significantly 
inhibit expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9. In conclusion, 
for the first time, our study suggested that ETV4 is an independent poor
prognostic factor in Chinese PCa patients. Silencing of ETV4 suppresses invasion 
of PCa cells by inhibiting the expression of uPA/uPAR as well as MMPs. Further
studies will be needed to determine whether ETV4 could be regarded as a potential
target for the management and prevention of PCa.

PMID: 25544710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Dec 14;20(46):17376-87. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i46.17376.

Pea3 expression promotes the invasive and metastatic potential of colorectal
carcinoma.

Mesci A(1), Taeb S(1), Huang X(1), Jairath R(1), Sivaloganathan D(1), Liu SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aruz Mesci, Stanley K Liu, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto
M5S 1A8, Canada.

AIM: To investigate the function of Pea3 in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) invasion
and metastatic potential.
METHODS: The expression of Pea3 during clinical progression of human CRC was
investigated using Oncomine Research Edition. To assay Pea3 expression in
established CRC cell lines, we performed western blotting of cell lysates. We
employed shRNA-mediated knockdown of Pea3 in HCT116 (HCT) and LS174T CRC cells
which was confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and western blotting.
Transwell invasion assays, MTS proliferation assays, anoikis assays, and
fluorometric matrix metalloprotease (MMP) assays were performed to determine the 
effects of Pea3 knockdown on invasion, proliferation, anoikis and MMP activity in
CRC cells in vitro. Alterations in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
matrix metalloprotease (MMP) mRNA levels were determined by qPCR. CRC cells were 
injected into the flanks of nude mice to generate xenografts and tumor growth
monitored with serial calliper measurements. To assay metastatic potential, CRC
cells were injected into the spleen of nude mice, and histological analysis
performed on the livers 21 d later.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that reduction of Pea3 expression in CRC cells
significantly impaired their invasive capacity (HCT.shPea3, 0.28 ± 0.04 fold, P <
0.01; LS.shPea3, 0.15 ± 0.04 fold; SW.shPea3, 0.23 ± 0.03, P < 0.01), reduced
anoikis resistance (HCT.shPea3 75.4% ± 1.9% viable cells vs HCT.shCtrl 88.6% ±
0.6% viable cells, P < 0.01; LS.shPea3 71.7% ± 0.5% viable cells vs LS.Ctrl 89.6%
± 0.3% viable cells, P < 0.005, but had no effect on proliferation (HCT.shCtrl
AUC 5098 ± 123 vs HCT.shPea3 5689 ± 151, P < 0.05; LS.shCtrl AUC 5600 ± 324.1 vs 
LS.shPea3 6423 ± 400, P < 0.05). In vivo, HCT.shPea3 and HCT.shCtrl tumour
xenografts grew at a similar rate (HCT.shPea3 2.64 ± 0.82 fold vs HCT.shCtrl 2.88
± 0.80 fold, P > 0.05). In keeping with a pro-metastatic function for Pea3 in
CRC, several EMT markers and MMPs were downregulated in shPea3-expressing cells, 
suggesting that Pea3 may exert its effects through these processes. A reduction
in overall MMP activity was observed in HCT.shPea3 cells compared to their
control counterparts (HCT.shPea3 0.61 ± 0.04 fold, P < 0.005). This translated in
vivo to the complete absence of metastases in the livers of mice that were
grafted with CRC cells lacking Pea3. Conversely, CRC cells expressing Pea3 formed
liver metastases in all mice.
CONCLUSION: Our study implicates Pea3 as a mediator of metastases, and provides a
biological rationale for the adverse prognosis associated with elevated Pea3
expression in human CRC.

PMCID: PMC4265596
PMID: 25516649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 20;34(34):4500-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.381. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

A positive role of DBC1 in PEA3-mediated progression of estrogen
receptor-negative breast cancer.

Kim HJ(1,)(2), Kim SH(1,)(3), Yu EJ(1,)(2), Seo WY(1,)(2), Kim JH(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for
Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Deleted in Breast Cancer 1 (DBC1), a negative regulator of deacetylase SIRT1, has
been shown to act as an estrogen receptor a (ER) coactivator that has a key role 
in ER transcription complex assembly and estrogen-dependent breast cancer cell
proliferation. However, little is known about its physiological role and
mechanism of action in ER-negative breast cancer cells. Here we report that DBC1 
functions as a coactivator for the oncogenic ETS transcription factor PEA3 to
promote ER-negative breast cancer progression. DBC1 is required for the
expression of PEA3 target genes and for recruitment of PEA3 and RNA polymerase II
to PEA3 target promoters. We also demonstrated that acetylation of PEA3
stimulates its DNA binding and association with DBC1 by disrupting the
intramolecular interaction of PEA3. The molecular mechanism underlying DBC1
function in PEA3-mediated transcription involves inhibition of SIRT1 interaction 
with PEA3 and of SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of PEA3. Moreover, DBC1 depletion
inhibited the tumorigenic properties of ER-negative breast cancer cells in vitro 
and in vivo. Importantly, increased DBC1 expression correlated with shorter
relapse-free survival of ER-negative breast cancer patients. Our results firmly
established DBC1 as a critical coactivator of PEA3 and as a key player in
PEA3-mediated breast cancer progression.

PMID: 25417701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):7182-90. eCollection 2014.

miR-199a-5p regulates the expression of metastasis-associated genes in B16F10
melanoma cells.

Zhou J(1), Liu R(1), Wang Y(1), Tang J(2), Tang S(3), Chen X(4), Xia K(5), Xiong 
W(6), Xu D(1), Wang S(1), He Q(1), Cao K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Third Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University Changsha, China. (2)Institute of Medical Physics and
Engineering, Department of Engineering Physics, Tsinghua University Beijing,
China. (3)Cleft Lip and Palate Treatment Center, Second Affiliated Hospital,
Shantou University Medical College Shantou, China. (4)Department of Dermatology, 
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University Changsha, China. (5)State Key
Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University Changsha, China.
(6)Cancer Research Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of Ministry of
Health, Central South University Changsha, China. (7)Department of Oncology,
Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University Changsha, China.

MicroRNAs are regulatory factors that play important roles in tumor development, 
invasion and metastasis. Previously, we showed that miR-199a is abnormally
expressed in clinical melanoma specimens and expression was closely associated
with clinical features of metastasis. However, the exact molecular mechanisms by 
which miR-199a-5p influences melanoma invasion and metastasis remains unclear. In
this study, we investigated gene expression changes of metastasis-associated
genes in B16F10 melanoma cells following targeted silencing or overexpression of 
miR-199a-5p, using mouse tumor metastasis PCR arrays. Comparison of gene
expression changes in miR-199a-5p-silenced versus overexpressing cells identified
a set of upregulated genes (> 2-fold) including Cd44, Cdh1, Cxcr4, Etv4, Fxyd5,
Rpsa, Mmp3, Myc, Rb1, Tcf20, Hprt1, Actb1 and downregulated genes (> 2-fold)
including Ctsk, Itga7 and Tnfsf10. Regulation of a subset of these genes (Myc,
Tnfsf10 and Cd44) following miR-199a-5p silencing or overexpression was validated
by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot. In 
conclusion, our study demonstrates that miR-199a-5p regulates melanoma
metastasis-related genes, and may provide a basis for the development of novel,
molecularly targeted drugs.

PMCID: PMC4230055
PMID: 25400815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biol Reprod. 2014 Dec;91(6):143. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.122168. Epub 2014
Nov 5.

Regulation of the pannexin-1 promoter in the rat epididymis.

Dufresne J(1), Cyr DG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut Armand-Frappier,
Université du Québec, Laval, Québec, Canada. (2)Institut National de la Recherche
Scientifique-Institut Armand-Frappier, Université du Québec, Laval, Québec,
Canada daniel.cyr@iaf.inrs.ca.

Pannexins (PANXs) are channel-forming proteins implicated in cellular
communication through the secretion of biomolecules, such as ATP and glutamate.
PANX1 and PANX3 are expressed in the male rat reproductive tract and their levels
are regulated by androgens in the epididymis. There is currently no information
on the regulation of the Panx1 promoter. The objective of the present study was
to characterize the Panx1 promoter in order to understand its regulation in the
epididymis. RNA ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA ends identified three
transcriptional start sites, at positions -443, -429, and -393. In silico
analysis revealed that transcription was initiated downstream of binding sites
for CREB and ETV4 transcription factors, in a CpG island context. To determine
the importance of this region in gene transactivation, a 2-kb fragment of the
promoter was cloned into a vector containing a luciferase reporter gene. Deletion
constructs indicated that the highest transactivation levels were achieved with
shorter constructs (-973 to -346 and -550 to -346). Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay and supershifts indicated that both transcription factors were able
to bind to the promoter region. Chromatin immunoprecipitation using rat caput
epididymis cells confirmed the binding of ETV4 and CREB on the Panx1 promoter.
Site mutation of either the ETV4 or CREB binding site decreased the
transactivation of the reporter gene. Previous studies indicated that
orchidectomy increased epididymal PANX1 levels. Likewise, we observed an increase
in both ETV4 and CREB in orchidectomized rats. These results indicate that ETV4
and cAMP response elements play a role in the transcriptional regulation of Panx1
in the epididymis.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25376229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Onco Targets Ther. 2014 Sep 26;7:1733-42. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S66692. eCollection
2014.

Overexpression of ETV4 protein in triple-negative breast cancer is associated
with a higher risk of distant metastasis.

Yuan ZY(1), Dai T(2), Wang SS(1), Peng RJ(1), Li XH(2), Qin T(1), Song LB(2),
Wang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, People's Republic 
of China ; Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou,
People's Republic of China ; Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China ;
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, People's Republic
of China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, People's
Republic of China ; Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine,
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China ; Department of Breast Oncology, Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) present a higher
probability of distant metastasis and lack of effective targeted therapy. ETS
translocation variant 4 (ETV4) is an ETS (E-26) transcription factor and has been
associated with tumor metastasis. However, the clinical and functional
significance of ETV4 in TNBC still remains unclear.
METHODS: A human tumor metastasis polymerase chain reaction array was used to
profile differential expression of tumor metastasis-related genes in TNBC tissue.
Real-time reverse transcription and Western blot analyses were performed to
verify ETV4 expression in TNBC cells and tissue. Immunohistochemistry was used to
detect expression of ETV4 protein in 135 TNBC tissue samples for association
between ETV4 protein expression and clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: A total total of eight upregulated (CCL7, KISS1, MET, MMP7, NR4A3, ETV4,
TIMP3, and TSHR) and three downregulated (ITGA7, SSTR, and MMP2) genes were
identified between TNBC tissue and the luminal subtype of breast cancer tissue.
ETV4 messenger ribonucleic acid was more than five-fold upregulated in TNBC
tissue compared with the control tissue. ETV4 overexpression was found in 57.0%
of 135 TNBC cases. Overexpression of ETV4 protein was associated with an advanced
stage and a higher proportion of positive lymph node and lymphovascular invasion.
Patients with an ETV4-overexpressed tumor had a significantly higher risk of
developing distant metastasis (P<0.0001) and shorter overall survival and
disease-free survival. Overexpression of ETV4 protein was an independent
predictor of short disease-free survival of TNBC patients (P=0.021).
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of ETV4 protein increases risk of developing distant
metastasis and results in a poor prognosis for TNBC patients. Thus, ETV4 might be
a novel target for developing an alternative therapeutic strategy for prevention 
of TNBC distant metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4196788
PMID: 25328406  [PubMed]


27. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Sep;22(8):e32-40. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000095.

Novel RNA hybridization method for the in situ detection of ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 
gene fusions in prostate cancer.

Kunju LP(1), Carskadon S, Siddiqui J, Tomlins SA, Chinnaiyan AM, Palanisamy N.

Author information: 
(1)*Michigan Center for Translational Pathology Departments of Pathology
§Urology Comprehensive Cancer Center <U+2225>Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

The genetic basis of 50% to 60% of prostate cancer (PCa) is attributable to
rearrangements in E26 transformation-specific (ETS) (ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5), 
BRAF, and RAF1 genes and overexpression of SPINK1. The development and validation
of reliable detection methods are warranted to classify various molecular
subtypes of PCa for diagnostic and prognostic purposes. ETS gene rearrangements
are typically detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction methods. Recently, monoclonal
antibodies against ERG have been developed that detect the truncated ERG protein 
in immunohistochemical assays where staining levels are strongly correlated with 
ERG rearrangement status by fluorescence in situ hybridization. However, specific
antibodies for ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 are unavailable, challenging their clinical
use. We developed a novel RNA in situ hybridization-based assay for the in situ
detection of ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues
from prostate needle biopsies, prostatectomy, and metastatic PCa specimens using 
RNA probes. Further, with combined RNA in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry we identified a rare subset of PCa with dual ETS gene
rearrangements in collisions of independent tumor foci. The high specificity and 
sensitivity of RNA in situ hybridization provides an alternate method enabling
bright-field in situ detection of ETS gene aberrations in routine clinically
available PCa specimens.

PMCID: PMC4159774
PMID: 25203299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Urol Oncol. 2015 Mar;33(3):108.e5-13. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2014.07.015. Epub
2014 Aug 28.

Molecular profiling of ETS gene rearrangements in patients with prostate cancer
registered in REDEEM clinical trial.

Palanisamy N(1), Tsodikov A(2), Yan W(3), Suleman K(3), Rittmaster R(4), Lucia
SM(5), Chinnaiyan AM(6), Fleshner N(7), Kunju LP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI. (2)Department 
of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO. (6)Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; University of Michigan
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI; Department of Urology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. (7)Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI. Electronic
address: lkunju@med.umich.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Androgen-induced E26 transformation-specific (ETS) gene
fusion-positive tumors have been associated with aggressive prostate cancer. The 
aim is to evaluate the ETS gene rearrangement status on initial biopsy of
patients registered in the Reduction by Dutasteride of Clinical Progression
Events in Expectant Management trial study and determine if gene fusion status
was associated with disease progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Initial biopsy material from 146 men registered in
Reduction by Dutasteride of Clinical Progression Events in Expectant Management
trial study treated with dutasteride (73/146, 50%) and as placebo (73/146, 50%)
were reviewed, and ERG and SPINK1 immunohistochemistry was performed. ERG- and
SPINK1-negative cancer samples were evaluated for ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5
rearrangements by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Frequency of ETS gene
aberrations in both groups was correlated with cancer progression including
prostate-specific antigen progression, Gleason progression, and progression-free 
survival by logistic analysis, pairwise differences, and chunk likelihood ratio
tests for the genotype groups.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Of the 146 patients, 99 (67.8%) (placebo, 51;
dutasteride, 48) samples displayed the following Gleason patterns: 3+3 = 6 in 80 
(54.8%) (placebo, 39; dutasteride, 41), 3+4 = 7 in 18 (12.3%) (placebo, 11;
dutasteride, 7), and 4+4 = 8 in 1(0.68%) (placebo, 1). The remaining 47 samples
showed atypical glands in 5 (3.4%) (placebo, 2; dutasteride, 3), HGPIN in 9
(6.1%) (placebo, 5; dutasteride, 4), and benign in 33 (22.6%) (placebo, 15;
dutasteride, 18). Immunohistochemistry findings were positive for ERG and SPINK1 
in 56 (56%) (placebo, 31; dutasteride, 25) and 9 (6.1%) (placebo, 5; dutasteride,
4) cases, respectively. ETV1 and ETV4 rearrangements were noted in 2 cases (1.4%)
(placebo, 1; dutasteride, 1) and 1 (0.7%) (placebo, 1) case, respectively. No
significant differences in the incidence of prostate cancer molecular aberrations
between the groups were observed. There was no evidence that ETS fusion status
was associated with disease progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25175425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(7):3099-103.

TMPRSS2:ETS fusions and clinicopathologic characteristics of prostate cancer
patients from Eastern China.

Dong J(1), Xiao L, Sheng L, Xu J, Sun ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Huadong Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
E-mail : drzhongquan@sina.com.

TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusions in prostate cancer have a dominant prevalence of
approximately 50.0%, but infomration is limited on differences among ethnic and
geographical groups. Some studies focusing on Japanese and Korean patients
reported a lower incidence. Investigations concerning Chinese revealed
controversial results. We evaluated TMPRSS2:ERG, TMPRSS2:ETV1 and TMPRSS2:ETV4
fusions in more than 100 Eastern Chinese prostate cancer patients. Paraffin
blocks of needle biopsy and radical prostatectomy were collected from 91 and 18
patients respectively. All patients' clinicopathologic factors were gathered.
TMPRSS2:ERG, TMPRSS2:ETV1 and TMPRSS2:ETV4 fusions were tested by multi-probe
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay. TMPRSS2:ERG fusions was present 
in 14.3% biopsy specimens and 11.1% radical prostatectomy patients. Neither
TMPRSS2:ETV1 nor TMPRSS2:ETV4 fusion was found in any case. Altogether, 13
(86.7%) TMPRSS2:ERG fusion positive cases possessed deletion pattern and 7
(46.6%) and insertion pattern. Some 5 cases had both deletion and insertion
patterns. While 38.5% (5/13) patients with deletion pattern had distant
metastasis, except for one metastatic case harboring both deletion and insertion,
there were no patients with insertion pattern accompanied with metastasis. There 
were no differences between fusion positive and negative cases in the
distribution of age, PSA, Gleason score and TNM stage. Eastern Chinese prostate
cancer patients have a significantly low incidence of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion. They
also lack TMPRSS2:ETV1 and TMPRSS2:ETV4 fusion. There are more deletion pattern
than insertion pattern in TMPRSS2:ERG positive cases. Fusion positive and
negative patients have no clinicopathologic factor differences.

PMID: 24815454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Jul;53(7):622-33. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22172. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

Distinct transcriptional signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 fusion-positive 
round cell tumors compared to EWSR1-rearranged Ewing sarcomas: further evidence
toward distinct pathologic entities.

Specht K(1), Sung YS, Zhang L, Richter GH, Fletcher CD, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Round cell sarcomas harboring CIC-DUX4 fusions have recently been described as
highly aggressive soft tissue tumors of children and young adults. Due to partial
morphologic and immunohistochemical overlap with Ewing sarcoma (ES),
CIC-DUX4-positive tumors have generally been classified as ES-like and managed
similarly; however, a systematic comparison at the molecular and
immunohistochemical levels between these two groups has not yet been conducted.
Based on an initial observation that CIC-DUX4-positive tumors show nuclear
immunoreactivity for WT1 and ETS transcription factors, FLI1 and ERG, we
performed a detailed immunohistochemical and molecular analysis including these
markers, to further investigate the relationship between CIC-DUX4 tumors and ES. 
The study group included 21 CIC-DUX4-positive sarcomas and 20 EWSR1-rearranged
ES. Immunohistochemically, CIC-DUX4 sarcomas showed membranous CD99 positivity in
18 (86%) cases, but only 5 (24%) with a diffuse pattern, while WT1 and FLI1 were 
strongly positive in all cases. ERG was positive in 18% of cases. All ES
expressed CD99 and FLI1, while ERG positivity was only seen in EWSR1-ERG fusion
positive ES. WT1 was negative in all ES. Expression profiling validated by q-PCR 
revealed a distinct gene signature associated with CIC-DUX4 fusion, with
upregulation of ETS transcription factors (ETV4, ETV1, and ETV5) and WT1, among
top overexpressed genes compared to ES, other sarcomas and normal tissue. In
conclusion, the distinct gene signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 sarcomas
suggest a distinct pathogenesis from ES. The consistent WT1 expression may
provide a useful clue in the diagnosis in the context of round cell sarcomas
negative for EWSR1 rearrangement. © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4108073
PMID: 24723486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Clin Invest. 2014 Apr;124(4):1636-45. doi: 10.1172/JCI71545. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

SOX2 and p63 colocalize at genetic loci in squamous cell carcinomas.

Watanabe H, Ma Q, Peng S, Adelmant G, Swain D, Song W, Fox C, Francis JM,
Pedamallu CS, DeLuca DS, Brooks AN, Wang S, Que J, Rustgi AK, Wong KK, Ligon KL, 
Liu XS, Marto JA, Meyerson M, Bass AJ.

The transcription factor SOX2 is an essential regulator of pluripotent stem cells
and promotes development and maintenance of squamous epithelia. We previously
reported that SOX2 is an oncogene and subject to highly recurrent genomic
amplification in squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). Here, we have further
characterized the function of SOX2 in SCC. Using ChIP-seq analysis, we compared
SOX2-regulated gene profiles in multiple SCC cell lines to ES cell profiles and
determined that SOX2 binds to distinct genomic loci in SCCs. In SCCs, SOX2
preferentially interacts with the transcription factor p63, as opposed to the
transcription factor OCT4, which is the preferred SOX2 binding partner in ES
cells. SOX2 and p63 exhibited overlapping genomic occupancy at a large number of 
loci in SCCs; however, coordinate binding of SOX2 and p63 was absent in ES cells.
We further demonstrated that SOX2 and p63 jointly regulate gene expression,
including the oncogene ETV4, which was essential for SOX2-amplified SCC cell
survival. Together, these findings demonstrate that the action of SOX2 in SCC
differs substantially from its role in pluripotency. The identification of the
SCC-associated interaction between SOX2 and p63 will enable deeper
characterization the downstream targets of this interaction in SCC and normal
squamous epithelial physiology.

PMCID: PMC3973117
PMID: 24590290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mech Dev. 2014 Feb;131:57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2013.10.003. Epub 2013 Nov 9.

The ETS transcription factor Etv1 mediates FGF signaling to initiate proneural
gene expression during Xenopus laevis retinal development.

Willardsen M(1), Hutcheson DA(1), Moore KB(1), Vetter ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. (2)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. Electronic 
address: monica.vetter@neuro.utah.edu.

Fibroblast growth factor signaling plays a significant role in the developing
eye, regulating both patterning and neurogenesis. Members of the
Pea3/Etv4-subfamily of ETS-domain transcription factors (Etv1, Etv4, and Etv5)
are transcriptional activators that are downstream targets of FGF/MAPK signaling,
but whether they are required for eye development is unknown. We show that in the
developing Xenopus laevis retina, etv1 is transiently expressed at the onset of
retinal neurogenesis. We found that etv1 is not required for eye specification,
but is required for the expression of atonal-related proneural bHLH transcription
factors, and is also required for retinal neuron differentiation. Using
transgenic reporters we show that the distal atoh7 enhancer, which is required
for the initiation of atoh7 expression in the Xenopus retina, is responsive to
both FGF signaling and etv1 expression. Thus, we conclude that Etv1 acts
downstream of FGF signaling to regulate the initiation of neurogenesis in the
Xenopus retina.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3959783
PMID: 24219979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 2;33(40):15940-51. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0928-13.2013.

Pea3 transcription factor family members Etv4 and Etv5 mediate retrograde
signaling and axonal growth of DRG sensory neurons in response to NGF.

Fontanet P(1), Irala D, Alsina FC, Paratcha G, Ledda F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Institute of Cellular Biology
and Neuroscience (IBCN), CONICET-UBA, School of Medicine, Buenos Aires 1428,
Argentina, and Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Department of
Neuroscience, Karolinska Institute, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Nerve growth factor (NGF) is a target-derived neurotrophic growth factor that
controls many aspects of sensory and sympathetic neuronal development. The
identification of transcription factors and downstream target genes that mediate 
NGF-dependent neuronal differentiation and target field innervation is currently 
a major challenge. Here, we show that the Pea3 transcription factor family
members Etv4 and Etv5 are expressed by developing TrkA-positive dorsal root
ganglion (DRG) neurons during the period of target innervation. Real-time PCR
assays indicated that Etv4 and Etv5 mRNAs are significantly induced by NGF in
different neuronal cells, suggesting that they could be involved in the
biological responses induced by this neurotrophin. Interestingly, distal axon
application of NGF in compartmentalized cultures of rat DRG sensory neurons was
sufficient to induce a significant increase in Etv4 and Etv5 mRNA expression.
Pharmacological assays also revealed that activation of MEK/ERK (MAPK) pathway is
required for Etv4 and Etv5 gene induction in response to NGF. Downregulation of
Etv4 and Etv5 using small interference RNA knockdown experiments inhibited
NGF-induced neurite outgrowth of rat sensory neurons, while overexpression of
full-length Etv4 or Etv5 potentiated neuronal differentiation in response to this
neurotrophin. Together, these data establish Etv4 and Etv5 as essential molecules
of the transcriptional program linking neurotrophin signaling to sensory neuronal
differentiation, and suggest that they can be involved in NGF-mediated target
innervation.

PMID: 24089499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 10;110(37):14819-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1313997110. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Understanding the temporal sequence of genetic events that lead to prostate
cancer progression and metastasis.

Baker SJ(1), Reddy EP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncological Sciences and Structural Biology, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 10;110(37):E3506-15.

PMCID: PMC3773772
PMID: 23995446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Nov;11(11):1412-24. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0229. Epub
2013 Aug 29.

Loss of a negative feedback loop involving pea3 and cyclin d2 is required for
pea3-induced migration in transformed mammary epithelial cells.

Ladam F(1), Damour I, Dumont P, Kherrouche Z, de Launoit Y, Tulasne D,
Chotteau-Lelievre A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille - Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1
Rue Pr Calmette, BP447, 59021 Lille, France. anne.chotteau@ibl.fr.

The Ets family transcription factor Pea3 (ETV4) is involved in tumorigenesis
especially during the metastatic process. Pea3 is known to induce migration and
invasion in mammary epithelial cell model systems. However, the molecular
pathways regulated by Pea3 are still misunderstood. In the current study, using
in vivo and in vitro assays, Pea3 increased the morphogenetic and tumorigenic
capacity of mammary epithelial cells by modulating their cell morphology,
proliferation, and migration potential. In addition, Pea3 overexpression favored 
an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) triggered by TGF-ß1. During
investigation for molecular events downstream of Pea3, Cyclin D2 (CCND2) was
identified as a new Pea3 target gene involved in the control of cellular
proliferation and migration, a finding that highlights a new negative regulatory 
loop between Pea3 and Cyclin D2. Furthermore, Cyclin D2 expression was lost
during TGF-ß1-induced EMT and Pea3-induced tumorigenesis. Finally, restored
Cyclin D2 expression in Pea3-dependent mammary tumorigenic cells decreased cell
migration in an opposite manner to Pea3. As such, these data demonstrate that
loss of the negative feedback loop between Cyclin D2 and Pea3 contributes to
Pea3-induced tumorigenesis.IMPLICATIONS: This study reveals molecular insight
into how the Ets family transcription factor Pea3 favors EMT and contributes to
tumorigenesis via a negative regulatory loop with Cyclin D2, a new Pea3 target
gene.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23989931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 10;110(37):E3506-15. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1303558110. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

ETV4 promotes metastasis in response to activation of PI3-kinase and Ras
signaling in a mouse model of advanced prostate cancer.

Aytes A(1), Mitrofanova A, Kinkade CW, Lefebvre C, Lei M, Phelan V, LeKaye HC,
Koutcher JA, Cardiff RD, Califano A, Shen MM, Abate-Shen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Herbert
Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Systems Biology, and Department
of Medicine and Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY 10032.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 10;110(37):14819-20.

Combinatorial activation of PI3-kinase and RAS signaling occurs frequently in
advanced prostate cancer and is associated with adverse patient outcome. We now
report that the oncogenic Ets variant 4 (Etv4) promotes prostate cancer
metastasis in response to coactivation of PI3-kinase and Ras signaling pathways
in a genetically engineered mouse model of highly penetrant, metastatic prostate 
cancer. Using an inducible Cre driver to simultaneously inactivate Pten while
activating oncogenic Kras and a fluorescent reporter allele in the prostate
epithelium, we performed lineage tracing in vivo to define the temporal and
spatial occurrence of prostate tumors, disseminated tumor cells, and metastases. 
These analyses revealed that though disseminated tumors cells arise early
following the initial occurrence of prostate tumors, there is a significant
temporal lag in metastasis, which is temporally coincident with the up-regulation
of Etv4 expression in primary tumors. Functional studies showed that knockdown of
Etv4 in a metastatic cell line derived from the mouse model abrogates the
metastatic phenotype but does not affect tumor growth. Notably, expression and
activation of ETV4, but not other oncogenic ETS genes, is correlated with
activation of both PI3-kinase and Ras signaling in human prostate tumors and
metastases. Our findings indicate that ETV4 promotes metastasis in prostate
tumors that have activation of PI3-kinase and Ras signaling, and therefore, ETV4 
represents a potential target of therapeutic intervention for metastatic prostate
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3773788
PMID: 23918374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Surg Oncol. 2013 Sep;22(3):e53-7. doi: 10.1016/j.suronc.2013.06.003. Epub 2013
Jul 3.

Genomic and molecular aberrations in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and 
their roles in personalized target therapy.

Yang J(1), Du X.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Bone and Soft Tissue Tumor, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Hospital and Institute, Tianjin 30060, China. jilongyang@yahoo.com

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are malignant tumors with a
high rate of local recurrence and a significant tendency to metastasize. Its
dismal outcome points to the urgent need to establish better therapeutic
strategies for patients harboring MPNSTs. The investigations of genomic and
molecular aberrations in MPNSTs which detect many chromosomal aberrations,
pathway abnormalities, and specific molecular aberrant events would supply
multiple potential therapy targets and contribute to achievement of personalized 
medicine. The involved genes in the significant gains aberrations include BIRC5, 
CCNE2, DAB2, DDX15, EGFR, DAB2, MSH2, CDK6, HGF, ITGB4, KCNK12, LAMA3, LOXL2,
MET, and PDGFRA. The involved genes in the significant deletion aberrations
include CDH1, GLTSCR2, EGR1, CTSB, GATA3, SULT2A1, GLTSCR2, HMMR/RHAMM, LICAM2,
MMP13, p16/INK4a, RASSF2, NM-23H1, and TP53. These genetic aberrations involve in
several important signaling pathways such as TFF, EGFR, ARF, IGF1R signaling
pathways. The genomic and molecular aberrations of EGFR, IGF1R, SOX9, EYA4,
TOP2A, ETV4, and BIRC5 exhibit great promise as personalized therapeutic targets 
for MPNST patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23830351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Neoplasia. 2013 Jul;15(7):720-6.

Novel 5' fusion partners of ETV1 and ETV4 in prostate cancer.

Barros-Silva JD(1), Paulo P, Bakken AC, Cerveira N, Løvf M, Henrique R, Jerónimo 
C, Lothe RA, Skotheim RI, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

Gene fusions involving the erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS)
transcription factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and FLI1 are a common feature of
prostate carcinomas (PCas). The most common upstream fusion partner described is 
the androgen-regulated prostate-specific gene TMPRSS2, most frequently with ERG, 
but additional 5' fusion partners have been described. We performed 5' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends in 18 PCas with ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 outlier expression
to identify the 5' fusion partners. We also evaluated the exon-level expression
profile of these ETS genes in 14 cases. We identified and confirmed by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction the two novel chimeric genes OR51E2-ETV1 and UBTF-ETV4 in two
PCas. OR51E2 encodes a G-protein-coupled receptor that is overexpressed in PCas, 
whereas UBTF is a ubiquitously expressed gene encoding an HMG-box DNA-binding
protein involved in ribosome biogenesis. We additionally describe two novel gene 
fusion combinations of previously described genes, namely, SLC45A3-ETV4 and
HERVK17-ETV4. Finally, we found one PCa with TMPRSS2-ETV1, one with
C15orf21-ETV1, one with EST14-ETV1, and two with 14q133-q21.1-ETV1. In nine PCas 
(eight ETV1 and one ETV5), exhibiting ETS outlier expression and genomic
rearrangement detected by FISH, no 5' fusion partner was found. Our findings
contribute significantly to characterize the heterogeneous group of ETS gene
fusions and indicate that all genes described as 5' fusion partners with one ETS 
gene can most likely be rearranged with any of the other ETS genes involved in
prostate carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3689235
PMID: 23814484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e63835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063835. Print 2013.

Deletion of the prorenin receptor from the ureteric bud causes renal
hypodysplasia.

Song R(1), Preston G, Ichihara A, Yosypiv IV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hypertension and Renal Center of Excellence, Tulane 
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.

The role of the prorenin receptor (PRR) in the regulation of ureteric bud (UB)
branching morphogenesis is unknown. Here, we investigated whether PRR acts
specifically in the UB to regulate UB branching, kidney development and function.
We demonstrate that embryonic (E) day E13.5 mouse metanephroi, isolated intact
E11.5 UBs and cultured UB cells express PRR mRNA. To study its role in UB
development, we conditionally ablated PRR in the developing UB (PRR (UB-/-))
using Hoxb7 (Cre) mice. On E12.5, PRR (UB-/-) mice had decreased UB branching and
increased UB cell apoptosis. These defects were associated with decreased
expression of Ret, Wnt11, Etv4/Etv5, and reduced phosphorylation of Erk1/2 in the
UB. On E18.5, mutants had marked kidney hypoplasia, widespread apoptosis of
medullary collecting duct cells and decreased expression of Foxi1, AE1 and
H(+)-ATPase a4 mRNA. Ultimately, they developed occasional small cysts in
medullary collecting ducts and had decreased nephron number. To test the
functional consequences of these alterations, we determined the ability of PRR
(UB-/-) mice to acidify and concentrate the urine on postnatal (P) day P30. PRR
(UB-/-) mice were polyuric, had lower urine osmolality and a higher urine pH
following 48 hours of acidic loading with NH4Cl. Taken together, these data show 
that PRR present in the UB epithelia performs essential functions during UB
branching morphogenesis and collecting duct development via control of Ret/Wnt11 
pathway gene expression, UB cell survival, activation of Erk1/2, terminal
differentiation and function of collecting duct cells needed for maintaining
adequate water and acid-base homeostasis. We propose that mutations in PRR could 
possibly cause renal hypodysplasia and renal tubular acidosis in humans.

PMCID: PMC3660567
PMID: 23704941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Transl Res. 2013 Apr 19;5(3):254-68. Print 2013.

Emergence of ETS transcription factors as diagnostic tools and therapeutic
targets in prostate cancer.

Rahim S(1), Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Washington DC.

The discovery of chromosomal translocations in prostate cancer has greatly
enhanced our understanding of prostate cancer biology. Genomic rearrangements
involving the ETS family of transcription factors are estimated to be present in 
50-70% of prostate cancer cases. These rearrangements fuse the ETS factors with
promoters of genes that are androgen regulated. Thus, the expression of ETS
factors, such as ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5, is mediated by androgen. In-vitro and 
in-vivo studies suggest that overexpression of ETS proteins increase cell
proliferation and confer an invasive phenotype to prostate cancer cells.
Epidemiological studies demonstrate that ETS-fusion positive patients exhibit
tumors corresponding to a more advanced disease. The ability of ETS factors to
serve as markers for screening and diagnosing prostate cancer patients is being
investigated, and the results have been largely positive to date. Additionally,
ETS factors present an excellent opportunity as therapeutic targets and several
strategies have been devised to directly target ETS proteins or their binding
partners and downstream effectors.

PMCID: PMC3633969
PMID: 23634237  [PubMed]


41. BJU Int. 2013 May;111(5):836-42. doi: 10.1111/bju.12119.

High-resolution ERG-expression profiling on GeneChip exon 1.0 ST arrays in
primary and castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Smit FP(1), Salagierski M, Jannink S, Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)NovioGendix BV, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether oestrogen-regulated gene (ERG) expression analysis
using GeneChip arrays can predict transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2)-ERG 
fusion. The expression level of the TMPRSS2-ERG gene was studied in various
histological grades of prostate cancer and castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CPRC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: GeneChip Affymetrix exon 1.0 ST arrays were used for
expression profiling of ERG, erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS) variant
gene 1 (ETV1), ETV4 and ETV5 genes in 67 prostate cancer tissue specimens.
Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis and in some cases DNA
sequencing was used to validate the presence and the expression levels of
TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions.
RESULTS: In our series of patients with prostate cancer over expression of the
ERG gene predicted the presence of TMPRSS2-ERG rearrangements in almost all
cases. ETS expression by itself outmatched the diagnostic performance of the ERG 
exons ratioing allowing equal detection of the less frequent ETS gene fusion
transcripts. The gene fusions were expressed at significantly lower levels in
CPRC but occurred more frequently than in primary prostate cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: ERG expression analysis using GeneChip arrays appears to be an
excellent diagnostic tool for identifying gene rearrangements. In coming years,
measuring expression of the ETS gene family by itself might become a clinically
relevant surrogate test to identify patients with fusion-positive prostate
cancer. The variation of gene fusion expression levels, particularly in CPRC,
needs to be taken into account when using quantitative molecular diagnosis of
prostate cancer.

© 2013 BJU International.

PMID: 23578236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Sci Transl Med. 2013 Mar 27;5(178):178ra39. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3005414.

Blockade of nonhormonal fibroblast growth factors by FP-1039 inhibits growth of
multiple types of cancer.

Harding TC(1), Long L, Palencia S, Zhang H, Sadra A, Hestir K, Patil N, Levin A, 
Hsu AW, Charych D, Brennan T, Zanghi J, Halenbeck R, Marshall SA, Qin M,
Doberstein SK, Hollenbaugh D, Kavanaugh WM, Williams LT, Baker KP.

Author information: 
(1)Five Prime Therapeutics Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080-7047, USA.

The fibroblast growth factor (FGF) pathway promotes tumor growth and angiogenesis
in many solid tumors. Although there has long been interest in FGF pathway
inhibitors, development has been complicated: An effective FGF inhibitor must
block the activity of multiple mitogenic FGF ligands but must spare the metabolic
hormone FGFs (FGF-19, FGF-21, and FGF-23) to avoid unacceptable toxicity. To
achieve these design requirements, we engineered a soluble FGF receptor 1 Fc
fusion protein, FP-1039. FP-1039 binds tightly to all of the mitogenic FGF
ligands, inhibits FGF-stimulated cell proliferation in vitro, blocks FGF- and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-induced angiogenesis in vivo, and
inhibits in vivo growth of a broad range of tumor types. FP-1039 antitumor
response is positively correlated with RNA levels of FGF2, FGF18, FGFR1c, FGFR3c,
and ETV4; models with genetic aberrations in the FGF pathway, including
FGFR1-amplified lung cancer and FGFR2-mutated endometrial cancer, are
particularly sensitive to FP-1039-mediated tumor inhibition. FP-1039 does not
appreciably bind the hormonal FGFs, because these ligands require a cell surface 
co-receptor, klotho or ß-klotho, for high-affinity binding and signaling. Serum
calcium and phosphate levels, which are regulated by FGF-23, are not altered by
administration of FP-1039. By selectively blocking nonhormonal FGFs, FP-1039
treatment confers antitumor efficacy without the toxicities associated with other
FGF pathway inhibitors.

PMID: 23536011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Mar;24(6):818-31. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-10-0745. Epub 2013 Jan
23.

Rab25 regulates integrin expression in polarized colonic epithelial cells.

Krishnan M(1), Lapierre LA, Knowles BC, Goldenring JR.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Surgical Sciences and the Epithelial Biology Center, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Rab25 is a tumor suppressor for colon cancer in humans and mice. To identify
elements of intestinal polarity regulated by Rab25, we developed Caco2-BBE cell
lines stably expressing short hairpin RNA for Rab25 and lines rescuing Rab25
knockdown with reexpression of rabbit Rab25. Rab25 knockdown decreased a2-, a5-, 
and ß1-integrin expression. We observed colocalization and direct association of 
Rab25 with a5ß1-integrins. Rab25 knockdown also up-regulated claudin-1
expression, increased transepithelial resistance, and increased invasive
behavior. Rab25-knockdown cells showed disorganized brush border microvilli with 
decreases in villin expression. All of these changes were reversed by
reintroduction of rabbit Rab25. Rab25 knockdown altered the expression of 29 gene
transcripts, including the loss of a5-integrin transcripts. Rab25 loss decreased 
expression of one transcription factor, ETV4, and overexpression of ETV4 in
Rab25-knockdown cells reversed losses of a5ß1-integrin. The results suggest that 
Rab25 controls intestinal cell polarity through the regulation of gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3596252
PMID: 23345591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(10):4935-8.

Fusion between TMPRSS2 and ETS family members (ERG, ETV1, ETV4) in prostate
cancers from northern China.

Wang JJ(1), Liu YX, Wang W, Yan W, Zheng YP, Qiao LD, Liu D, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China.

In this study we evaluated the frequency of fusion between TMPRSS2 and ETS family
members (ERG, ETV1, ETV4) in prostate cancers in patients from northern China in 
order to explore differences in fusion rates among regions in northern and
southern China, other parts of Asia, Europe, and North America. We examined 100
prostate cancer patients, diagnosed by means of prostate biopsy; fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH) was used to detect the expression of TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV1
and ETV4 in cancer tissue. Differences in gene fusion rates among different
ethnics groups were also analyzed. Of the 100 prostate cancer patients, 55 (55%) 
had the fusion gene. Among the patients with the fusion gene, 46 (83.6%) patients
had the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion product, 8 (14.8%) patients had TMPRSS2:ETV1 fusion, 1
(1.6%) patient had TMPRSS2:ETV4.

PMID: 23244085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2012 Dec;16(14):1967-73.

Gene networks implicated in diabetic kidney disease.

Tang W(1), Gao Y, Li Y, Shi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated Jiangyin Hospital of Southeast
University Medical College, Jiangyin, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
drtangwei@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is one of the main causes of renal
end-stage disease. The incidence of DKD has increased substantially over the past
few years. However, our understanding to the molecular mechanism of DKD is still 
essential, and an effective treatment has not been developed.
AIM: We aimed to explore the molecule mechanism in the development of DKD, and
provide a comparison of DKD in different compartments.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we implemented a system biology approach
and analyzed gene expression profiles in 22 microdissected human renal glomerular
and 22 tubule samples from healthy patients and patients with DKD.
RESULTS: The WGCNA (Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis) analysis
identified 10 modules of genes with high topological overlap in tubuli and 12
modules in glomeruli. Several TFs (transcription factors) were found expressed in
both compartments, such as ETS1, ETV4, JUN, LITAF, NFE2, RARG and STAT5A. These
genes may be used as therapeutic targets for DKD. By comparing the modules in the
two compartments, we found that dysregulation of cell proliferation may
significantly contribute to the development of DKD. Furthermore, our results
concluded that DKD may be an immune-mediated degenerative disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies identified multiple genes that may play an important
role in the pathogenesis of DKD and provided a system understanding of the
potential relationships among these genes. We hope our study could aid in
understanding of DKD and could provide the basis for DKD biomarker discovery.

PMID: 23242724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. BMC Syst Biol. 2012;6 Suppl 1:S2. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-S1-S2. Epub 2012 Jul
16.

A computational procedure for identifying master regulator candidates: a case
study on diabetes progression in Goto-Kakizaki rats.

Piao G(1), Saito S, Sun Y, Liu ZP, Wang Y, Han X, Wu J, Zhou H, Chen L, Horimoto 
K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China. wujr@sibs.ac.cn

BACKGROUND: We have recently identified a number of active regulatory networks
involved in diabetes progression in Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats by network screening.
The networks were quite consistent with the previous knowledge of the regulatory 
relationships between transcription factors (TFs) and their regulated genes. To
study the underlying molecular mechanisms directly related to phenotype changes, 
such as diseases, we also previously developed a computational procedure for
identifying transcriptional master regulators (MRs) in conjunction with network
screening and network inference, by effectively perturbing the phenotype states.
RESULTS: In this work, we further improved our previous method for identifying MR
candidates, by listing them in a more reliable manner, and applied the method to 
reveal the MR candidates for diabetes progression in GK rats from the active
networks. Specifically, the active TF-gene pairs for different time periods in GK
rats were first extracted from the networks by network screening. Another set of 
active TF-gene pairs was selected by network inference, by considering the gene
expression signatures for those periods between GK and Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats.
The TF-gene pairs extracted by the two methods were then further selected, from
the viewpoints of the emergence specificity of TF in GK rats and the
regulated-gene coverage of TF in the expression signature. Finally, we narrowed
all of the genes down to only 5 TFs (Etv4, Fus, Nr2f1, Sp2, and Tcfap2b) as the
candidates of MRs, with 54 regulated genes, by merging the selected TF-gene
pairs.
CONCLUSIONS: The present method has successfully identified biologically
plausible MR candidates, including the TFs related to diabetes in previous
reports. Although the experimental verifications of the candidates and the
present procedure are beyond the scope of this study, we narrowed down the
candidates to 5 TFs, which can be used to perform the verification experiments
relatively easily. The numerical results showed that our computational method is 
an efficient way to detect the key molecules responsible for biological
phenomena.

PMCID: PMC3403593
PMID: 23046543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Nov;30(5):1029-33. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1097. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

ERG is specifically associated with ETS-2 and ETV-4, but not with ETS-1, in
prostate cancer.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Ochsenfahrt J, Fuchs K, Kristiansen G, Perner S, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany.

The erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS) family of transcription factors
plays important roles in both physiological and pathological conditions. Even
though many studies have focused on single ETS factors within a single tissue and
within the context of specific promoters, the functional impact of multiple ETS
members present within a specific cell type has not yet been investigated,
especially in prostate cancer (PCa). As the most prominent gene rearrangement in 
PCa leads to the overexpression of the ETS-related gene (ERG), the aim of this
study was to investigate whether ERG is part of a complex integrated
transcriptional network that involves other ETS factors. More specifically, as
the ETS family consists of 27 members, we focused our efforts initially on
investigating whether ERG is associated with the three family members, ETS-1,
ETS-2 and ETS variant gene-4 (ETV-4), in PCa as a proof of principle. Using
western blot analysis, we show that ERG, ETS-1, ETS-2 and ETV-4 are expressed in 
PC3 cell nuclear extracts and in protein lysates prepared from human PCa
prostatectomy specimens. Immunoprecipitations using an anti-ERG antibody were
used with PC3 cell nuclear extracts as well as with a pooled protein lysate
sample prepared from the PCa tissue samples of five patients. Importantly, our
results revealed that ERG is specifically associated with ETS-2 and ETV-4, but
not with ETS-1, in PC3 cell nuclear extracts and PCa tissue protein lysates. Our 
findings strongly support the notion that ERG is part of a complex integrated
transcriptional network that involves other ETS factors, which are likely to
cooperate or influence the activity of ERG in PCa. The functional impact of
multiple ETS factors being associated with ERG in PCa requires further study, as 
it may provide insights into the mechanism by which ERG exerts its influence in
PCa and may subsequently contribute to our understanding of the molecular basis
of PCa.

PMCID: PMC3572757
PMID: 22922762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Nov;6(5):961-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1034. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Transcriptional regulatory networks in human lung adenocarcinoma.

Meng X(1), Lu P, Bai H, Xiao P, Fan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, PR China.

Lung adenocarcinoma (AC) is the most common histological subtype of lung cancer
worldwide and its absolute incidence is increasing markedly. Transcriptional
regulation is one of the most fundamental processes in lung AC development.
However, high-throughput functional analyses of multiple transcription factors
and their target genes in lung AC are rare. Thus, the objective of our study was 
to interpret the mechanisms of human AC through the regulatory network using the 
GSE2514 microarray data. Our results identified the genes peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPARG), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (CEBPB), ets
variant 4 (ETV4), Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI1), T-cell acute
lymphocytic leukemia 1 (TAL1) and nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene 
enhancer in B-cells 1 (NFKB1) as hub nodes in the transcriptome network. Among
these genes, it appears that: PPARG promotes the PPAR signaling pathway via the
upregulation of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) expression, but suppresses the cell
cycle pathway via downregulation of growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible, <U+03B3>
(GADD45G) expression; ETV4 stimulates matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9) expression
to induce the bladder cancer pathway; FLI upregulates transforming growth factor,
ß receptor II (TGFBR2) expression to activate TGF-ß signaling and upregulates
cyclin D3 (CCND3) expression to promote the cell cycle pathway; NFKB1 upregulates
interleukin 1, ß (IL-1B) expression and initiates the prostate cancer pathway;
CEBPB upregulates IL-6 expression and promotes pathways in cancer; and TAL1
promotes kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) expression to promote the TGF-ß
signaling pathway. This transcriptional regulation analysis may provide an
improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic
targets in the treatment of lung AC.

PMID: 22895549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Hum Pathol. 2012 Nov;43(11):1910-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.01.018. Epub 2012
May 7.

Rearrangement of the ETS genes ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 is a clonal event
during prostate cancer progression.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Braun M, Nikolov P, Boehm D, Scheble V, Menon R, Fend F,
Kristiansen G, Perner S, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

ETS gene rearrangements are frequently found in prostate cancer. Several studies 
have assessed the rearrangement status of the most commonly found ETS rearranged 
gene ERG, and the less frequent genes, ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 in primary 
prostate cancer. However, frequency in metastatic disease is not well
investigated. Recently, we have assessed the ERG rearrangement status in both
primary and corresponding lymph node metastases and observed that ERG
rearrangement in primary prostate cancer transfers into lymph node metastases,
suggesting it to be a clonal expansion event during prostate cancer progression. 
As a continuation, we investigated in this study whether this observation is
valid for the less frequent ETS rearranged genes. Using dual-color break-apart
fluorescent in situ hybridization assays, we evaluated the status of all less
frequent ETS gene rearrangements for the first time on tissue microarrays
constructed from a large cohort of 86 patients with prostate cancer and composed 
of primary and corresponding lymph node metastases, as well as in a second cohort
composed of 43 distant metastases. ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 rearrangements 
were found in 8 (10%) of 81, 5 (6%) of 85, 1 (1%) of 85, and 2 (2%) of 86 of
primary prostate cancer, respectively, and in 6 (8%) of 73, 4 (6%) of 72, 1 (1%) 
of 75, and 1 (1%) of 78 of corresponding lymph node metastases, respectively.
ETV-1 and ETV-5 rearrangements were not found in the distant metastases cases,
whereas ETV-4 and ELK-4 rearrangements were found in 1 (4%) of 25 and 1 (4%) of
24, respectively. Our findings suggest that rearrangement of the less frequent
ETS genes is a clonal event during prostate cancer progression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22569213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2012 Dec;31(6):341-8. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2012.659397.
Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Ewing sarcoma with 7;22 translocation: three new cases and clinicopathological
characterization.

Shulman SC(1), Katzenstein H, Bridge J, Bannister LL, Qayed M, Oskouei S, Shehata
BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia
30322, USA.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the second most common primary bone malignancy in children 
and is typically characterized by a translocation involving the EWS gene on
chromosome 22 and a member of the ETS family of genes: FLI1 (90%), ERG1 (5%),
ETV1 (1%), ETV4 (1%), and FEV (1%). We identified three new cases of t(7;22)
(p22;q12) (EWS-ETV1) ES and a literature search revealed an additional six cases.
In comparison to conventional ES with t(11;22) (q24;q12) (EWS-FLI1), the t(7;22) 
ES variant has a higher propensity for females and children in a younger age
group and it occurs more commonly in extraosseous locations.

PMID: 22432475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jan-Feb;205(1-2):55-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.01.007.

A t(17;22)(q21;q12) with partial ETV4 deletion in a soft tissue Ewing sarcoma.

Rougemont AL(1), Bouron-Dal Soglio D, Patey-Mariaud de Serre N, Fetni R, Fan L,
Barrette S, Fournet JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine,
Montréal, Québec, Canada. anne-laure.rougemont@hcuge.ch

Cytogenetic analysis of a lumbar soft tissue Ewing sarcoma (ES) in a 7-month-old 
female child showed a t(17;22)(q21;q12), a rare translocation leading to an
EWSR1-ETV4 chimeric transcript. These findings were confirmed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) techniques. The breakpoints were characterized by direct
sequencing of the chimeric fusion gene. Tumor genotyping using the Affymetrix
Genome-Wide Human single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array 6.0 Genechip
identified deletions of both chromosomal regions involved in the translocation,
resulting in partial deletion of ETV4, but an uninvolved EWSR1 gene. The creation
of a fusion between EWSR1 and an ETS family gene consecutive to a chromosomal
translocation is characteristic of the Ewing family of tumors (EFT). This is the 
first report of a deletion involving the two breakpoints in an EWS-ETS
translocation. To date, only two cases of t(17;22)(q21;q12) in Ewing sarcoma have
been reported, with no associated deletion. Interestingly, both cases had also
occurred in soft tissue tumors, which are less common than their bone-involving
counterparts.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22429598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Aug;1826(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2012.02.002.
Epub 2012 Mar 8.

ETV1, 4 and 5: an oncogenic subfamily of ETS transcription factors.

Oh S(1), Shin S, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

The homologous ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 proteins form the PEA3 subfamily of ETS
transcription factors. In Ewing tumors, chromosomal translocations affecting ETV1
or ETV4 are an underlying cause of carcinogenesis. Likewise, chromosomal
rearrangements of the ETV1, ETV4 or ETV5 gene occur in prostate tumors and are
thought to be one of the major driving forces in the genesis of prostate cancer. 
In addition, these three ETS proteins are implicated in melanomas, breast and
other types of cancer. Complex posttranslational modifications govern the
activity of PEA3 factors, which can promote cell proliferation, motility and
invasion. Here, we review evidence for a role of ETV1, 4 and 5 as oncoproteins
and describe modes of their action. Modulation of their activation or interaction
with cofactors as well as inhibiting crucial target gene products may ultimately 
be exploited to treat various cancers that are dependent on the PEA3 group of ETS
transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3362686
PMID: 22425584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Cell. 2012 Feb 14;22(2):459-67. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.12.010.

Opposing functions of the ETS factor family define Shh spatial expression in limb
buds and underlie polydactyly.

Lettice LA(1), Williamson I, Wiltshire JH, Peluso S, Devenney PS, Hill AE, Essafi
A, Hagman J, Mort R, Grimes G, DeAngelis CL, Hill RE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU,
UK.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression during limb development is crucial for specifying
the identity and number of digits. The spatial pattern of Shh expression is
restricted to a region called the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), and this
expression is controlled from a long distance by the cis-regulator ZRS. Here,
members of two groups of ETS transcription factors are shown to act directly at
the ZRS mediating a differential effect on Shh, defining its spatial expression
pattern. Occupancy at multiple GABPa/ETS1 sites regulates the position of the ZPA
boundary, whereas ETV4/ETV5 binding restricts expression outside the ZPA. The ETS
gene family is therefore attributed with specifying the boundaries of the
classical ZPA. Two point mutations within the ZRS change the profile of ETS
binding and activate Shh expression at an ectopic site in the limb bud. These
molecular changes define a pathogenetic mechanism that leads to preaxial
polydactyly (PPD).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3314984
PMID: 22340503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Apr;23(4):607-17. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2011020165. Epub 2012
Jan 26.

Ureteric morphogenesis requires Fgfr1 and Fgfr2/Frs2a signaling in the
metanephric mesenchyme.

Sims-Lucas S(1), Di Giovanni V, Schaefer C, Cusack B, Eswarakumar VP, Bates CM.

Author information: 
(1)Rangos Research Center, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh,
PA 15201, USA.

Conditional deletion of fibroblast growth factor receptors (Fgfrs) 1 and 2 in the
metanephric mesenchyme (MM) of mice leads to a virtual absence of MM and
unbranched ureteric buds that are occasionally duplex. Deletion of Fgfr2 in the
MM leads to kidneys with cranially displaced ureteric buds along the Wolffian
duct or duplex ureters. Mice with point mutations in Fgfr2's binding site for the
docking protein Frs2a (Fgfr2(LR/LR)), however, have normal kidneys; the roles of 
the Fgfr2/Frs2a signaling axis in MM development and regulating the ureteric bud 
induction site are incompletely understood. Here, we generated mice with both
Fgfr1 deleted in the MM and Fgfr2(LR/LR) point mutations
(Fgfr1(Mes-/-)Fgfrf2(LR/LR)). Unlike mice lacking both Fgfr1 and Fgfr2 in the MM,
these mice had no obvious MM defects but had cranially displaced or duplex
ureteric buds, probably as a result of decreased Bmp4 expression.
Fgfr1(Mes-/-)Fgfr2(LR/LR) mice also had subsequent defects in ureteric
morphogenesis, including dilated, hyperproliferative tips and decreased
branching. Ultimately, they developed progressive renal cystic dysplasia
associated with abnormally oriented cell division. Furthermore, mutants had
increased and ectopic expression of Ret and its downstream targets in ureteric
trunks, and exhibited upregulation of Ret/Etv4/5 signaling effectors, including
Met, Myb, Cxcr4, and Crlf1. These defects were associated with reduced expression
of Bmp4 in mesenchymal cells near mutant ureteric bud tips. Taken together, these
results demonstrate that Fgfr2/Frs2a signaling in the MM promotes Bmp4
expression, which represses Ret levels and signaling in the ureteric bud to
ensure normal ureteric morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3312502
PMID: 22282599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Oncogenesis. 2012 Jul 16;1:e20. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2012.20.

Overexpression of ETV4 is oncogenic in prostate cells through promotion of both
cell proliferation and epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Pellecchia A(1), Pescucci C, De Lorenzo E, Luceri C, Passaro N, Sica M, Notaro R,
De Angioletti M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Gene Transfer Laboratory, Core Research Laboratory,
Istituto Toscano Tumori, AOUC, Florence, Italy.

The discovery of translocations that involve one of the genes of the ETS family
(ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5) has been a major advance in understanding the
molecular basis of prostate cancer (PC). Each one of these translocations results
in deregulated expression of one of the ETS proteins. Here, we focus on the
mechanism whereby overexpression of the ETV4 gene mediates oncogenesis in the
prostate. By siRNA technology, we show that ETV4 inhibition in the PC3 cancer
cell line reduces not only cell mobility and anchorage-independent growth, but
also cell proliferation, cell cycle progression and tumor growth in a xenograft
model. Conversely, ETV4 overexpression in the nonmalignant human prostate cell
line (RWPE) increases anchorage-independent growth, cell mobility and cell
proliferation, which is probably mediated by downregulation of p21, producing
accelerated progression through the cell cycle. ETV4 overexpression is associated
with changes in the pattern of E-cadherin and N-cadherin expression; the cells
also become spindle-shaped, and these changes are characteristic of the so-called
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). In RWPE cells overexpressing ETV4 EMT
results from a marked increase in EMT-specific transcription factors such as
TWIST1, SLUG1, ZEB1 and ZEB2. Thus, whereas ETV4 shares with the other ETS
proteins (ERG, ETV5 and ETV1) a major role in invasiveness and cell migration, it
emerges as unique in that it increases at the same time also the rate of
proliferation of PC cells. Considering the wide spectrum in the clinical course
of patients with PC, it may be highly relevant that ETV4 is capable of inducing
most and perhaps all of the features that make a tumor aggressive.

PMCID: PMC3412649
PMID: 23552736  [PubMed]


56. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Mar;51(3):240-9. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20948. Epub 2011
Nov 12.

FLI1 is a novel ETS transcription factor involved in gene fusions in prostate
cancer.

Paulo P(1), Barros-Silva JD, Ribeiro FR, Ramalho-Carvalho J, Jerónimo C, Henrique
R, Lind GE, Skotheim RI, Lothe RA, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

To characterize the pattern of ETS rearrangements and to uncover novel ETS fusion
genes, we analyzed 200 prostate carcinomas (PCa) with TaqMan low-density arrays
(TLDAs), followed by selective analyses with fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), RT-PCR, and sequencing. Besides confirming the recurrent presence of ERG,
ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 rearrangements, we here report FLI1 as the fifth ETS
transcription factor involved in fusion genes in prostate cancer. Outlier
expression of the FLI1 gene was detected by TLDAs in one PCa that showed relative
overexpression of FLI1 exons 4:5 as compared with FLI1 exons 2:3. A structural
rearrangement was found using FISH probes flanking the FLI1 gene and RT-PCR and
sequencing analyses showed fusion of SLC45A3 exon 1 with FLI1 exon 3.
Interestingly, we found four cases with two different ETS rearrangements in the
index tumor, thus revealing intratumor genetic heterogeneity. Correlation
analysis with clinico-pathological data showed association of ERG rearrangements 
with locally advanced disease (pT3, P = 0.007) and MYC overexpression (P =
0.001), and association of ETV1 rearrangements with PTEN downregulation (P =
0.015). We report that FLI1 is a novel ETS transcription factor involved in gene 
fusions in prostate cancer and that intratumor genetic heterogeneity of ETS
rearrangements can occasionally be found in index primary tumors.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22081504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Mar;40(5):1928-43. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr978. Epub 2011 Nov
10.

Synthetic transactivation screening reveals ETV4 as broad coactivator of
hypoxia-inducible factor signaling.

Wollenick K(1), Hu J, Kristiansen G, Schraml P, Rehrauer H, Berchner-Pfannschmidt
U, Fandrey J, Wenger RH, Stiehl DP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology and Zürich Center for Integrative Human Physiology
(ZIHP), University of Zürich, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland.

The human prolyl-4-hydroxylase domain (PHD) proteins 1-3 are known as cellular
oxygen sensors, acting via the degradation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)
a-subunits. PHD2 and PHD3 genes are inducible by HIFs themselves, suggesting a
negative feedback loop that involves PHD abundance. To identify novel regulators 
of the PHD2 gene, an expression array of 704 transcription factors was screened
by a method that allows distinguishing between HIF-dependent and HIF-independent 
promoter regulation. Among others, the E-twenty six transcription factor ETS
translocation variant 4 (ETV4) was found to contribute to PHD2 gene expression
particularly under hypoxic conditions. Mechanistically, complex formation between
ETV4 and HIF-1/2a was observed by mammalian two-hybrid and fluorescence resonance
energy transfer analysis. HIF-1a domain mapping, CITED2 overexpression and factor
inhibiting HIF depletion experiments provided evidence for cooperation between
HIF-1a and p300/CBP in ETV4 binding. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed ETV4
and HIF-1a corecruitment to the PHD2 promoter. Of 608 hypoxically induced
transcripts found by genome-wide expression profiling, 7.7% required ETV4 for
efficient hypoxic induction, suggesting a broad role of ETV4 in hypoxic gene
regulation. Endogenous ETV4 highly correlated with PHD2, HIF-1/2a and several
established markers of tissue hypoxia in 282 human breast cancer tissue samples, 
corroborating a functional interplay between the ETV4 and HIF pathways.

PMCID: PMC3300025
PMID: 22075993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 15;360(2):310-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.029. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 acts downstream of GDNF/Ret in branching
morphogenesis of the developing mouse kidney.

Willecke R(1), Heuberger J, Grossmann K, Michos O, Schmidt-Ott K, Walentin K,
Costantini F, Birchmeier W.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Robert-Roessle-Strasse 10, 
13125 Berlin, Germany.

The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 acts downstream of various growth factors, hormones
or cytokine receptors. Mutations of the Shp2 gene are associated with several
human diseases. Here we have ablated Shp2 in the developing kidneys of mice,
using the ureteric bud epithelium-specific Hoxb7/Cre. Mutant mice produced a
phenotype that is similar to mutations of the genes of the GDNF/Ret receptor
system, that is: strongly reduced ureteric bud branching and downregulation of
the Ret target genes Etv4 and Etv5. Shp2 mutant embryonic kidneys also displayed 
reduced cell proliferation at the branch tips and branching defects, which could 
not be overcome by GDNF in organ culture. We also examined compound mutants of
Shp2 and Sprouty1, which is an inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in
the kidney. Sprouty1 single mutants produce supernumerary ureteric buds, which
branch excessively. Sprouty1 mutants rescued branching deficits in Ret(-/-) and
GDNF(-/-) kidneys. Sprouty1; Shp2 double mutants showed no rescue of kidney
branching. Our data thus indicate an intricate interplay of Shp2 and Sprouty1 in 
signaling downstream of receptor tyrosine kinases during kidney development.
Apparently, Shp2 mediates not only GDNF/Ret but also signaling by other receptor 
tyrosine kinases in branching morphogenesis of the embryonic kidney.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22015719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Cell. 2011 Oct 18;21(4):746-57. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.08.017.

ATXN1 protein family and CIC regulate extracellular matrix remodeling and lung
alveolarization.

Lee Y(1), Fryer JD, Kang H, Crespo-Barreto J, Bowman AB, Gao Y, Kahle JJ, Hong
JS, Kheradmand F, Orr HT, Finegold MJ, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Although expansion of CAG repeats in ATAXIN1 (ATXN1) causes Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 1, the functions of ATXN1 and ATAXIN1-Like (ATXN1L) remain poorly
understood. To investigate the function of these proteins, we generated and
characterized Atxn1L(-/-) and Atxn1(-/-); Atxn1L(-/-) mice. Atxn1L(-/-) mice have
hydrocephalus, omphalocele, and lung alveolarization defects. These phenotypes
are more penetrant and severe in Atxn1(-/-); Atxn1L(-/-) mice, suggesting that
ATXN1 and ATXN1L are functionally redundant. Upon pursuing the molecular
mechanism, we discovered that several Matrix metalloproteinase (Mmp) genes are
overexpressed and that the transcriptional repressor Capicua (CIC) is
destabilized in Atxn1L(-/-) lungs. Consistent with this, Cic deficiency causes
lung alveolarization defect. Loss of either ATXN1L or CIC derepresses Etv4, an
activator for Mmp genes, thereby mediating MMP9 overexpression. These findings
demonstrate a critical role of ATXN1/ATXN1L-CIC complexes in extracellular matrix
(ECM) remodeling during development and their potential roles in pathogenesis of 
disorders affecting ECM remodeling.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3253850
PMID: 22014525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):359-67. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.07.002. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

Angiotensin II stimulates in vitro branching morphogenesis of the isolated
ureteric bud.

Song R(1), Preston G, Yosypiv IV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Hypertension and
Renal Center of Excellence, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Mutations in the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) genes are associated with
congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). As angiotensin
(Ang) II, the principal effector peptide growth factor of the RAS, stimulates
ureteric bud (UB) branching in whole intact embryonic (E) metanephroi, defects in
UB morphogenesis may be causally linked to CAKUT observed under conditions of
disrupted RAS. In the present study, using the isolated intact UB (iUB) assay, we
tested the hypothesis that Ang II stimulates UB morphogenesis by directly acting 
on the UB, identified Ang II target genes in the iUB by microarray and examined
the effect of Ang II on UB cell migration in vitro. We show that isolated E11.5
mouse iUBs express Ang II AT(1) and AT(2) receptor mRNA. Treatment of E11.5 iUBs 
grown in collagen matrix gels with Ang II (10(-5)M) increases the number of iUB
tips after 48h of culture compared to control (4.8±0.4 vs. 2.4±0.2, p<0.01). A
number of genes required for UB branching as well as novel genes whose role in UB
development is currently unknown are targets of Ang II signaling in the iUB. In
addition, Ang II increases UB cell migration (346±5.1 vs. 275±4.4, p<0.01) in
vitro. In summary, Ang II stimulates UB cell migration and directly induces
morphogenetic response in the iUB. We conclude that Ang II-regulated genes in the
iUB may be important mediators of Ang II-induced UB branching. We hypothesize
that Ang II-dependent cell movements play an important role in UB branching
morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3213329
PMID: 21820050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Neurosci. 2011 Aug 3;31(31):11144-58. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2198-11.2011.

Pool-specific regulation of motor neuron survival by neurotrophic support.

Lamballe F(1), Genestine M, Caruso N, Arce V, Richelme S, Helmbacher F, Maina F.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille-Luminy (IBDML), UMR 6216,
CNRS-Inserm-Université de la Méditerranée, Campus de Luminy-Case 907, 13288
Marseille Cedex 09, France.

The precise control of motor neuron (MN) death and survival following initial
innervation of skeletal muscle targets is a key step in sculpting a functional
motor system, but how this is regulated at the level of individual motor pools
remains unclear. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and its receptor Met play key
developmental roles in both muscle and MNs. We generated mice (termed "Nes-Met") 
in which met is inactivated from midembryonic stages onward in the CNS only.
Adult animals showed motor behavioral defects suggestive of impaired innervation 
of pectoral muscles. Correspondingly, in neonatal spinal cords of Nes-Met
mutants, we observed death of a discrete population of pea3-expressing MNs at
brachial levels. Axonal tracing using pea3 reporter mice revealed a novel target 
muscle of pea3-expressing MNs: the pectoralis minor muscle. In Nes-Met mice, the 
pectoralis minor pool initially innervated its target muscle, but required
HGF/Met for survival, hence for proper maintenance of muscle innervation. In
contrast, HGF/Met was dispensable for the survival of neighboring Met-expressing 
MN pools, despite its earlier functions for their specification and axon growth. 
Our results demonstrate the exquisite degree to which outcomes of signaling by
receptor tyrosine kinases are regulated on a cell-by-cell basis. They also
provide a model for one way in which the multiplicity of neurotrophic factors may
allow for regulation of MN numbers in a pool-specific manner.

PMID: 21813676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;776:335-48. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-243-4_19.

Androgen regulation of ETS gene fusion transcripts in prostate cancer.

Gasi D(1), Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University
Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. d.gasi@erasmusmc.cl

Fusion between androgen-regulated TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor gene ERG
is the most frequent genetic alteration that occurs in 40-70% of prostate
cancers. Not only ERG but also other ETS transcription factor genes are involved 
in gene fusions. ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 have all several fusion partners. One
common feature shared by the majority of these partners is androgen-regulated
expression. Despite its high frequency, the biological and molecular effects of
ETS gene fusion in prostate cancer development and progression are unknown. In
this chapter quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) is used for detection
and further studying the incidence and properties of these fusion transcripts.
The focus is on the expression of TMPRSS2-ERG transcripts in clinical prostate
samples. Androgen regulation of TMPRSS2 is measured in commonly used LNCaP
prostate cancer cells grown with and without the synthetic androgen R1881.
Furthermore, combining Q-PCR with 5' RLM-RACE and sequencing are described for
the identification of novel ETS fusion partners.

PMID: 21796535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Nov;4(11):1852-62. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0186. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

Tamoxifen downregulates ets oncogene family members ETV4 and ETV5 in benign
breast tissue: implications for durable risk reduction.

Euhus D(1), Bu D, Xie XJ, Sarode V, Ashfaq R, Hunt K, Xia W, O'Shaughnessy J,
Grant M, Arun B, Dooley W, Miller A, Flockhart D, Lewis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323
Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390, USA. david.euhus@utsouthwestern.edu

Five years of tamoxifen reduces breast cancer risk by nearly 50% but is
associated with significant side effects and toxicities. A better understanding
of the direct and indirect effects of tamoxifen in benign breast tissue could
elucidate new mechanisms of breast carcinogenesis, suggest novel chemoprevention 
targets, and provide relevant early response biomarkers for phase II prevention
trials. Seventy-three women at increased risk for breast cancer were randomized
to tamoxifen (20 mg daily) or placebo for 3 months. Blood and breast tissue
samples were collected at baseline and posttreatment. Sixty-nine women completed 
all study activities (37 tamoxifen and 32 placebo). The selected biomarkers
focused on estradiol and IGFs in the blood; DNA methylation and cytology in
random periareolar fine-needle aspirates; and tissue morphometry, proliferation, 
apoptosis, and gene expression (microarray and reverse transcriptase PCR) in the 
tissue core samples. Tamoxifen downregulated Ets oncogene transcription factor
family members ETV4 and ETV5 and reduced breast epithelial cell proliferation
independent of CYP2D6 genotypes or effects on estradiol, ESR1, or IGFs. Reduction
in proliferation was correlated with downregulation of ETV4 and DNAJC12.
Tamoxifen reduced the expression of ETV4- and ETV5-regulated genes implicated in 
epithelial-stromal interaction and tissue remodeling. Three months of tamoxifen
did not affect breast tissue composition, cytologic atypia, preneoplasia, or
apoptosis. A plausible mechanism for the chemopreventive effects of tamoxifen is 
restriction of lobular expansion into stroma through downregulation of ETV4 and
ETV5. The human equivalent of murine multipotential progenitor cap cells of
terminal end buds may be the primary target.

PMCID: PMC3208724
PMID: 21778330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Br J Cancer. 2011 Jun 28;105(1):124-30. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.187. Epub 2011 Jun 
14.

PEA3/ETV4-related transcription factors coupled with active ERK signalling are
associated with poor prognosis in gastric adenocarcinoma.

Keld R(1), Guo B, Downey P, Cummins R, Gulmann C, Ang YS, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors often play important roles in tumourigenesis.
Members of the PEA3 subfamily of ETS-domain transcription factors fulfil such a
role and have been associated with tumour metastasis in several different
cancers. Moreover, the activity of the PEA3 subfamily transcription factors is
potentiated by Ras-ERK pathway signalling, which is itself often deregulated in
tumour cells.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical patterns of PEA3 expression and active ERK
signalling were analysed and mRNA expression levels of PEA3, ER81, MMP-1 and
MMP-7 were determined in gastric adenocarcinoma samples.
RESULTS: Here, we have studied the expression of the PEA3 subfamily members
PEA3/ETV4 and ER81/ETV1 in gastric adenocarcinomas. PEA3 is upregulated at the
protein level in gastric adenocarcinomas and both PEA3/ETV4 and ER81/ETV1 are
upregulated at the mRNA level in gastric adenocarcinoma tissues. This increased
expression correlates with the expression of a target gene associated with
metastasis, MMP-1. Enhanced ERK signalling is also more prevalent in late-stage
gastric adenocarcinomas, and the co-association of ERK signalling and PEA3
expression also occurs in late-stage gastric adenocarcinomas. Furthermore, the
co-association of ERK signalling and PEA3 expression correlates with decreased
survival rates.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that members of the PEA3 subfamily of transcription
factors are upregulated in gastric adenocarcinomas and that the simultaneous
upregulation of PEA3 expression and ERK pathway signalling is indicative of
late-stage disease and a poor survival prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3137405
PMID: 21673681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nature. 2011 May 15;474(7351):403-6. doi: 10.1038/nature10005.

COP1 is a tumour suppressor that causes degradation of ETS transcription factors.

Vitari AC(1), Leong KG, Newton K, Yee C, O'Rourke K, Liu J, Phu L, Vij R,
Ferrando R, Couto SS, Mohan S, Pandita A, Hongo JA, Arnott D, Wertz IE, Gao WQ,
French DM, Dixit VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Jul;11(7):466.

The proto-oncogenes ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 encode transcription factors in the E26
transformation-specific (ETS) family, which includes the most frequently
rearranged and overexpressed genes in prostate cancer. Despite being critical
regulators of development, little is known about their post-translational
regulation. Here we identify the ubiquitin ligase COP1 (also known as RFWD2) as a
tumour suppressor that negatively regulates ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5. ETV1, which is
mutated in prostate cancer more often, was degraded after being ubiquitinated by 
COP1. Truncated ETV1 encoded by prostate cancer translocation TMPRSS2:ETV1 lacks 
the critical COP1 binding motifs and was 50-fold more stable than wild-type ETV1.
Almost all patient translocations render ETV1 insensitive to COP1, implying that 
this confers a selective advantage to prostate epithelial cells. Indeed, COP1
deficiency in mouse prostate elevated ETV1 and produced increased cell
proliferation, hyperplasia, and early prostate intraepithelial neoplasia.
Combined loss of COP1 and PTEN enhanced the invasiveness of mouse prostate
adenocarcinomas. Finally, rare human prostate cancer samples showed hemizygous
loss of the COP1 gene, loss of COP1 protein, and elevated ETV1 protein while
lacking a translocation event. These findings identify COP1 as a tumour
suppressor whose downregulation promotes prostatic epithelial cell proliferation 
and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 21572435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. BMC Genomics. 2011 May 11;12:230. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-230.

Detecting copy number status and uncovering subclonal markers in heterogeneous
tumor biopsies.

Parisi F(1), Ariyan S, Narayan D, Bacchiocchi A, Hoyt K, Cheng E, Xu F, Li P,
Halaban R, Kluger Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Yale Cancer Center, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genomic aberrations can be used to determine cancer diagnosis and
prognosis. Clinically relevant novel aberrations can be discovered using
high-throughput assays such as Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) arrays and
next-generation sequencing, which typically provide aggregate signals of many
cells at once. However, heterogeneity of tumor subclones dramatically complicates
the task of detecting aberrations.
RESULTS: The aggregate signal of a population of subclones can be described as a 
linear system of equations. We employed a measure of allelic imbalance and total 
amount of DNA to characterize each locus by the copy number status (gain, loss or
neither) of the strongest subclonal component. We designed simulated data to
compare our measure to existing approaches and we analyzed SNP-arrays from 30
melanoma samples and transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) from one melanoma
sample.We showed that any system describing aggregate subclonal signals is
underdetermined, leading to non-unique solutions for the exact copy number
profile of subclones. For this reason, our illustrative measure was more robust
than existing Hidden Markov Model (HMM) based tools in inferring the aberration
status, as indicated by tests on simulated data. This higher robustness
contributed in identifying numerous aberrations in several loci of melanoma
samples. We validated the heterogeneity and aberration status within single
biopsies by fluorescent in situ hybridization of four affected and
transcriptionally up-regulated genes E2F8, ETV4, EZH2 and FAM84B in 11 melanoma
cell lines. Heterogeneity was further demonstrated in the analysis of allelic
imbalance changes along single exons from melanoma RNA-Seq.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate how subclonal heterogeneity, prevalent in 
tumor samples, is reflected in aggregate signals measured by high-throughput
techniques. Our proposed approach yields high robustness in detecting copy number
alterations using high-throughput technologies and has the potential to identify 
specific subclonal markers from next-generation sequencing data.

PMCID: PMC3114747
PMID: 21569352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 28;6(4):e19370. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019370.

Genetic analysis reveals an unexpected role of BMP7 in initiation of ureteric bud
outgrowth in mouse embryos.

Gonçalves A(1), Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel Medical
Faculty, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Genetic analysis in the mouse revealed that GREMLIN1 (GREM1)-mediated
antagonism of BMP4 is essential for ureteric epithelial branching as the
disruption of ureteric bud outgrowth and renal agenesis in Grem1-deficient
embryos is restored by additional inactivation of one Bmp4 allele. Another BMP
ligand, BMP7, was shown to control the proliferative expansion of nephrogenic
progenitors and its requirement for nephrogenesis can be genetically substituted 
by Bmp4. Therefore, we investigated whether BMP7 in turn also participates in
inhibiting ureteric bud outgrowth during the initiation of metanephric kidney
development.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Genetic inactivation of one Bmp7 allele in
Grem1-deficient mouse embryos does not alleviate the bilateral renal agenesis,
while complete inactivation of Bmp7 restores ureteric bud outgrowth and
branching. In mouse embryos lacking both Grem1 and Bmp7, GDNF/WNT11 feedback
signaling and the expression of the Etv4 target gene, which regulates formation
of the invading ureteric bud tip, are restored. In contrast to the restoration of
ureteric bud outgrowth and branching, nephrogenesis remains aberrant as revealed 
by the premature loss of Six2 expressing nephrogenic progenitor cells. Therefore,
very few nephrons develop in kidneys lacking both Grem1 and Bmp7 and the
resulting dysplastic phenotype is indistinguishable from the one of
Bmp7-deficient mouse embryos.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study reveals an unexpected inhibitory role of BMP7
during the onset of ureteric bud outgrowth. As BMP4, BMP7 and GREM1 are expressed
in distinct mesenchymal and epithelial domains, the localized antagonistic
interactions of GREM1 with BMPs could restrict and guide ureteric bud outgrowth
and branching. The robustness and likely significant redundancy of the underlying
signaling system is evidenced by the fact that global reduction of Bmp4 or
inactivation of Bmp7 are both able to restore ureteric bud outgrowth and
epithelial branching in Grem1-deficient mouse embryos.

PMCID: PMC3084290
PMID: 21552539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Sep;17(9):568-76. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar021. Epub 2011 Apr 
8.

Complex ovarian defects lead to infertility in Etv5-/- female mice.

Eo J(1), Shin H, Kwon S, Song H, Murphy KM, Lim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, RCTC, IBST, Konkuk
University, 1 Hwayang-dong, Kwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

Etv5 is a member of the Etv4 subfamily of Ets transcription factors. In female
mice, Etv5 was previously shown to be expressed in the mouse ovary. In this work,
we show that Etv5-/- female mice are infertile due to a complex reproductive
phenotype. Defects in the ovarian tissue architecture were noted as early as 2
weeks of age in Etv5-/- mice. Adult Etv5-/- female mice show decreased ovulation 
and no interest in mating even after gonadotrophin treatment. Histological
abnormalities were also noted in Etv5-/- ovaries. Injection of 17ß-estradiol to
gonadotrophin-treated Etv5-/- mice significantly increased ovulation, mating and 
fertilization rates. However, 2-cell embryos of Etv5-/- females show compromised 
development, suggesting a role for Etv5 in the developmental competence of
embryos. Expression of aromatase (CYP11a1), 17a-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase/17,20
desmolase (CYP17a1), side-chain-cleaving enzyme (CYP19a1) and luteinizing
hormone/choriogonadotropin receptor mRNAs was not significantly altered in
Etv5-/- ovaries. Collectively, our results suggest that Etv5 is important for the
developmental competence of germ cells and the regulation of responses to steroid
hormones in female mice.

© The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21478265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Pathol. 2011 May;224(1):78-89. doi: 10.1002/path.2859. Epub 2011 Mar 14.

Polyomavirus enhancer activator 3 protein promotes breast cancer metastatic
progression through Snail-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Yuen HF(1), Chan YK, Grills C, McCrudden CM, Gunasekharan V, Shi Z, Wong AS,
Lappin TR, Chan KW, Fennell DA, Khoo US, Johnston PG, El-Tanani M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University of Belfast,
UK.

Polyomavirus enhancer activator 3 protein (Pea3), also known as ETV4, is a member
of the Ets-transcription factor family, which promotes metastatic progression in 
various types of solid cancer. Pea3-driven epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) has been described in lung and ovarian cancers. The mechanisms of
Pea3-induced EMT, however, are largely unknown. Here we show that Pea3
overexpression promotes EMT in human breast epithelial cells through
transactivation of Snail (SNAI1), an activator of EMT. Pea3 binds to the human
Snail promoter through the two proximal Pea3 binding sites and enhances Snail
expression. In addition, knockdown of Pea3 in invasive breast cancer cells
results in down-regulation of Snail, partial reversal of EMT, and reduced
invasiveness in vitro. Moreover, knockdown of Snail partially rescues the
phenotype induced by Pea3 overexpression, suggesting that Snail is one of the
mediators bridging Pea3 and EMT, and thereby metastatic progression of the cancer
cells. In four breast cancer patient cohorts whose microarray and survival data
were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database, Pea3 and Snail
expression are significantly correlated with each other and with overall survival
of breast cancer patients. We further demonstrate that nuclear localization of
Pea3 is associated with Snail expression in breast cancer cell lines and is an
independent predictor of overall survival in a Chinese breast cancer patient
cohort. In conclusion, our results suggest that Pea3 may be an important
prognostic marker and a therapeutic target for metastatic progression of human
breast cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21404275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Genes Cancer. 2011 Jan 1;1(10):1044-1052.

The ETS gene ETV4 is required for anchorage-independent growth and a cell
proliferation gene expression program in PC3 prostate cells.

Hollenhorst PC(1), Paul L, Ferris MW, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, 1001 E 3 St.
Bloomington, Indiana 47405.

Chromosomal abnormalities that give rise to elevated expression levels of the ETS
genes ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, or ERG are prevalent in prostate cancer, but the function
of these transcription factors in carcinogenesis is not clear. Previous work in
cell lines implicates ERG, ETV1, and ETV5 as regulators of invasive growth but
not transformation. Here we show that the PC3 prostate cancer cell line provides 
a model system to study the over-expression of ETV4. Migration assays, anchorage 
independent growth assays, and microarray analysis indicate that high ETV4
expression contributes to both transformation and cellular motility in PC3 cells.
ETV4 directly bound the 5' and 3' MYC enhancers and modulated expression of both 
MYC and other cell proliferation genes, demonstrating a potential role in cell
growth control. Despite this novel role for ETV4 in anchorage independent growth,
ETV4 over-expression in normal prostate-derived RWPE-1 cells showed effects
similar to ETV1 over-expression - increased cellular motility, and an
up-regulation of genes encoding extracellular proteins as well as ones important 
for development, inflammation, and wound healing. Because ETV1 and ETV4 have
similar roles when introduced to the same cellular background, we suggest that
the requirement of high ETV4 expression for maintenance of the
anchorage-independent growth in PC3 cells is due to a specific characteristic of 
this cell line rather than a function of ETV4 that is distinct from the other
oncogenic ETS genes. Thus, the function of ETS genes in prostate cancer may
differ based on other genetic alterations in a tumor.

PMCID: PMC3046414
PMID: 21373373  [PubMed]


71. Br J Cancer. 2011 Mar 15;104(6):1038-48. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.31. Epub 2011 Mar 
1.

Activated KrasG¹²D is associated with invasion and metastasis of pancreatic
cancer cells through inhibition of E-cadherin.

Rachagani S(1), Senapati S, Chakraborty S, Ponnusamy MP, Kumar S, Smith LM, Jain 
M, Batra SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer (PC) harbours an activated point mutation
(Kras(G12D)) in the Kras proto-oncogene that has been demonstrated to promote the
development of PC.
METHODS: This study was designed to investigate the effect of the oncogenic
Kras(G12D) allele on aggressiveness and metastatic potential of PC cells. We
silenced the oncogenic Kras(G12D) allele expression in CD18/HPAF and ASPC1 cell
lines by stable expression of shRNA specific to the Kras(G12D)allele.
RESULTS: The Kras(G12D) knockdown cells exhibited a significant decrease in
motility (P<0.0001), invasion (P<0.0001), anchorage-dependent (P<0.0001) and
anchorage-independent growth (P<0.0001), proliferation (P<0.005) and an increase 
in cell doubling time (P<0.005) in vitro and a decrease in the incidence of
metastases upon orthotopic implantation into nude mice. The knockdown of the
Kras(G12D) allele led to a significant increase in the expression of E-cadherin
(mRNA and protein) both in vitro and in vivo. This was associated with a decrease
in the expression of phoshpo-ERK-1/2, NF-<U+03BA>B and MMP-9, and transcription factors 
such as dEF1, Snail and ETV4. Furthermore, the expression of several proteins
involved in cell survival, invasion and metastasis was decreased in the
Kras(G12D) knockdown cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest that the Kras(G12D) allele
promotes metastasis in PC cells partly through the downregulation of E-cadherin.

PMCID: PMC3065271
PMID: 21364589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Anat. 2011 May;218(5):534-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01352.x. Epub 2011 
Feb 21.

Expression of fibroblast growth factors (Fgfs) in murine tooth development.

Porntaveetus T(1), Otsuka-Tanaka Y, Basson MA, Moon AM, Sharpe PT, Ohazama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, Dental Institute, King's College
London, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

Fgf signalling is known to play critical roles in tooth development. Twenty-two
Fgf ligands have been identified in mammals, but expression of only 10 in molars 
and three in the incisor loop stem cell region have been documented in murine
tooth development. Our understanding of Fgf signalling in tooth development thus 
remains incomplete and we therefore carried out comparative in situ hybridisation
analysis of unexamined Fgf ligands (eight in molars and 15 in cervical loops of
incisors; Fgf11-Fgf14 were excluded from this analysis because they are not
secreted and do not activate Fgf receptors) during tooth development. To identify
where Fgf signalling is activated, we also examined the expression of Etv4 and
Etv5, considered to be transcriptional targets of the Fgf signalling pathway. In 
molar tooth development, the expression of Fgf15 and Fgf20 was restricted to the 
primary enamel knots, whereas Etv4 and Etv5 were expressed in cells surrounding
the primary enamel knots. Fgf20 expression was observed in the secondary enamel
knots, whereas Fgf15 showed localised expression in the adjacent mesenchyme.
Fgf16, Etv4 and Etv5 were strongly expressed in the ameloblasts of molars. In the
incisor cervical loop stem cell region, Fgf17, Fgf18, Etv4 and Etv5 showed a
restricted expression pattern. These molecules thus show dynamic temporo-spatial 
expression in murine tooth development. We also analysed teeth in Fgf15(-/-) and 
Fgf15(-/-) ;Fgf8(+/-) mutant mice. Neither mutant showed significant
abnormalities in tooth development, indicating likely functional redundancy.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy © 2011 Anatomical Society of Great Britain
and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3089749
PMID: 21332717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Virchows Arch. 2011 Apr;458(4):421-30. doi: 10.1007/s00428-011-1053-6. Epub 2011 
Feb 12.

Analysis of select members of the E26 (ETS) transcription factors family in
colorectal cancer.

Deves C(1), Renck D, Garicochea B, da Silva VD, Giulianni Lopes T, Fillman H,
Fillman L, Lunardini S, Basso LA, Santos DS, Batista EL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Molecular and Functional Biology (CP-BMF), Pontificia
Universidade Catolica do Rio Grande do Sul, Av. Ipiranga 6681 Bld. 92A, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil.

The E-twenty-six (ETS) family of transcription factors is known to act as
positive or negative regulators of the expression of genes that are involved in
diverse biological processes, including those that control cellular
proliferation, differentiation, hematopoiesis, apoptosis, metastasis, tissue
remodeling, and angiogenesis. Identification of target gene promoters of normal
and oncogenic transcription factors provides new insights into the regulation of 
genes that are involved in the control of normal cell growth and differentiation.
The aim of the present investigation was to analyze the differential expression
of 11 ETS (ELF-3, ESE3, ETS1, ETV3, ETV4, ETV6, NERF, PDEF, PU1, Spi-B, and
Spi-C) as potential markers for prognostic of colorectal cancer. A series of
paired tissue biopsies consisting of a tumor and a non-affected control sample
were harvested from 28 individuals suffering from diagnosed colorectal lesions.
Total RNA was isolated from the samples, and after reverse transcription,
differential expression of the select ETS was carried out through real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Tumor staging as determined by histopathology was
carried out to correlate the degree of tumor invasiveness with the expression of 
the ETS genes. The results demonstrated a different quantitative profile of
expression in tumors and normal tissues. ETV4 was significantly upregulated with 
further increase in the event of lymph node involvement. PDEF and Spi-B presented
downregulation, which was more significant when lymph node involvement was
present. These findings were supported by immunohistochemistry of tumoral
tissues. The results suggest that select ETS may serve as potential markers of
colorectal cancer invasiveness and metastasis.

PMID: 21318373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 15;17(4):700-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1300.
Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Clinical validation of colorectal cancer biomarkers identified from
bioinformatics analysis of public expression data.

Jung Y(1), Lee S, Choi HS, Kim SN, Lee E, Shin Y, Seo J, Kim B, Jung Y, Kim WK,
Chun HK, Lee WY, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Ewha Research Center for Systems Biology, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Identification of novel biomarkers of cancer is important for improved
diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutic intervention. This study aimed to identify 
marker genes of colorectal cancer (CRC) by combining bioinformatics analysis of
gene expression data and validation experiments using patient samples and to
examine the potential connection between validated markers and the established
oncogenes such as c-Myc and K-ras.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Publicly available data from GenBank and Oncomine were
meta-analyzed leading to 34 candidate marker genes of CRC. Multiple case-matched 
normal and tumor tissues were examined by RT-PCR for differential expression, and
9 genes were validated as CRC biomarkers. Statistical analyses for correlation
with major clinical parameters were carried out, and RNA interference was used to
examine connection with major oncogenes.
RESULTS: We show with high confidence that 9 (ECT2, ETV4, DDX21, RAN, S100A11,
RPS4X, HSPD1, CKS2, and C9orf140) of the 34 candidate genes are expressed at
significantly elevated levels in CRC tissues compared to normal tissues.
Furthermore, high-level expression of RPS4X was associated with nonmucinous
cancer cell type and that of ECT2 with lack of lymphatic invasion while
upregulation of CKS2 was correlated with early tumor stage and lack of family
history of CRC. We also demonstrate that RPS4X and DDX21 are regulatory targets
of c-Myc and ETV4 is downstream to K-ras signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified multiple novel biomarkers of CRC. Further
analyses of their function and connection to signaling pathways may reveal
potential value of these biomarkers in diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of
CRC.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21304002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Organogenesis. 2010 Oct-Dec;6(4):252-62. doi: 10.4161/org.6.4.12680.

GDNF/Ret signaling and renal branching morphogenesis: From mesenchymal signals to
epithelial cell behaviors.

Costantini F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY, USA. fdc3@columbia.edu

Signaling by GDNF through the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase is required for the
normal growth and morphogenesis of the ureteric bud (UB) during kidney
development.  Recent studies have sought to understand the precise role of Ret
signaling in this process, and the specific responses of UB cells to GDNF. 
Surprisingly, the requirement for Gdnf and Ret was largely relieved by removing
the negative regulator Spry1, revealing unexpected functional overlap between
GDNF and FGF10. However, the kidneys that developed without Gdnf/Ret and Spry1
displayed significant branching abnormalities, suggesting a unique role for GDNF 
in fine-tuning UB branching.  GDNF/Ret signaling alters patterns of gene
expression in UB tip cells, and one critical event is upregulation of the ETS
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5.  Mice lacking Etv4 and Etv5 fail to develop 
kidneys.  Thus, these genes represent key components of a regulatory network
downstream of Ret.  Studies of chimeric embryos in which a subset of cells lack
either Ret, Etv4/5 or Spry1 have revealed an important role for this pathway in
cell movement.  Ret signaling, via Etv4 and Etv5, promotes competitive cell
rearrangements in the nephric duct, in which the cells with the highest level of 
Ret signaling preferentially migrate to form the first ureteric bud tip.

PMCID: PMC3055651
PMID: 21220964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Cancer. 2010 Dec 9;9:313. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-313.

The ERK MAP kinase-PEA3/ETV4-MMP-1 axis is operative in oesophageal
adenocarcinoma.

Keld R(1), Guo B, Downey P, Gulmann C, Ang YS, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
UK.

BACKGROUND: Many members of the ETS-domain transcription factor family are
important drivers of tumourigenesis. In this context, their activation by Ras-ERK
pathway signaling is particularly relevant to the tumourigenic properties of many
ETS-domain transcription factors. The PEA3 subfamily of ETS-domain transcription 
factors have been implicated in tumour metastasis in several different cancers.
RESULTS: Here, we have studied the expression of the PEA3 subfamily members
PEA3/ETV4 and ER81/ETV1 in oesophageal adenocarcinomas and determined their role 
in oesophageal adenocarcinoma cell function. PEA3 plays an important role in
controlling both the proliferation and invasive properties of OE33 oesophageal
adenocarcinoma cells. A key target gene is MMP-1. The ERK MAP kinase pathway
activates PEA3 subfamily members and also plays a role in these PEA3 controlled
events, establishing the ERK-PEA3-MMP-1 axis as important in OE33 cells. PEA3
subfamily members are upregulated in human adenocarcinomas and expression
correlates with MMP-1 expression and late stage metastatic disease. Enhanced ERK 
signaling is also more prevalent in late stage oesophageal adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that the ERK-PEA3-MMP-1 axis is upregulated in
oesophageal adenocarcinoma cells and is a potentially important driver of the
metastatic progression of oesophageal adenocarcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3009708
PMID: 21143918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem J. 2011 Feb 1;433(3):515-25. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101562.

ERK/p90(RSK)/14-3-3 signalling has an impact on expression of PEA3 Ets
transcription factors via the transcriptional repressor capicúa.

Dissanayake K(1), Toth R, Blakey J, Olsson O, Campbell DG, Prescott AR,
MacKintosh C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Dundee, Scotland, UK.

Compounds that inhibit signalling upstream of ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated
kinase) are promising anticancer therapies, motivating research to define how
this pathway promotes cancers. In the present study, we show that human capicúa
represses mRNA expression for PEA3 (polyoma enhancer activator 3) Ets
transcription factors ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 (ETV is Ets translocation variant), and
this repression is relieved by multisite controls of capicúa by ERK, p90(RSK)
(p90 ribosomal S6 kinase) and 14-3-3 proteins. Specifically, 14-3-3 binds to
p90(RSK)-phosphorylated Ser¹7³ of capicúa thereby modulating DNA binding to its
HMG (high-mobility group) box, whereas ERK phosphorylations prevent binding of a 
C-terminal NLS (nuclear localization sequence) to importin a4 (KPNA3). ETV1, ETV4
and ETV5 mRNA levels in melanoma cells are elevated by siRNA (small interfering
RNA) knockdown of capicúa, and decreased by inhibiting ERK and/or expressing a
form of capicúa that cannot bind to 14-3-3 proteins. Capicúa knockdown also
enhances cell migration. The findings of the present study give further
mechanistic insights into why ETV1 is highly expressed in certain cancers,
indicate that loss of capicúa can desensitize cells to the effects of ERK pathway
inhibitors, and highlight interconnections among growth factor signalling,
spinocerebellar ataxias and cancers.

PMCID: PMC3025492
PMID: 21087211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Lab Invest. 2011 Mar;91(3):404-12. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2010.179. Epub 2010 Oct
25.

Testing mutual exclusivity of ETS rearranged prostate cancer.

Svensson MA(1), LaFargue CJ, MacDonald TY, Pflueger D, Kitabayashi N, Santa-Cruz 
AM, Garsha KE, Sathyanarayana UG, Riley JP, Yun CS, Nagy D, Kosmeder JW, Pestano 
GA, Tewari AK, Demichelis F, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Prostate cancer is a clinically heterogeneous and multifocal disease. More than
80% of patients with prostate cancer harbor multiple geographically discrete
cancer foci at the time of diagnosis. Emerging data suggest that these foci are
molecularly distinct consistent with the hypothesis that they arise as
independent clones. One of the strongest arguments is the heterogeneity observed 
in the status of E26 transformation specific (ETS) rearrangements between
discrete tumor foci. The clonal evolution of individual prostate cancer foci
based on recent studies demonstrates intertumoral heterogeneity with intratumoral
homogeneity. The issue of multifocality and interfocal heterogeneity is important
and has not been fully elucidated due to lack of the systematic evaluation of ETS
rearrangements in multiple tumor sites. The current study investigates the
frequency of multiple gene rearrangements within the same focus and between
different cancer foci. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays were
designed to detect the four most common recurrent ETS gene rearrangements. In a
cohort of 88 men with localized prostate cancer, we found ERG, ETV1, and ETV5
rearrangements in 51% (44/86), 6% (5/85), and 1% (1/86), respectively. None of
the cases demonstrated ETV4 rearrangements. Mutual exclusiveness of ETS
rearrangements was observed in the majority of cases; however, in six cases, we
discovered multiple ETS or 5' fusion partner rearrangements within the same tumor
focus. In conclusion, we provide further evidence for prostate cancer tumor
heterogeneity with the identification of multiple concurrent gene rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC3130188
PMID: 20975660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2010 Oct;137(20):3417-26. doi: 10.1242/dev.051789. Epub 2010 Sep 8.

Preaxial polydactyly: interactions among ETV, TWIST1 and HAND2 control
anterior-posterior patterning of the limb.

Zhang Z(1), Sui P, Dong A, Hassell J, Cserjesi P, Chen YT, Behringer RR, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Preaxial polydactyly (PPD) is a common limb-associated birth defect characterized
by extra digit(s) in the anterior autopod. It often results from ectopic sonic
hedgehog (Shh) expression in the anterior limb bud. Although several
transcription factors are known to restrict Shh expression to the posterior limb 
bud, how they function together remains unclear. Here we provide evidence from
mouse conditional knockout limb buds that the bHLH family transcription factor
gene Twist1 is required to inhibit Shh expression in the anterior limb bud
mesenchyme. More importantly, we uncovered genetic synergism between Twist1 and
the ETS family transcription factor genes Etv4 and Etv5 (collectively Etv), which
also inhibit Shh expression. Biochemical data suggest that this genetic
interaction is a result of direct association between TWIST1 and ETV proteins.
Previous studies have shown that TWIST1 functions by forming homodimers or
heterodimers with other bHLH factors including HAND2, a key positive regulator of
Shh expression. We found that the PPD phenotype observed in Etv mutants is
suppressed by a mutation in Hand2, indicative of genetic antagonism. Furthermore,
overexpression of ETV proteins influences the dimerization of these bHLH factors.
Together, our data suggest that through biochemical interactions, the Shh
expression regulators ETV, TWIST1 and HAND2 attain a precise balance to establish
anterior-posterior patterning of the limb.

PMCID: PMC2947755
PMID: 20826535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2010 Sep;19(3):151-6. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e3181bb216a.

Detection of TMPRSS2 gene deletions and translocations in carcinoma,
intraepithelial neoplasia, and normal epithelium of the prostate by direct
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Zhang S(1), Pavlovitz B, Tull J, Wang Y, Deng FM, Fuller C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210, 
USA. zhangs@upstate.edu

TMPRSS2 gene fusions with ETS transcription factor family members ERG, ETV1, or
ETV4 have been recently discovered as a common molecular event in prostate
cancer. Much attention has been focused on exploring their clinical application
as a genetic tumor marker for the diagnosis, prognosis, and prediction of
response to therapy. Although several studies have been done, the clinical
utility of TMPRSS2 genetic alterations as biomarkers for prostate carcinoma
remains indeterminate. In this study, we examined adenocarcinomas, prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), and normal epithelium of the prostate retrieved 
from radical prostatectomy specimens to determine the frequency, specificity,
tissue heterogeneity, and prognostic value of TMPRSS2 genetic alterations using a
direct-labeled TMPRSS2 dual-color break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) probe cocktail designed to detect all known TMPRSS2-associated deletions
or translocations. Seventy-one patients (161 samples) with normal prostate
tissue, 60 patients (153 samples) with PIN, and 61 patients (142 samples) with
carcinoma in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue microarrays were tested.
None of the 161 normal prostate samples showed TMPRSS2 translocation or deletion.
Sixty-two percent patients of prostate carcinomas demonstrated TMPRSS2 gene
alterations, including 39% with translocation, 16% with deletion, and 7% with a
mixed pattern. Tissue heterogeneity for TMPRSS2 gene alterations was identified
in 28% of prostate carcinomas. No difference in the frequency of TMPRSS2 gene
alterations was found between Gleason 6 and 7 tumors. Seventeen percent of PIN
had TMPRSS2 gene alterations and showed the same FISH patterns as in the
carcinomas from respective prostatectomy specimens. The TMPRSS2 dual-color
break-apart FISH probe cocktail provides a simple and reliable method for the
detection of TMPRSS2-related genetic alterations in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue. TMPRSS2 genetic alterations detectable by this method
are strictly restricted in prostate neoplasia, and can be identified in the
majority of prostate carcinomas. Tissue heterogeneity for TMPRSS2 alterations is 
common, and it should be considered when sampling and evaluating biopsy
specimens.

PMID: 20736744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Mar;56(3):698-706. doi: 10.1007/s10620-010-1346-7. Epub 2010
Aug 5.

Over-expression of Ephb4 is associated with carcinogenesis of gastric cancer.

Li M(1), Zhao ZW, Zhang Y, Xin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, Liaoning Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed malignancies
in the world. The gene expression profile and molecular grouping of gastric
cancer has been a challenging task due to its inherent complexity and variation
among individuals.
AIMS: To determine the molecular mechanism associated with gastric
carcinogenesis.
METHODS: We analyzed the gene expression profiles of 20 cancerous tissues and
their tumor-adjacent tissue from patients with gastric cancer by using a 14 K
cDNA microarray. The differentially expressed genes and their products were
verified by semiquantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR), western blotting
and immunohistochemistry of gastric cancer and normal tissue samples.
RESULTS: A total of 69 genes were found to be differentially regulated in the
cancerous tissue. Among them, genes such as CDH17, ETV4, S100A6, S100A11, Ephb4, 
and KLK10 were confirmed by RT-PCR to be up-regulated, while genes such as NK4
and PPP2R1B were down-regulated. Western blotting and immunohistochemistry
indicated that Ephb4 was over-expressed and localized to the cytoplasm of gastric
cancer cells. Moreover, Ephb4 protein was observed as being significantly related
to tumor size and pN category (p = 0.001 and 0.007, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These newly identified genes might provide a valuable resource for
understanding the molecular mechanism associated with the carcinogenesis of
gastric cancer and for finding potential diagnostic markers of gastric cancer.

PMID: 20686847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Mol Diagn. 2010 Sep;12(5):718-24. doi: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.100002. Epub 2010
Jul 8.

Detection of TMPRSS2-ETS fusions by a multiprobe fluorescence in situ
hybridization assay for the early diagnosis of prostate cancer: a pilot study.

Sun QP(1), Li LY, Chen Z, Pang J, Yang WJ, Zhou XF, Qiu JG, Su ZL, He D, Gao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, the Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, 
Guangzhou, China.

Fusion of the prostate-specific and androgen-regulated transmembrane-serine
protease gene (TMPRSS2) with the erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS)
family members is the most common genetic alteration in prostate cancer. However,
the biological and clinical role of TMPRSS2-ETS fusions in prostate cancer,
especially in problematic prostate needle core biopsies, has not been rigorously 
evaluated. We randomly collected 85 specimens including 50 archival prostate
cancer tissue blocks, 15 normal prostate specimens, and 20 benign prostatic
hyperplasia specimens for TMPRSS2-ETS fusion analyses. Moreover, the fusion
status in an additional 20 patients with initial negative biopsies who progressed
to biopsy-positive prostate cancer at subsequent follow-ups was also
characterized. Fluorescently labeled probes specific for ERG-related
rearrangements involving the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion as well as TMPRSS2-ETV1 and
TMPRSS2-ETV4 were used to assess samples for gene rearrangements indicative of
malignancy under a design of sequential trial. Rearrangements involving
TMPRSS2-ETS fusions were detected in 90.0% of the 50 postoperative prostate
cancer samples. The positive rate for the rearrangements in the initial prostate 
cancer-negative biopsies of 20 patients who eventually progressed to prostate
cancer was 60.0% (12/20). Our preliminary study demonstrates that the clinical
utility of TMPRSS2-ETS fusion detection as a biomarker and ancillary diagnostic
tool for the early diagnosis of prostate cancer is promising, given this approach
shows significant high sensitivity and specificity in detection.

PMCID: PMC2928438
PMID: 20616363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Lipid Res. 2010 Sep;51(9):2775-84. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M008490. Epub 2010 Jun 2.

The small molecule phenamil is a modulator of adipocyte differentiation and
PPARgamma expression.

Park KW(1), Waki H, Choi SP, Park KM, Tontonoz P.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California at Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.

We previously described the use of a cell-based screening approach to identify
small molecules that regulate adipocyte differentiation. Here we identify the
amiloride derivative phenamil as an adipogenic compound. Phenamil acutely induces
expression of the key transcription factor of adipogenesis, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and, consequently, promotes the
differentiation of multiple preadipocyte cell lines, including 3T3-L1 and F442A. 
Interestingly, the adipogenic action of phenamil is distinct from and additive
with both PPARgamma ligands and the previously identified adipogenic small
molecule harmine. To identify signaling pathways mediating phenamil's effects, we
performed transcriptional profiling of 3T3-F442A preadipocytes. ETS variant 4
(ETV4) was identified as a gene rapidly induced by phenamil but not by other
adipogenic small molecules or PPARgamma agonists. Transient expression of ETV4 in
preadipocytes enhances the expression of PPARgamma. Stable overexpression of ETV4
promotes expression of PPARgamma and its downstream target genes and enhances
morphological differentiation. Finally, knockdown of PPARgamma expression by
shRNA blocks the effects of phenamil on adipocyte differentiation and gene
expression, but it does not block phenamil induction of ETV4, which suggests that
ETV4 acts upstream of PPARgamma in differentiation processes. These results
identify a phenamil as new small molecule tool for the probing of adipocyte
differentiation that acts, at least in part, through induction of ETV4
expression.

PMCID: PMC2918460
PMID: 20519739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. EMBO J. 2010 Jul 7;29(13):2147-60. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.106. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

Genome-wide analysis of ETS-family DNA-binding in vitro and in vivo.

Wei GH(1), Badis G, Berger MF, Kivioja T, Palin K, Enge M, Bonke M, Jolma A,
Varjosalo M, Gehrke AR, Yan J, Talukder S, Turunen M, Taipale M, Stunnenberg HG, 
Ukkonen E, Hughes TR, Bulyk ML, Taipale J.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL)
and Genome-Scale Biology Program, Institute of Biomedicine and High Throughput
Center, University of Helsinki, Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland.

Members of the large ETS family of transcription factors (TFs) have highly
similar DNA-binding domains (DBDs)-yet they have diverse functions and activities
in physiology and oncogenesis. Some differences in DNA-binding preferences within
this family have been described, but they have not been analysed systematically, 
and their contributions to targeting remain largely uncharacterized. We report
here the DNA-binding profiles for all human and mouse ETS factors, which we
generated using two different methods: a high-throughput microwell-based TF
DNA-binding specificity assay, and protein-binding microarrays (PBMs). Both
approaches reveal that the ETS-binding profiles cluster into four distinct
classes, and that all ETS factors linked to cancer, ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and FLI1,
fall into just one of these classes. We identify amino-acid residues that are
critical for the differences in specificity between all the classes, and confirm 
the specificities in vivo using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
sequencing (ChIP-seq) for a member of each class. The results indicate that even 
relatively small differences in in vitro binding specificity of a TF contribute
to site selectivity in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2905244
PMID: 20517297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Development. 2010 Jun;137(12):1975-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.051656. Epub 2010 May 12.

The transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 mediate formation of the ureteric bud tip
domain during kidney development.

Kuure S(1), Chi X, Lu B, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Signaling by the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase promotes cell movements in the
Wolffian duct that give rise to the first ureteric bud tip, initiating kidney
development. Although the ETS transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 are known to be
required for mouse kidney development and to act downstream of Ret, their
specific functions are unclear. Here, we examine their role by analyzing the
ability of Etv4 Etv5 compound mutant cells to contribute to chimeric kidneys.
Etv4(-/-);Etv5(+/-) cells show a limited distribution in the caudal Wolffian duct
and ureteric bud, similar to Ret(-/-) cells, revealing a cell-autonomous role for
Etv4 and Etv5 in the cell rearrangements promoted by Ret. By contrast,
Etv4(-/-);Etv5(-/-) cells display more severe developmental limitations,
suggesting a broad role for Etv4 and Etv5 downstream of multiple signals, which
are together important for Wolffian duct and ureteric bud morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2875840
PMID: 20463033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Apr;34(4):478-85. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181d6827b.

ETS gene aberrations in atypical cribriform lesions of the prostate: Implications
for the distinction between intraductal carcinoma of the prostate and cribriform 
high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

Han B(1), Suleman K, Wang L, Siddiqui J, Sercia L, Magi-Galluzzi C, Palanisamy N,
Chinnaiyan AM, Zhou M, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, USA.

BACKGROUND: Atypical cribriform lesions (ACLs) of the prostate consist of
cribriform glands lined with cytologically malignant cells with partial or
complete basal cell lining. It may represent cribriform "high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia" (HGPIN) or "intraductal carcinoma of the prostate"
(IDC-P), which is almost always associated with clinically aggressive prostate
carcinoma (PCa). Distinction between these 2 lesions has profound clinical
significance, especially on needle biopsies. However, there are lesions that do
not fully satisfy the criteria for IDC-P yet are worse than typical HGPIN and are
difficult to distinguish based on morphologic criteria alone.
METHODS: To better understand the biologic and molecular basis of distinction
between cribriform HGPIN and IDC, we used break-apart fluorescence in-situ
hybridization assay to assess ETS gene aberrations, a specific and commonest
molecular alteration involving PCa, in a cohort of 16 isolated ACL, presumed to
be an isolated cribriform HGPIN, and 45 carcinoma-associated ACL (ACL-PCa) on
radical prostatectomy specimens, presumed to be spectrum of IDC-P. The latter was
further divided into 2 groups: group A with marked nuclear atypia (nuclear size
6xnormal or larger) and/or comedonecrosis (n=21) and group B that did not fulfill
these criteria (n=24).
RESULTS: Overall, ERG rearrangement was absent (0 of 16) in isolated cribriform
HGPIN, whereas present in 75% (36 of 48) of IDC-P, of which 65% (23 of 36) were
through deletion and 35% (13 of 36) through insertion. Notably, 17% (6 of 36) of 
the IDC-P showed duplication of ERG rearrangement in combination with deletion of
5'-ERG. Hundred percent (34 of 34) of the IDC-P showed concordance of ERG
rearrangement status with adjacent invasive carcinoma. There was no difference
between the 2 groups of IDC-P lesions regarding prevalence of ERG rearrangement
(group A 79% vs. group B 74%) and EDel2+ (20% vs. 15%). No case with ETV1, ETV4, 
or ETV5 rearrangement was identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our molecular data suggest that isolated cribriform HGPIN and IDC-P 
are biologically distinct lesions. Majority of ACL-PCa most likely represent
intraductal spread of PCa. There is a significant overlap between IDC-P and HGPIN
at the lower grade morphologic spectrum. ERG break-apart fluorescence in-situ
hybridization assay provides insight into understanding the molecular basis of
cribriform HGPIN and IDC-P and has potential clinical implications in their
distinction on needle biopsies.

PMID: 20220513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 22;5(1):e8854. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008854.

Pea3 transcription factors and wnt1-induced mouse mammary neoplasia.

Baker R(1), Kent CV, Silbermann RA, Hassell JA, Young LJ, Howe LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, New York, USA.

The role of the PEA3 subfamily of Ets transcription factors in breast neoplasia
is controversial. Although overexpression of PEA3 (E1AF/ETV4), and of the related
factors ERM (ETV5) and ER81 (ETV1), have been observed in human and mouse breast 
tumors, PEA3 factors have also been ascribed a tumor suppressor function. Here,
we utilized the MMTV/Wnt1 mouse strain to further interrogate the role of PEA3
transcription factors in mammary tumorigenesis based on our previous observation 
that Pea3 is highly expressed in MMTV/Wnt1 mammary tumors. Pea3 expression in
mouse mammary tissues was visualized using a Pea3(NLSlacZ) reporter strain. In
normal mammary glands, Pea3 expression is predominantly confined to myoepithelial
cells. Wnt1 transgene expression induced marked amplification of this cell
compartment in nontumorous mammary glands, accompanied by an apparent increase in
Pea3 expression. The pattern of Pea3 expression in MMTV/Wnt1 mammary glands
recapitulated the cellular profile of activated beta-catenin/TCF signaling, which
was visualized using both beta-catenin immunohistochemistry and the
beta-catenin/TCF-responsive reporter Axin2(NLSlacZ). To test the requirement for 
PEA3 factors in Wnt1-induced tumorigenesis, we employed a mammary-targeted
dominant negative PEA3 transgene, DeltaNPEA3En. Expression of DeltaNPEA3En
delayed early-onset tumor formation in MMTV/Wnt1 virgin females (P = 0.03),
suggesting a requirement for PEA3 factor function for Wnt1-driven tumor
formation. Consistent with this observation, expression of the DeltaNPEA3En
transgene was profoundly reduced in mammary tumors compared to nontumorous
mammary glands from bigenic MMTV/Wnt1, MMTV/DeltaNPEA3En mice (P = 0.01). Our
data provide the first description of Wnt1-mediated expansion of the
Pea3-expressing myoepithelial compartment in nontumorous mammary glands.
Consistent with this observation, mammary myoepithelium was selectively
responsive to Wnt1. Together these data suggest the MMTV/Wnt1 strain as a
potential model of basal breast cancer. Furthermore, this study provides evidence
for a protumorigenic role of PEA3 factors in breast neoplasia, and supports
targeting the PEA3 transcription factor family in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2809747
PMID: 20107508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jan 15;6(1):e1000809. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000809.

Kidney development in the absence of Gdnf and Spry1 requires Fgf10.

Michos O(1), Cebrian C, Hyink D, Grieshammer U, Williams L, D'Agati V, Licht JD, 
Martin GR, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA.

GDNF signaling through the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) is required for
ureteric bud (UB) branching morphogenesis during kidney development in mice and
humans. Furthermore, many other mutant genes that cause renal agenesis exert
their effects via the GDNF/RET pathway. Therefore, RET signaling is believed to
play a central role in renal organogenesis. Here, we re-examine the extent to
which the functions of Gdnf and Ret are unique, by seeking conditions in which a 
kidney can develop in their absence. We find that in the absence of the negative 
regulator Spry1, Gdnf, and Ret are no longer required for extensive kidney
development. Gdnf-/-;Spry1-/- or Ret-/-;Spry1-/- double mutants develop large
kidneys with normal ureters, highly branched collecting ducts, extensive
nephrogenesis, and normal histoarchitecture. However, despite extensive
branching, the UB displays alterations in branch spacing, angle, and frequency.
UB branching in the absence of Gdnf and Spry1 requires Fgf10 (which normally
plays a minor role), as removal of even one copy of Fgf10 in Gdnf-/-;Spry1-/-
mutants causes a complete failure of ureter and kidney development. In contrast
to Gdnf or Ret mutations, renal agenesis caused by concomitant lack of the
transcription factors ETV4 and ETV5 is not rescued by removing Spry1, consistent 
with their role downstream of both RET and FGFRs. This shows that, for many
aspects of renal development, the balance between positive signaling by RTKs and 
negative regulation of this signaling by SPRY1 is more critical than the specific
role of GDNF. Other signals, including FGF10, can perform many of the functions
of GDNF, when SPRY1 is absent. But GDNF/RET signaling has an apparently unique
function in determining normal branching pattern. In contrast to GDNF or FGF10,
Etv4 and Etv5 represent a critical node in the RTK signaling network that cannot 
by bypassed by reducing the negative regulation of upstream signals.

PMCID: PMC2797609
PMID: 20084103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nat Genet. 2009 Dec;41(12):1295-302. doi: 10.1038/ng.476. Epub 2009 Nov 8.

Etv4 and Etv5 are required downstream of GDNF and Ret for kidney branching
morphogenesis.

Lu BC(1), Cebrian C, Chi X, Kuure S, Kuo R, Bates CM, Arber S, Hassell J, MacNeil
L, Hoshi M, Jain S, Asai N, Takahashi M, Schmidt-Ott KM, Barasch J, D'Agati V,
Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Apr;42(4):361.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor signaling through the Ret receptor
tyrosine kinase is crucial for ureteric bud branching morphogenesis during kidney
development, yet few of the downstream genes are known. Here we show that the ETS
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 are positively regulated by Ret signaling in 
the ureteric bud tips. Mice lacking both Etv4 alleles and one Etv5 allele show
either renal agenesis or severe hypodysplasia, whereas kidney development fails
completely in double homozygotes. We identified several genes whose expression in
the ureteric bud depends on Etv4 and Etv5, including Cxcr4, Myb, Met and Mmp14.
Thus, Etv4 and Etv5 are key components of a gene network downstream of Ret that
promotes and controls renal branching morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2787691
PMID: 19898483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. APMIS. 2009 Nov;117(11):791-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2009.02534.x.

E1AF expression is associated with extra-prostatic growth and matrix
metalloproteinase-7 expression in prostate cancer.

Maruta S(1), Sakai H, Kanda S, Hayashi T, Kanetake H, Miyata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Sakamoto,
Nagasaki, Japan.

E1AF is associated with malignant aggressiveness via regulation of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), which play pivotal roles in invasion through the
degradation of extracellular matrix of tissues surrounding tumors. However, the
clinical significance of E1AF and MMPs in patients with prostate cancer is not
fully understood. We reviewed 50 tissue samples from patients with T2-3N0M0
prostate cancer who had undergone radical operation. Expression levels of E1AF,
MMP-1, -3, -7, -9 and -14 were determined semiquantitatively by
immunohistochemistry. The mean +/- SD percentage of E1AF-stained cancer cells was
8.56 +/- 5.22, and it was significantly higher (p < 0.001) than the
E1AF-immunostaining index of normal cells (1.17 +/- 0.61). E1AF immunostaining
index in pT3 (12.74 +/- 4.80) was significantly higher (p < 0.001) than that in
pT2 (5.78 +/- 3.31). Although E1AF expression correlated with that of MMP-7 and
MMP-9 (r = 0.47, p < 0.001 and r = 0.41, p = 0.004, respectively), multivariate
analysis showed that E1AF correlated with only MMP-7 expression (OR = 5.81, 95%
CI = 1.27-26.59, p = 0.023). Our results demonstrated that increased expression
of E1AF is involved in tumor aggression of prostate cancer. This finding may be
influenced by regulation of MMP-7. We speculate that E1AF is a possible target in
treatment and prevention of tumor growth in prostate cancer.

PMID: 19845529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Nov;297(5):F1208-19. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00262.2009. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Deletion of Frs2alpha from the ureteric epithelium causes renal hypoplasia.

Sims-Lucas S(1), Cullen-McEwen L, Eswarakumar VP, Hains D, Kish K, Becknell B,
Zhang J, Bertram JF, Wang F, Bates CM.

Author information: 
(1)Rangos Research Center, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh,
PA 15201, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (Fgfr2) signaling is critical in maintaining 
ureteric branching architecture and mesenchymal stromal morphogenesis in the
kidney. Fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2alpha (Frs2alpha) is a major
docking protein for Fgfr2 with downstream targets including Ets variant (Etv) 4
and Etv5 in other systems. Furthermore, global deletion of Frs2alpha causes early
embryonic lethality. The purpose of the study was to determine the role of
Frs2alpha in mediating Fgfr2 signaling in the ureteric epithelium. To that end,
we generated mice with conditional deletion of Frs2alpha in the ureteric
epithelium (Frs2alpha(UB-/-)) and mice with point mutations in the Frs2alpha
binding site of Fgfr2 (Fgfr2(LR/LR)). Frs2alpha(UB-/-) mice developed mild renal 
hypoplasia characterized by decreased ureteric branching morphogenesis but
maintained normal overall branching architecture and had normal mesenchymal
stromal development. Reduced nephron endowment in postnatal mutant mice was
observed, corresponding with the reduction in branching morphogenesis.
Furthermore, there were no apparent renal abnormalities in Fgfr2(LR/LR) mice.
Interestingly, Etv4 and Etv5 expression was unaltered in Frs2alpha(UB-/-) mice,
as was Sprouty1, an antagonist of Frs2alpha signaling. However, Ret and Wnt11
(molecules critical for ureteric branching morphogenesis) mRNA levels were lower 
in mutants vs. controls. Taken together, these findings suggest that Fgfr2
signals through adapter molecules other than Frs2alpha in the ureteric
epithelium. Furthermore, Frs2alpha may transmit signals through other receptor
kinases present in ureteric epithelium. Finally, the renal hypoplasia observed in
Frs2alpha(UB-/-) mice is likely secondary to decreased Ret and Wnt11 expression.

PMCID: PMC2781346
PMID: 19741018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Nat Rev Urol. 2009 Aug;6(8):429-39. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2009.127.

ETS gene fusions in prostate cancer.

Clark JP(1), Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Male Urological Cancer Research Centre, Sutton, UK. jeremy.clark@icr.ac.uk

Chromosomal rearrangements that result in high level expression of ETS gene
family members are common events in human prostate cancer. Most frequently, the
androgen-activated gene TMPRSS2 is found fused to the ERG gene. Fusions involving
ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 occur less frequently but exhibit greater variability in
fusion structure with 12 unique 5' fusion partners identified so far. ETS gene
rearrangement seems to be a key event in driving prostate neoplastic development:
the rearrangement occurs as an early event and continues to be expressed in
metastatic and castration-resistant disease. However, ETS alterations seem
insufficient on their own to induce cancer formation. No consistent associations 
are seen between the presence of ETS alteration and clinical outcome, with the
possible exception that duplication of rearranged ERG, reflecting aneuploidy, is 
associated with poor outcome. Thus, factors other than ERG gene status may be the
major determinants of poor clinical outcome. Expression signatures of prostate
cancers containing the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion suggest involvement of beta-estradiol
signaling, and reveal higher levels of expression of HDAC1 and ion channel genes 
when compared to cancers that lack the rearrangement. These observations suggest 
new therapeutic possibilities for patients harboring ETS gene fusions.

PMID: 19657377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mod Pathol. 2009 Sep;22(9):1176-85. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.79. Epub 2009 May
22.

Characterization of ETS gene aberrations in select histologic variants of
prostate carcinoma.

Han B(1), Mehra R, Suleman K, Tomlins SA, Wang L, Singhal N, Linetzky KA,
Palanisamy N, Zhou M, Chinnaiyan AM, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Histologic variants of prostate carcinoma account for 5-10% of the disease and
are typically seen in association with conventional acinar carcinoma. These
variants often differ from the latter in clinical, immunophenotypic, and biologic
potential. Recently, recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene
TMPRSS2 and the ETS transcription factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 have been
identified in a majority of conventional prostate carcinomas. However, the
frequency and significance of this critical molecular event is unknown in the
histologic variants of prostate carcinoma. Here, we used break-apart fluorescence
in situ hybridization to assess TMPRSS2 and ETS aberrations in a series of select
histologic variants: foamy gland carcinoma (N=17), ductal adenocarcinoma (N=18), 
mucinous carcinoma (N=18), and small cell carcinoma (N=7). A histologic variation
of acinar adenocarcinoma, demonstrating glomeruloid morphology (N=9), was also
investigated. Overall, 55% of histologic variant or variation morphologies
demonstrated ETS aberrations (ERG in 54% and ETV1 in 1%). TMPRSS2:ERG fusion was 
identified in 83% (15/18), 71% (5/7), 50% (9/18), 33% (3/9), and 29% (5/17) of
mucinous, small cell, ductal, glomeruloid, and foamy gland prostate carcinomas,
respectively. Previously, we reported that 100% of androgen-independent
metastatic prostate carcinomas harboring TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion were associated 
with interstitial deletion (Edel). Interestingly, ERG rearrangement in small cell
carcinomas occurred exclusively through Edel, supporting the notion that
TMPRSS2:ERG with Edel is an aggressive molecular subtype. SPINK1, a biomarker
expressed exclusively in a subset of ETS negative prostate carcinomas, was
expressed in 6% of ETS negative histologic variants, specifically in ductal
adenocarcinoma. Notably, 88% (43/49) variant morphologies in this cohort showed
concordance of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion with associated conventional acinar type,
suggesting that variant morphology is clonally related to the latter. Overall,
our data provide insight into the origin, molecular mechanism, and phenotypic
association of ETS fusions in histologic variants of prostate carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2760291
PMID: 19465903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Dev Cell. 2009 Apr;16(4):607-13. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.02.008.

FGF-regulated Etv genes are essential for repressing Shh expression in mouse limb
buds.

Zhang Z(1), Verheyden JM, Hassell JA, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Anterior-posterior (A-P) patterning of the vertebrate limb is controlled by sonic
hedgehog (SHH) signaling, and the precise restriction of Shh expression to the
posterior limb bud is essential for its polarizing effect. Fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) signaling, a key control of proximal-distal (P-D) limb outgrowth, is
known to promote Shh expression in the posterior limb bud. Here, we show that
conditional knockout of the FGF-activated transcription factor genes Etv4 and
Etv5 in mouse led to ectopic Shh expression in the anterior limb bud and a
preaxial polydactyly (PPD) skeletal phenotype. These unexpected results suggest
that ETV4 and ETV5 act downstream of FGF signaling to inhibit Shh expression in
the anterior limb bud. This finding elucidates a novel aspect of the mechanism
coordinating limb development along the A-P and P-D axes.

PMCID: PMC3541528
PMID: 19386269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Dev Cell. 2009 Apr;16(4):600-6. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.02.005.

Fgf-dependent Etv4/5 activity is required for posterior restriction of Sonic
Hedgehog and promoting outgrowth of the vertebrate limb.

Mao J(1), McGlinn E, Huang P, Tabin CJ, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Crosstalk between the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)
pathways is critical for proper patterning and growth of the developing limb bud.
Here, we show that FGF-dependent activation of the ETS transcription factors Etv4
and Etv5 contributes to proximal-distal limb outgrowth. Surprisingly, blockage of
Etv activity in early distal mesenchyme also resulted in ectopic, anterior
expansion of Shh, leading to a polydactylous phenotype. These data indicate an
unexpected function for an FGF/Etv pathway in anterior-posterior patterning. FGF 
activity in the limb is not only responsible for maintaining posterior-specific
Shh expression, but it also acts via Etvs to prevent inappropriate anterior
expansion of Shh. This study identifies another level of genetic interaction
between the orthogonal axes during limb development.

PMCID: PMC3164484
PMID: 19386268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2009;111(4):e103-15. doi: 10.1159/000209210. Epub 2009 Mar
17.

Suppression subtractive hybridization analysis of gene expression during late
kidney development identifies the developmentally regulated gene rPEA3.

Chen Q(1), Xu S, Huang S, Zhang A, Feng Q, Guo X, Guo M, Chen R, Yang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Affiliated Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, China.

BACKGROUND: While early kidney development has been studied exhaustively, the
later stages of nephrogenesis that occur after birth in the rodent are relatively
poorly understood. To gain insight into this process, we detected the alterations
in gene expression in rat kidney at two postnatal stages, P0 (0 day after birth),
the time at which nephrogensis is still active, and P21 (21 days after birth),
when nephrogenesis is complete.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were mated, and appearance of a vaginal plug was
designated as E0. Kidneys were dissected from embryos at E13, E15, E17 and E19,
and from postnatal days P0, P7, P14, P21 and adult rats. Suppression subtractive 
hybridization (SSH) analysis was performed and highly expressed genes were
evaluated as molecular markers by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR), in situ hybridization, immunofluorescence, and Western
blot.
RESULTS: Several differentially expressed genes were identified, including rPEA3,
a member of the PEA3 subfamily of Ets domain transcription factors. Real time
RT-PCR analysis revealed that rPEA3 exhibited dynamic developmental regulation,
with high levels of expression from embryonic day E15 until birth, and declining 
levels thereafter. By in situ hybridization, rPEA3 mRNA was detected in the
ureteric bud (UB) and surrounding metanephric mesenchyme of the kidneys from E15 
until birth, but was undetectable in mature kidneys. Double-immunofluorescence
staining showed that both rPEA3 and WT1 expressed in the condensed mesenchymal
cells at E15 and E17; and later from E19 to P7, both expressed in the epithelial 
cells of ureteric bud and their branches.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide compelling evidence that SSH is an effective
method for identifying genes that are regulated during renal development, and
suggest that the newly identified gene rPEA3 may play an important role in kidney
development and differentiation.

2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19293599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Hepatol. 2009 Jan;50(1):128-39. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2008.07.034. Epub 2008 Oct 
7.

Interferon alpha increases metalloproteinase-13 gene expression through a
polyomavirus enhancer activator 3-dependent pathway in hepatic stellate cells.

Díaz-Sanjuán T(1), García-Ruiz I, Rodríguez-Juan C, Muñoz-Yagüe T, Solís-Muñoz P,
Solís-Herruzo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Research Center, Hospital Universitario 12 de 
Octubre, Avenida de Andalucia, s/n. Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To determine the effects of IFNalpha on MMP-13 gene expression
in primary culture of hepatic stellate cells.
METHODS: We measured MMP-13 mRNA, MMP-13 protein, MMP-13 luciferase activity,
binding of AP1 and PEA3 to DNA, and binding of PEA3 to Jak1 and Stat1.
RESULTS: IFNalpha increased MMP-13 mRNA, MMP-13 protein, and luciferase activity 
in cells transfected either with a luciferase plasmid driven by the MMP-13
promoter or with the same plasmid in which the AP1 binding site has been mutated.
IFNalpha induced the binding of nuclear proteins to a radiolabeled PEA3 probe,
but not to a AP1 probe. Supershift assays demonstrated that PEA3 and Stat1 are
implicated in the formation of this complex. Immunoprecipitation assays showed
that PEA3 interacts physically with Stat1 and that IFNalpha treatment increases
this interaction. Downregulation of PEA3 or JAK1 with appropriated siRNAs or
mutation of the PEA3 binding site in the MMP-13 promoter abrogated the effects of
IFNalpha on MMP-13 gene expression. Finally, IFNalpha induced the binding of PEA3
to JAK1, as well as PEA3 tyrosine and serine phosphorylation.
CONCLUSIONS: IFNalpha determines the binding of PEA3 to JAK1 and its tyrosine
phosphorylation. Activated PEA3 binds to MMP-13 promoter and activates its
expression.

PMID: 19014879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;68(18):7629-37. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2014.

A fluorescence in situ hybridization screen for E26 transformation-specific
aberrations: identification of DDX5-ETV4 fusion protein in prostate cancer.

Han B(1), Mehra R, Dhanasekaran SM, Yu J, Menon A, Lonigro RJ, Wang X, Gong Y,
Wang L, Shankar S, Laxman B, Shah RB, Varambally S, Palanisamy N, Tomlins SA,
Kumar-Sinha C, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions involving E26 transformation-specific (ETS) transcription 
factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 have been identified in 40% to 70% of prostate
cancers. Here, we used a comprehensive fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
split probe strategy interrogating all 27 ETS family members and their five known
5' fusion partners in a cohort of 110 clinically localized prostate cancer
patients. Gene rearrangements were only identified in ETS genes that were
previously implicated in prostate cancer gene fusions including ERG, ETV1, and
ETV4 (43%, 5%, and 5%, respectively), suggesting that a substantial fraction of
prostate cancers (estimated at 30-60%) cannot be attributed to an ETS gene
fusion. Among the known 5' gene fusion partners, TMPRSS2 was rearranged in 47% of
cases followed by SLC45A3, HNRPA2B1, and C15ORF21 in 2%, 1%, and 1% of cases,
respectively. Based on this comprehensive FISH screen, we have made four
noteworthy observations. First, by screening the entire ETS transcription factor 
family for rearrangements, we found that a large fraction of prostate cancers
(44%) cannot be ascribed to an ETS gene fusion, an observation which will
stimulate research into identifying recurrent non-ETS aberrations in prostate
cancers. Second, we identified SLC45A3 as a novel 5' fusion partner of ERG;
previously, TMPRSS2 was the only described 5' partner of ERG. Third, we
identified two prostate-specific, androgen-induced genes, FLJ35294 and CANT1, as 
5' partners to ETV1 and ETV4. Fourth, we identified a ubiquitously expressed,
androgen-insensitive gene, DDX5, fused in frame with ETV4, leading to the
expression of a DDX5-ETV4 fusion protein.

PMCID: PMC2760292
PMID: 18794152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Aug 20;26(24):3930-6. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2007.15.6752.

Gene panel model predictive of outcome in men at high-risk of systemic
progression and death from prostate cancer after radical retropubic
prostatectomy.

Cheville JC(1), Karnes RJ, Therneau TM, Kosari F, Munz JM, Tillmans L, Basal E,
Rangel LJ, Bergstralh E, Kovtun IV, Savci-Heijink CD, Klee EW, Vasmatzis G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

PURPOSE: In men who are at high-risk of prostate cancer, progression and death
from cancer after radical retropubic prostatectomy (RRP), limited prognostic
information is provided by established prognostic features. The objective of this
study was to develop a model predictive of outcome in this group of patients.
METHODS: Candidate genes were identified from microarray expression data from 102
laser capture microdissected prostate tissue samples. Candidates were
overexpressed in tumor compared with normal prostate and more frequently in
Gleason patterns 4 and 5 than in 3. A case control study of 157 high-risk
patients, matched on Gleason score and stage with systemic progression or death
of prostate cancer as the end point, was used to evaluate the expression of
candidate genes and build a multivariate model. Tumor was collected from the
highest Gleason score in paraffin-embedded blocks and the gene expression was
quantified by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
Validation of the final model was performed on a separate case-control study of
57 high-risk patients who underwent RRP.
RESULTS: A model incorporating gene expression of topoisomerase-2a, cadherin-10, 
the fusion status based on ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 expression, and the aneuploidy
status resulted in a 0.81 area under the curve (AUC) in receiver operating
characteristic statistical analysis for the identification of men with systemic
progression and death from high grade prostate cancer. The AUC was 0.79 in the
independent validation study.
CONCLUSION: The model can identify men with high-risk prostate cancer who may
benefit from more intensive postoperative follow-up and adjuvant therapies.

PMCID: PMC2654311
PMID: 18711181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biochem. 2008 Oct;144(4):539-46. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvn098. Epub 2008 Aug 7.

Identification of E1AF as a target gene of E2F1-induced apoptosis in response to 
DNA damage.

Wei Y(1), Liu D, Ge Y, Zhou F, Xu J, Chen H, Gu J, Jiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Glycoconjuates Research & Gene Research Center, Shanghai
Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Transcription factor E1AF plays critical roles in neuronal development and tumour
metastasis and is regulated by a number of signalling cascades, including the
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. Accumulated evidence indicted that
E1AF might contribute to cell survival in response to environment factors. Here, 
we provided evidence the cell cycle and apoptosis regulator E2F1 induces E1AF
expression at the transcriptional level. DNA damage by etoposide causes
E2F1-dependent induction of E1AF expression at transcriptional level.
Furthermore, disruption of E1AF expression by E1AF RNAi decreased E2F1-induced
apoptosis in response to etoposide. Thus, we conclude that activation of E1AF
provides a means for E2F1 to induce cell apoptosis in response to DNA damage.

PMID: 18687701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Mar 11;88(10):669-73.

[Frequency and transcript variant analysis of gene fusions between TMPRSS2 and
ETS transcription factor genes in prostate cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Dai MJ(1), Chen LL, Zheng YB, Chen W, Tao ZH, Weng ZL, Wu XL, Li CD, Chen ZG,
Chen XD, Shi SB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Laboratory Diagnosis, First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical College, Wenzhou 325000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the frequencies and types of fusions between the
transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2), ETS-related gene (ERG), ETS variant-1 
(ETV1), and ETS variant-4 (ETV4) genes in prostate cancer (PCa) and significance 
thereof.
METHODS: Biopsy samples of prostate were obtained under transrectal ultrasound
(TRUS) from 32 PCa patients, aged (74 +/- 8) and 34 patients with benign prostate
hyperplasia (BPH). Nested RT-PCR and direct DNA sequencing were used to detect
the fusion genes of TMPRSS2/ERG, TMPRSS2/ETV1, and TMPRSS2/ETV4. The association 
between the fusion-positive tumor rate and Gleason grading was analyzed.
RESULTS: Of the 32 PCa patients, TMPRSS2/ERG fusion was detected in 17 cases
(53.1%), including 5 variant fusion transcripts one of which was newly discovered
with the GenBank accession number of EU090248. TMPRSS2/ETV1 fusion was detected
in only 2 cases (6.3%), including one newly discovered variant fusion transcripts
with the GenBank accession number of EU090249. TMPRSS2/ETV4 fusion was not
detected. The positive rates of TMPRSS2/ERG and TMPRSS2/ETV1 fusions showed no
statistical association with the Gleason grade (P = 0.169). No fusion between the
TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor genes was detected in the 34 BPH samples.
CONCLUSION: TMPRSS2/ERG and TMPRS22/ETV1 fusion genes with different subtypes
exist in the tissues of PCa. TMPRSS2/ERG and TMPRSS2/ETV1 fusion genes may be
used as diagnostic tools for PCa.

PMID: 18642766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cancer. 2008 Jun 3;7:48. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-48.

DNA copy number changes in high-grade malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors by
array CGH.

Kresse SH(1), Skårn M, Ohnstad HO, Namløs HM, Bjerkehagen B, Myklebost O,
Meza-Zepeda LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Radiumhospitalet, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
stinek@rr-research.no

BACKGROUND: Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are rare and highly
aggressive soft tissue tumors showing complex chromosomal aberrations. In order
to identify recurrent chromosomal regions of gain and loss, and thereby novel
gene targets of potential importance for MPNST development and/or progression, we
have analyzed DNA copy number changes in seven high-grade MPNSTs using
microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH).
RESULTS: Considerable more gains than losses were observed, and the most frequent
minimal recurrent regions of gain included 1q24.1-q24.2, 1q24.3-q25.1,
8p23.1-p12, 9q34.11-q34.13 and 17q23.2-q25.3, all gained in five of seven
samples. The 17q23.2-q25.3 region was gained in all five patients with poor
outcome and not in the two patients with disease-free survival. cDNA microarray
analysis and quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR were used to
investigate expression of genes located within these regions. The gene lysyl
oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2) was identified as a candidate target for the 8p23.1-p12
gain. Within 17q, the genes topoisomerase II-alpha (TOP2A), ets variant gene 4
(E1A enhancer binding protein, E1AF) (ETV4) and baculoviral IAP repeat-containing
5 (survivin) (BIRC5) showed increased expression in all samples compared to two
benign tumors. Increased expression of these genes has previously been associated
with poor survival in other malignancies, and for TOP2A, in MPNSTs as well. In
addition, we have analyzed the expression of five micro RNAs located within the
17q23.2-q25.3 region, but none of them showed high expression levels compared to 
the benign tumors.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows the potential of using DNA copy number changes
obtained by array CGH to predict the prognosis of MPNST patients. Although no
clear correlations between the expression level and patient outcome were
observed, the genes TOP2A, ETV4 and BIRC5 are interesting candidate targets for
the 17q gain associated with poor survival.

PMCID: PMC2442610
PMID: 18522746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Oncology. 2007;73(5-6):384-8. doi: 10.1159/000136158. Epub 2008 May 30.

Association of E1AF mRNA expression with tumor progression and matrilysin in
human rectal cancer.

Liu HY(1), Zhou B, Wang L, Li Y, Zhou ZG, Sun XF, Xu B, Zeng YJ, Song JM, Luo HZ,
Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Surgery and Organ Microcirculation, Department of
Gastrointestinal Surgery, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine E1AF mRNA expression and to determine whether it is
correlated with tumor progression and matrilysin in human rectal cancer.
METHODS: Real-time RT-PCR was used to determine E1AF and matrilysin expression in
100 matched rectal cancers and normal tissues.
RESULTS: Among the 100 rectal cancers, 69 cases of E1AF mRNA overexpression were 
observed. E1AF mRNA overexpression correlated well with matrilysin. In
carcinomas, E1AF mRNA overexpression correlated significantly with depth of
invasion, lymph node metastasis, venous involvement and advanced pTNM stage.
CONCLUSIONS: E1AF was correlated significantly with tumor progression of human
rectal cancer and may be an important factor in rectal cancer progression.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18511876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2008 Sep 1;477(1):20-6. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2008.05.001.
Epub 2008 May 14.

E1AF promotes mithramycin A-induced Huh-7 cell apoptosis depending on its
DNA-binding domain.

Liu D(1), Wei Y, Zhou F, Ge Y, Xu J, Chen H, Zhang W, Yun X, Jiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Glycoconjugates Research, Ministry of Public Health & Gene
Research Center, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Dongan Road 130,
Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China.

Transcription factor E1AF is widely known to play critical roles in tumor
metastasis via directly binding to the promoters of genes involved in tumor
migration and invasion. Here, we reported for the first time the pro-apoptotic
role of E1AF in tumor cells. The expression of E1AF at protein level was
obviously increased during Huh-7 and Hep3B cells apoptosis induced by the
anticancer agent mithramycin A. E1AF overexpression markedly enhanced mithramycin
A-induced Huh-7 cell apoptosis and the expression of pro-apoptotic protein Bax
depending on its DNA-binding domain. And, reduction of E1AF inhibited mithramycin
A-induced Huh-7 cell apoptosis. Furthermore, reducing the expression of Bax
significantly inhibited E1AF-increased Huh-7 cell apoptosis induced by
mithramycin A. Taken together, E1AF increases mithramycin A-induced Huh-7 cells
apoptosis and Bax expression depending on its DNA-binding domain, indicating that
E1AF might contribute to the therapeutic efficiency of mithramycin A for
hepatoma.

PMID: 18510939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Endocrinol. 2008 Aug;198(2):281-90. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0142. Epub 2008 May 20.

Etv5, an ETS transcription factor, is expressed in granulosa and cumulus cells
and serves as a transcriptional regulator of the cyclooxygenase-2.

Eo J(1), Han K, M Murphy K, Song H, Lim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, RCTC, IBST, Konkuk
University, 1 Hwayang-Dong, Kwangjin-Gu, Seoul 143-701, South Korea.

Etv4, Etv1, and Etv5 are members of Etv4 subfamily of E26 transformation-specific
(Ets) transcription factors that are known to influence a host of biological
processes. We previously showed that Etv5, expressed in Sertoli cells, plays a
crucial role in maintaining spermatogonial stem cell niche in the mouse testis.
However, it is not yet known whether Etv4 family members are expressed in the
ovary or play any role in ovarian functions. Here, we show that Etv5 and Etv4 are
expressed in mouse ovaries in granulosa and cumulus cells during
folliculogenesis. Both Etv5 and Etv4 mRNAs are also detected in cumulus-oocyte
complexes (COCs) and denuded oocytes. Notably, Etv4 is highly expressed in the
cumulus cells of ovulated COCs at 16-h post-human chorionic gonadotropin.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (PTGS2), a rate-limiting enzyme for prostaglandin synthesis, is 
critical for oocyte maturation and ovulation. Since several putative Ets-binding 
sites are present in the PTGS2 promoter, we examined whether Etv5 influences
Ptgs2 transcriptional activity. Indeed, we found that addition of Etv5 increases 
the transcriptional activity of the 3.2-kb mouse Ptgs2 promoter by 2.5-fold in
luciferase reporter assays. Collectively, the results show that Etv4 and Etv5 are
expressed in granulosa and cumulus cells during folliculogenesis and ovulation,
suggesting that they influence cellular events in the ovary by regulating
downstream genes such as Ptgs2.

PMID: 18492810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cancer Res. 2008 May 15;68(10):3584-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6154.

Characterization of TMPRSS2-ETS gene aberrations in androgen-independent
metastatic prostate cancer.

Mehra R(1), Tomlins SA, Yu J, Cao X, Wang L, Menon A, Rubin MA, Pienta KJ, Shah
RB, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS
transcription factor family members ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 have been identified as a
critical event in prostate cancer development. In this study, we characterized
the prevalence and diversity of these rearrangements in hormone-refractory
metastatic prostate cancer. We used a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
split probe strategy to comprehensively evaluate TMPRSS2-ETS aberrations across
97 nonosseous metastatic sites of prostate cancer from 30 rapid autopsies of men 
who died of androgen-independent disease. Tissue microarrays were constructed
representing multiple metastatic sites from each patient, and split signal FISH
probes for TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 were used to assess for TMPRSS2-ETS
rearrangements. In patients exhibiting these aberrations, multiple sites from an 
individual case harbored the same gene fusion molecular subtype suggesting clonal
expansion of disease. The most common prostate cancer gene fusion, TMPRSS2-ERG,
can be generated by the mechanism of interstitial deletion (Edel) about 39% to
60% of the time in clinically localized disease. Interestingly, we observed that 
all of the androgen-independent metastatic prostate cancer sites harboring
TMPRSS2-ERG were associated with Edel. These findings suggest that TMPRSS2-ERG
with Edel is an aggressive and, in this study, uniformly lethal molecular subtype
of prostate cancer associated with androgen-independent disease.

PMCID: PMC2677168
PMID: 18483239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 May;183(1):21-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.01.021.

Detection of the TMPRSS2-ETS fusion gene in prostate carcinomas: retrospective
analysis of 55 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded samples with clinical data.

Rouzier C(1), Haudebourg J, Carpentier X, Valério L, Amiel J, Michiels JF,
Pedeutour F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Solid Tumors Genetics, Nice University Hospital and CNRS UMR
6543, Faculty of Medicine, 28 avenue de Valombrose, 06107 Nice, France.

The recent identification of fusion genes involving ETS family members in human
prostate adenocarcinoma has confirmed the hypothesis that recurrent specific
aberrations such as fusion genes may be as frequent in epithelial tumors as they 
are in leukemias and sarcomas. However, reciprocal translocations with fusion
genes are often not detectable in carcinomas by conventional karyotyping because 
of additional complex chromosomal abnormalities. We retrospectively analyzed a
large series of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples including 55 prostate
carcinomas and 11 benign prostate tumors. We identified the fusion gene
TMPRSS2-ERG by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 40/55 
carcinomas (72%). Our study demonstrates that the detection of ETS fusion gene by
RT-PCR is feasible on formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded samples. No
significant association between the presence of the fusion gene and any clinical 
feature, such as preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level (PSA>20
or PSA< or =20), pTNM stage including capsule invasion, seminal vesicle invasion,
and lymph nodes metastases, or recurrence was observed in our series.

Copyright 2008 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 18474293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer Res. 2008 May 1;68(9):3094-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0198.

Two unique novel prostate-specific and androgen-regulated fusion partners of ETV4
in prostate cancer.

Hermans KG(1), Bressers AA, van der Korput HA, Dits NF, Jenster G, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Recently, fusion of ERG to the androgen-regulated, prostate-specific TMPRSS2 gene
has been identified as the most frequent genetic alteration in prostate cancer.
At low frequency, TMPRSS2-ETV1 and TMPRSS2-ETV4 fusion genes have been described.
In this study, we report two novel ETV4 fusion genes in prostate cancer:
KLK2-ETV4 and CANT1-ETV4. Both gene fusions have important unique aspects. KLK2
is a well-established androgen-induced and prostate-specific gene. Fusion of KLK2
to ETV4 results in the generation of an additional ETV4 exon, denoted exon 4a.
This novel exon delivers an ATG for the longest open reading frame, in this way
avoiding translation start in KLK2 exon 1. Although wild-type CANT1 has two
alternative first exons (exons 1 and 1a), only exon 1a was detected in CANT1-ETV4
fusion transcripts. We show that CANT1 transcripts starting at exon 1a have an
androgen-induced and prostate-specific expression pattern, whereas CANT1
transcripts starting at exon 1 are not prostate specific. So, the two novel ETV4 
fusion partners possess as predominant common characteristics androgen-induction 
and prostate-specific expression.

PMID: 18451133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Oncol Rep. 2008 May;19(5):1093-8.

Expression of E1AF, an ets-oncogene transcription factor, highly correlates with 
malignant phenotype of malignant melanoma through up-regulation of the
membrane-type-1 matrix metalloproteinase gene.

Hata H(1), Kitamura T, Higashino F, Hida K, Yoshida K, Ohiro Y, Totsuka Y,
Kitagawa Y, Shindoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Biology, Hokkaido University Graduate School 
of Dental Medicine, Sapporo 060-8586, Japan.

Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) is closely involved in the degradation of
extracellular matrix and confers invasive and metastatic potential to malignant
tumors. MMP-2 is a type-IV collagenase secreted as a proenzyme that is activated 
on the surface of the tumor cell by membrane-type 1-MMP (MT1-MMP). MT1-MMP plays 
a critical role during tumor progression and metastasis. We investigated the
expression levels of E1AF and MT1-MMP in malignant melanoma cell lines and
specimens from patients in order to clarify the mechanisms responsible for the
invasion and metastasis of malignant melanoma. High levels of E1AF and MT1-MMP
mRNA expression were observed in melanoma cells by Northern blotting and
real-time PCR. The expression level was highly correlated with an invasive
potential determined by an in vitro invasion assay. The down-regulation of
MT1-MMP was identified when E1AF was knocked down by RNA interference. These
results suggest that E1AF plays a crucial role in the invasion and metastasis of 
malignant melanoma through up-regulating the MT1-MMP expression.

PMID: 18425363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 1;68(1):73-80. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5352.

Characterization of TMPRSS2:ETV5 and SLC45A3:ETV5 gene fusions in prostate
cancer.

Helgeson BE(1), Tomlins SA, Shah N, Laxman B, Cao Q, Prensner JR, Cao X, Singla
N, Montie JE, Varambally S, Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0602, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions involving oncogenic ETS transcription factors (including
ERG, ETV1, and ETV4) have been identified in a large fraction of prostate
cancers. The most common fusions contain the 5' untranslated region of TMPRSS2
fused to ERG. Recently, we identified additional 5' partners in ETV1 fusions,
including TMPRSS2, SLC45A3, HERV-K_22q11.23, C15ORF21, and HNRPA2B1. Here, we
identify ETV5 as the fourth ETS family member involved in recurrent gene
rearrangements in prostate cancer. Characterization of two cases with ETV5
outlier expression by RNA ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA ends
identified one case with a TMPRSS2:ETV5 fusion and one case with a SLC45A3:ETV5
fusion. We confirmed the presence of these fusions by quantitative PCR and
fluorescence in situ hybridization. In vitro recapitulation of ETV5
overexpression induced invasion in RWPE cells, a benign immortalized prostatic
epithelial cell line. Expression profiling and an integrative molecular concepts 
analysis of RWPE-ETV5 cells also revealed the induction of an invasive
transcriptional program, consistent with ERG and ETV1 overexpression in RWPE
cells, emphasizing the functional redundancy of ETS rearrangements. Together, our
results suggest that the family of 5' partners previously identified in ETV1 gene
fusions can fuse with other ETS family members, suggesting numerous rare gene
fusion permutations in prostate cancer.

PMID: 18172298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8770-82. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

Functional interaction of E1AF and Sp1 in glioma invasion.

Jiang J(1), Wei Y, Shen J, Liu D, Chen X, Zhou J, Zong H, Yun X, Kong X, Zhang S,
Yang Y, Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Ministry of Education and
Health, Gene Research Center, Shanghai Medical College and Institutes of
Biomedical Sciences of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of
China.

Transcription factor E1AF is widely known to play critical roles in tumor
metastasis via directly binding to the promoters of genes involved in tumor
migration and invasion. Here, we report for the first time E1AF as a novel
binding partner for ubiquitously expressed Sp1 transcription factor. E1AF forms a
complex with Sp1, contributes to Sp1 phosphorylation and transcriptional
activity, and functions as a mediator between epidermal growth factor and Sp1
phosphorylation and activity. Sp1 functions as a carrier bringing E1AF to the
promoter region, thus activating transcription of glioma-related gene for
beta1,4-galactosyltransferase V (GalT V; EC 2.4.1.38). Biologically, E1AF
functions as a positive invasion regulator in glioma in cooperation with Sp1
partly via up-regulation of GalT V. This report describes a new mechanism of
glioma invasion involving a cooperative effort between E1AF and Sp1 transcription
factors.

PMCID: PMC2169427
PMID: 17938207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Dyn. 2007 Nov;236(11):3100-10.

ETS-family genes in pancreatic development.

Kobberup S(1), Nyeng P, Juhl K, Hutton J, Jensen J.

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado, Denver,
Colorado 80045, USA.

ETS-family factors play major roles in development and cancer, notably as
critical targets for extra-cellular signaling pathways, including MAPK-signaling.
Given the presently limited knowledge on the role of ETS-factors in pancreatic
development, we here sought to characterize all 26 individual members of the
ETS-family in relation to pancreatic development using a combination of genomics,
RT-PCR, and histological techniques. This analysis uncovers 22 ETS family genes
displaying select spatial and temporal expression patterns in the developing
pancreas. Highly specific expression of ETS-family components is observed in
pancreatic progenitor cells or the associated embryonic mesenchyme. Other members
are linked to the differentiation of more mature pancreatic cells, including
exocrine and endocrine cell types. We find that two members of the Etv subfamily,
Etv4 and Etv5, are expressed in cells proximal to pancreatic mesenchyme, and,
furthermore, induced in FGF10-arrested pancreatic progenitors suggesting that
these factors mediate mesenchymal-to-epithelial signaling.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17907201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 1;67(17):7991-5.

Heterogeneity of TMPRSS2 gene rearrangements in multifocal prostate
adenocarcinoma: molecular evidence for an independent group of diseases.

Mehra R(1), Han B, Tomlins SA, Wang L, Menon A, Wasco MJ, Shen R, Montie JE,
Chinnaiyan AM, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS
family transcription factors ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 have been identified in the
majority of prostate adenocarcinomas (PCA). PCA is often multifocal with
histologic heterogeneity of different tumor foci. As TMPRSS2 is a common 5'
partner of ETS gene fusions, we monitored TMPRSS2 rearrangement by fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) to study the origin and molecular basis of
multifocal PCA heterogeneity. TMPRSS2 rearrangement was evaluated by FISH on a
tissue microarray representing 93 multifocal PCAs from 43 radical prostatectomy
resections. Overall, 70% (30 of 43) of the cases showed TMPRSS2 rearrangement,
including 63% through deletion (loss of the 3' TMPRSS2 signal), 27% through
translocation (split of 5' and 3' TMPRSS2 signals), and 10% through both
mechanisms in different tumor foci. Of the 30 TMPRSS2 rearranged cases, 30%
showed concordance in all tumor foci, whereas 70% were discordant in at least one
focus. In TMPRSS2 rearranged cases, the largest (index) tumor was rearranged 83% 
of the time. Pathologic stage, size, or Gleason grade of the multifocal PCA did
not correlate with overall TMPRSS2 rearrangement. Our results suggest that
multifocal PCA is a heterogeneous group of diseases arising from multiple,
independent clonal expansions. Understanding this molecular heterogeneity is
critical to the future development and utility of diagnostic and prognostic PCA
biomarkers.

PMID: 17804708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nature. 2007 Aug 2;448(7153):595-9.

Distinct classes of chromosomal rearrangements create oncogenic ETS gene fusions 
in prostate cancer.

Tomlins SA(1), Laxman B, Dhanasekaran SM, Helgeson BE, Cao X, Morris DS, Menon A,
Jing X, Cao Q, Han B, Yu J, Wang L, Montie JE, Rubin MA, Pienta KJ, Roulston D,
Shah RB, Varambally S, Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Feb 12;457(7231):E1; discussion E2-3.

Recently, we identified recurrent gene fusions involving the 5' untranslated
region of the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS (E26
transformation-specific) family genes ERG, ETV1 or ETV4 in most prostate cancers.
Whereas TMPRSS2-ERG fusions are predominant, fewer TMPRSS2-ETV1 cases have been
identified than expected on the basis of the frequency of high (outlier)
expression of ETV1 (refs 3-13). Here we explore the mechanism of ETV1 outlier
expression in human prostate tumours and prostate cancer cell lines. We
identified previously unknown 5' fusion partners in prostate tumours with ETV1
outlier expression, including untranslated regions from a prostate-specific
androgen-induced gene (SLC45A3) and an endogenous retroviral element
(HERV-K_22q11.23), a prostate-specific androgen-repressed gene (C15orf21), and a 
strongly expressed housekeeping gene (HNRPA2B1). To study aberrant activation of 
ETV1, we identified two prostate cancer cell lines, LNCaP and MDA-PCa 2B, that
had ETV1 outlier expression. Through distinct mechanisms, the entire ETV1 locus
(7p21) is rearranged to a 1.5-megabase prostate-specific region at
14q13.3-14q21.1 in both LNCaP cells (cryptic insertion) and MDA-PCa 2B cells
(balanced translocation). Because the common factor of these rearrangements is
aberrant ETV1 overexpression, we recapitulated this event in vitro and in vivo,
demonstrating that ETV1 overexpression in benign prostate cells and in the mouse 
prostate confers neoplastic phenotypes. Identification of distinct classes of ETS
gene rearrangements demonstrates that dormant oncogenes can be activated in
prostate cancer by juxtaposition to tissue-specific or ubiquitously active
genomic loci. Subversion of active genomic regulatory elements may serve as a
more generalized mechanism for carcinoma development. Furthermore, the
identification of androgen-repressed and insensitive 5' fusion partners may have 
implications for the anti-androgen treatment of advanced prostate cancer.

PMID: 17671502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Aug 17;360(1):226-32. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Repression of E1AF transcriptional activity by sumoylation and PIASy.

Nishida T(1), Terashima M, Fukami K, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Functional Genomics, Life Science Research Center, Mie
University, 1577 Kurima-machiya, Tsu 514-8507, Japan. nishida@gene.mie-u.ac.jp

E1AF is a member of the Ets transcriptional factor family, and it plays a crucial
role in tumor metastasis. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating its
activity are not well characterized. In this study, we show that E1AF is
sumoylated at four lysine residues, both in vivo and in vitro. Replacement of
these lysines by arginine enhanced the transcriptional activity of E1AF,
suggesting that sumoylation negatively regulates E1AF activity. We further
demonstrated that PIASy enhanced sumoylation of E1AF as a specific SUMO-E3
ligase. In addition, PIASy repressed the transcriptional activity of both the
wild-type and sumoylation defective mutants. However, the C342A mutant of PIASy, 
which abrogates SUMO-E3 ligase activity, had a significantly decreased ability to
repress E1AF activity. Taken together, our results indicate that PIASy negatively
regulates E1AF-mediated transcription by both E1AF sumoylation in a dependent and
independent fashion.

PMID: 17585876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 22;358(1):53-8. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

E1AF promotes breast cancer cell cycle progression via upregulation of Cyclin D3 
transcription.

Jiang J(1), Wei Y, Liu D, Zhou J, Shen J, Chen X, Zhang S, Kong X, Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Glycoconjugates Research, Ministry of Public Health and Gene
Research Center, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
People's Republic of China.

E1AF transcription factor, a member of Ets family, is deregulated in many tumors 
and widely known to play critical roles in tumor metastasis via directly binding 
to the promoter of genes involved in tumor migration and invasion. Here, we found
that E1AF overexpression promoted breast cancer cell cycle progression and growth
in vivo as well as the transcription of cell cycle-related protein Cyclin D3.
And, the interference of Cyclin D3 expression by transfecting with Cyclin D3 RNAi
inhibited the positive role of E1AF in cell cycle progression. We further showed 
that decreasing the expression of E1AF by E1AF RNAi reduced Cyclin D3
transcription and expression, and inhibited cell cycle progression that was
abrogated by Cyclin D3 overexpression. Taken together, E1AF increases cell cycle 
progression via upregulation of Cyclin D3 transcription, which elicits a new
mechanism of breast cancer growth and a new mechanism of Cyclin D3 transcription.

PMID: 17467662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Urologe A. 2007 Jul;46(7):754-60.

[TMPRSS2-ETS gene fusion in prostate cancer].

[Article in German]

Perner S(1), Schmidt FH, Hofer MD, Kuefer R, Rubin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham & Women's Hospital/Harvard Medical School,
221 Longwood Avenue, EBRC 442A, Boston, MA 02115-6110, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent chromosomal rearrangements have not been well characterized
in common carcinomas. Using a novel bioinformatics approach, our group recently
described a novel gene fusion in PCa. This fusion involves the androgen-regulated
gene TMPRSS2 and so far three members of the ETS family of transcription factors 
already described as rearranged in the Ewing's family of tumors. By analogy,
fusion status in prostate cancer may determine clinical outcome and secondary
genetic alterations as witnessed in Ewing's tumors.
MATERIAL: These novel gene fusions occur in the majority of prostate cancers
identified by PSA screening and are the driving mechanism for overexpression of
the three members of the ETS transcription factor family, either ERG (21q22.3),
ETV1 (7p21.2), or ETV4 (17q21). Considering the high incidence of prostate cancer
and the high frequency of this gene fusion, the TMPRSS2-ETS gene fusion is the
most common genetic aberration so far described in human malignancies.
RESULTS: So far, this is the only gene rearrangement in any of the most prevalent
cancers. As confirmed by other groups, we demonstrated that, within the group of 
ETS transcription factors, ERG is the most common fusion partner of the ETS genes
with TMPRSS2. This gene fusion is considered to be an early event in PCa
development. Emerging data suggest that gene fusion PCa demonstrates a distinct
clinical course and thus support its use as a diagnostic test and prognostic
biomarker. Also similar to the Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML), the gene fusion in prostate cancer has potential as an important 
candidate for the development of targeted therapy.

PMID: 17458530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncol Rep. 2007 May;17(5):1033-6.

Molecular genetic analyses of the TMPRSS2-ERG and TMPRSS2-ETV1 gene fusions in 50
cases of prostate cancer.

Winnes M(1), Lissbrant E, Damber JE, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, SE-413 45
Göteborg, Sweden.

Recently, gene fusions between the androgen responsive gene TMPRSS2 and members
of the ETS-family of DNA-binding transcription factor genes were found in
prostate cancer. Recurrent fusions were identified between the 5'-noncoding
region of TMPRSS2 and ERG, or less frequently ETV1 or ETV4, resulting in
overexpression of normal or truncated ETS-proteins. Herein, we have analyzed a
series of 50 prostate cancer samples for expression of TPRSS2-ERG and
TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusion transcripts. RT-PCR analysis revealed TMPRSS2-ERG fusion
transcripts in 18 of the 50 tumors (36%). None of the tumors expressed a
TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusion. Our findings show that the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion is common in
prostate cancer and that the related TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusion is very rare. However,
the frequency of ERG-fusions in the present study is somewhat lower than
previously observed, indicating heterogeneity with regard to expression of
ETS-gene fusions in subsets of prostate cancers. Moreover, clinical follow-up
studies showed a clear tendency that fusion-positive tumors were associated with 
lower Gleason grade and better survival than fusion-negative tumors. Our findings
suggest that ERG gene fusions might be of prognostic significance in prostate
cancer.

PMID: 17390040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mod Pathol. 2007 May;20(5):538-44. Epub 2007 Mar 2.

Comprehensive assessment of TMPRSS2 and ETS family gene aberrations in clinically
localized prostate cancer.

Mehra R(1), Tomlins SA, Shen R, Nadeem O, Wang L, Wei JT, Pienta KJ, Ghosh D,
Rubin MA, Chinnaiyan AM, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

Novel recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the 
ETS family members ERG, ETV1, or ETV4 have been recently identified as a common
molecular event in prostate cancer development. We comprehensively analyzed the
frequency and risk of disease progression for the TMPRSS2 and ETS family genes
rearrangements in a cohort of 96 American men surgically treated for clinically
localized prostate cancer. Using three break apart (TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV4) and one
fusion (TMPRSS:ETV1) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays, we
identified rearrangements in TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 in 65, 55, 2, and 2% of
cases, respectively. Overall, 54 and 2% of cases demonstrated TMPRSS2:ERG and
TMPRSS2:ETV1 fusions, respectively. As intronic loss of genomic DNA between
TMPRSS2 and ERG has been identified as a mechanism of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion, our
assays allowed us to detect deletion of the 3' end of TMPRSS2 and the 5' end of
ERG in 41 and 39% of cases rearranged for respective genes. Prostate cancers
demonstrating TMPRSS2 gene rearrangement were associated with high pathologic
stage (P=0.04). Our results confirm that recurrent chromosomal aberrations in
TMPRSS2 and/or ETS family members are found in about 70% of prostate cancers.
Importantly, we define a novel approach to study these gene fusions and
identified cases where TMPRSS2 was rearranged without rearrangement of ERG, ETV1 
or ETV4 and cases with ETS family gene rearrangement without TMPRSS2
rearrangement, suggesting that novel 5' and 3' partners may be involved in gene
fusions in prostate cancer.

PMID: 17334343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mod Pathol. 2007 Mar;20(3):397-404.

Differentiating Ewing's sarcoma from other round blue cell tumors using a RT-PCR 
translocation panel on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues.

Lewis TB(1), Coffin CM, Bernard PS.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, The ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental
Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a common malignancy of bone and soft tissue that occurs most
often in children and young adults. Differentiating Ewing's sarcoma from other
round blue cell tumors can be a diagnostic challenge because of their similarity 
in histology and clinical presentation. Thus, ancillary molecular tests for
detecting disease-defining translocations are important for confirming the
diagnosis. We analyzed 65 round blue cell tumors, including 53 Ewing's sarcoma
samples from 50 unique cases. Samples were processed for RNA from archived
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. Real-time RT-PCR assays specific 
for Ewing's sarcoma (EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1, EWS-ETV4, and EWS-FEV),
synovial sarcoma (SYT-SSX1 and SYT-SSX2), and rhabdomyosarcoma (PAX3-FKHR and
PAX7-FKHR) were tested across the samples. The translocation panel had a
sensitivity of 81% (43 out of 53 samples) for diagnosing Ewing's sarcoma when
using the histological criteria as the 'gold' standard. None of the Ewing's
specific translocations were found in the non-Ewing's samples (100% specificity).
Of the 43 samples with translocations detected, 26 (60%) had an EWS-FLI1 type 1
translocation, 13 (30%) had an EWS-FLI1 type 2 translocation, 3 (7%) had an
EWS-ERG translocation, 1 had an EWS-ETV1 translocation, and 1 sample had both an 
EWS-FLI1 type 1 and type 2 translocation. Our real-time RT-PCR assay for
detecting sarcoma translocations has high sensitivity and specificity for Ewing's
sarcoma and has clinical utility in differentiating small round blue cell tumors 
in the clinical lab.

PMID: 17334332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cell Cycle. 2006 Dec;5(23):2753-9. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Expression of EWS-ETS fusions in NIH3T3 cells reveals significant differences to 
Ewing's sarcoma.

Braunreiter CL(1), Hancock JD, Coffin CM, Boucher KM, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas contain specific chromosomal translocations that fuse EWS to ETS
family members, including FLI, ERG, FEV, ETV1 and ETV4. Prior work has suggested 
that functional differences exist between some of these EWS-ETS fusions. However,
as the cell of origin of Ewing's sarcoma is unknown, this prior work was
conducted in NIH3T3 cells, which have not been validated as an appropriate model 
for the study of EWS-ETS fusions. To determine if NIH3T3 cells are a good model
for Ewing's sarcoma, we introduced all five EWS-ETS fusions into these cells, and
analyzed their phenotypes and gene expression patterns. EWS-FLI, EWS-ERG, and
EWS-FEV caused NIH3T3 cells to exhibit anchorage independent growth whereas
EWS-ETV1 and EWS-ETV4 did not. In contrast, all the EWS-ETS fusions induced tumor
formation in a xenograft model. We defined the core transcriptional profile of
the EWS-ETS fusions using cDNA microarrays, and compared these to data derived
from patient-derived Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. The NIH3T3 model did not
recapitulate the gene expression pattern of bona fide Ewing's sarcoma. Based on
these results, we conclude that while there may be functional differences between
the various EWS-ETS fusions, the NIH3T3 cell model is inadequate to study the
gene expression pattern induced by EWS-ETS proteins in Ewing's sarcoma. Thus,
data derived from the NIH3T3 model system needs to be appropriately validated
before they can be accepted as relevant to the human disease.

PMID: 17172842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10658-63.

TMPRSS2:ERG fusion by translocation or interstitial deletion is highly relevant
in androgen-dependent prostate cancer, but is bypassed in late-stage androgen
receptor-negative prostate cancer.

Hermans KG(1), van Marion R, van Dekken H, Jenster G, van Weerden WM, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Urology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Recently, a unique fusion between the prostate-specific, androgen-regulated
TMPRSS2 gene and the ETS genes ERG, ETV1, or ETV4 has been described in clinical 
prostate cancer. We investigated mechanisms of expression of four ETS genes, ERG,
ETV1, ETV4, and FLI1, in 11 xenografts representing different stages of prostate 
cancer. All five androgen-dependent xenografts showed as major transcript
overexpression of two splice variants of TMPRSS2:ERG, linking TMPRSS2 exon 1 or 2
sequences to ERG exon 4. In one of two androgen-sensitive xenografts, fusion
transcripts of TMPRSS2 and ETV1 were detected. Array-based comparative genomic
hybridization and interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization indicated both
interstitial deletions and translocations as mechanisms of TMPRSS2:ERG gene
fusion. Importantly, TMPRSS2 to ERG fusions were also observed in three of four
androgen-independent, androgen receptor (AR)-negative xenografts and in two
AR-negative clinical prostate cancer specimens; however, the fusion gene was not 
expressed. In almost all AR-negative tumor samples, overexpression of wild-type
ETV4 or FLI1 was detected. Combined, our observations indicate a key role of
fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS genes in most androgen-regulated prostate cancers,
which might be bypassed by androgen-independent expression of wild-type ETS
factors in late-stage disease.

PMID: 17108102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;66(21):10242-6.

TMPRSS2 fusions with oncogenic ETS factors in prostate cancer involve unbalanced 
genomic rearrangements and are associated with HDAC1 and epigenetic
reprogramming.

Iljin K(1), Wolf M, Edgren H, Gupta S, Kilpinen S, Skotheim RI, Peltola M, Smit
F, Verhaegh G, Schalken J, Nees M, Kallioniemi O.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biotechnology, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland and University
of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Translocations fusing the strong androgen-responsive gene, TMPRSS2, with ERG or
other oncogenic ETS factors may facilitate prostate cancer development. Here, we 
studied 18 advanced prostate cancers for ETS factor alterations, using reverse
transcription-PCR and DNA and RNA array technologies, and identified putative ERG
downstream gene targets from the microarray data of 410 prostate samples. Out of 
the 27 ETS factors, ERG was most frequently overexpressed. Seven cases showed
TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusions, whereas the TMPRSS2:ETV4 fusion was seen in one case.
In five out of six tumors with high ERG expression, array-CGH analysis revealed
interstitial 2.8 Mb deletions between the TMPRSS2 and ERG loci, or smaller,
unbalanced rearrangements. In silico analysis of the ERG gene coexpression
patterns revealed an association with high expression of the histone deacetylase 
1 gene, and low expression of its target genes. Furthermore, we observed
increased expression of WNT-associated pathways and down-regulation of tumor
necrosis factor and cell death pathways. In summary, our data indicate that the
TMPRSS2:ERG translocation is common in advanced prostate cancer and occurs by
virtue of unbalanced genomic rearrangements. Activation of ERG by fusion with
TMPRSS2 may lead to epigenetic reprogramming, WNT signaling, and down-regulation 
of cell death pathways, implicating ERG in several hallmarks of cancer with
potential therapeutic importance.

PMID: 17079440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Neoplasia. 2006 Oct;8(10):885-8.

Noninvasive detection of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion transcripts in the urine of men with 
prostate cancer.

Laxman B(1), Tomlins SA, Mehra R, Morris DS, Wang L, Helgeson BE, Shah RB, Rubin 
MA, Wei JT, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

We recently reported the identification of recurrent gene fusions in the majority
of prostate cancers involving the 5' untranslated region of the
androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS family members ERG, ETV1, and ETV4.
Here we report the noninvasive detection of these gene fusions in the urine of
patients with clinically localized prostate cancer. By quantitative polymerase
chain reaction, we assessed the expression of ERG and TMPRSS2:ERG transcripts in 
urine samples obtained after prostatic massage from 19 patients (11 prebiopsy and
8 pre-radical prostatectomy) with prostate cancer. We observed a strong
concordance between ERG overexpression and TMPRSS2:ERG expression, with 8 of 19
(42%) patients having detectable TMPRSS2:ERG transcripts in their urine.
Importantly, by fluorescence in situ hybridization, we confirmed the presence or 
the absence of TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusions in matched prostate cancer tissue samples
from three of three patients with fusion transcripts in their urine and from two 
of two patients without fusion transcripts in their urine. These results
demonstrate that TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusions can be detected in the urine of
patients with prostate cancer and support larger studies on prospective cohorts
for noninvasive detection of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC1715928
PMID: 17059688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Br J Cancer. 2006 Oct 9;95(7):767-74. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

Improving the outcome of patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer
through rational drug development.

Attard G(1), Sarker D, Reid A, Molife R, Parker C, de Bono JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer
Research, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5PT, UK.

Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is now the second most common cause
of male cancer-related mortality. Although docetaxel has recently been shown to
extend the survival of patients with CRPC in two large randomised phase III
studies, subsequent treatment options remain limited for these patients. A
greater understanding of the molecular causes of castration resistance is
allowing a more rational approach to the development of new drugs and many new
agents are now in clinical development. Therapeutic targets include the adrenal
steroid synthesis pathway, androgen receptor signalling, the epidermal growth
factor receptor family, insulin growth factor-1 receptor, histone deacetylase,
heat shock protein 90 and the tumour vasculature. Drugs against these targets are
giving an insight into the molecular pathogenesis of this disease and promise to 
improve patient quality of life and survival. Finally, the recent discovery of
chromosomal translocations resulting in the upregulation of one of at least 3 ETS
genes (ERG, ETV1, ETV4) may lead to novel agents for the treatment of this
disease.

PMCID: PMC2360544
PMID: 16983403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Lab Invest. 2006 Nov;86(11):1099-102. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Bioinformatics approach leads to the discovery of the TMPRSS2:ETS gene fusion in 
prostate cancer.

Rubin MA(1), Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115-6110, USA. marubin@partners.org.or

Recurrent chromosomal rearrangements have not been well characterized in common
carcinomas. We describe the use of a novel bioinformatics approach to discover
candidate oncogenic chromosomal aberrations on the basis of outlier gene
expression called COPA (cancer outlier profile analysis). We demonstrate how this
approach led to the identification of gene fusions of the 5'-untranslated region 
of TMPRSS2 (21q22.3), an androgen regulated gene, with the ETS transcription
factor family members, either ERG (21q22.2), ETV1 (7p21.2), or ETV4(17q21). These
novel gene fusions suggest a mechanism for overexpression of the ETS genes in the
majority of prostate cancers identified through PSA screening. Considering the
high incidence of prostate cancer and the high frequency of this gene fusion, the
TMPRSS2-ETS gene fusions are the most common genetic aberration so far described 
in human malignancies. The clinical implications of this discovery are
significant for diagnosis and potentially for the development of targeted
therapy.

PMID: 16983328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 1;66(17):8337-41.

TMPRSS2:ERG fusion-associated deletions provide insight into the heterogeneity of
prostate cancer.

Perner S(1), Demichelis F, Beroukhim R, Schmidt FH, Mosquera JM, Setlur S,
Tchinda J, Tomlins SA, Hofer MD, Pienta KG, Kuefer R, Vessella R, Sun XW,
Meyerson M, Lee C, Sellers WR, Chinnaiyan AM, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
EBRC 442A, 221 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115-6110, USA.

Prostate cancer is a common and clinically heterogeneous disease with marked
variability in progression. The recent identification of gene fusions of the
5'-untranslated region of TMPRSS2 (21q22.3) with the ETS transcription factor
family members, either ERG (21q22.2), ETV1 (7p21.2), or ETV4 (17q21), suggests a 
mechanism for overexpression of the ETS genes in the majority of prostate
cancers. In the current study using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), we
identified the TMPRSS2:ERG rearrangements in 49.2% of 118 primary prostate
cancers and 41.2% of 18 hormone-naive lymph node metastases. The FISH assay
detected intronic deletions between ERG and TMPRSS2 resulting in TMPRSS2:ERG
fusion in 60.3% (35 of 58) of the primary TMPRSS2:ERG prostate cancers and 42.9% 
(3 of 7) of the TMPRSS2:ERG hormone-naive lymph node metastases. A significant
association was observed between TMPRSS2:ERG rearranged tumors through deletions 
and higher tumor stage and the presence of metastatic disease involving pelvic
lymph nodes. Using 100K oligonucleotide single nucleotide polymorphism arrays, a 
homogeneous deletion site between ERG and TMPRSS2 on chromosome 21q22.2-3 was
identified with two distinct subclasses distinguished by the start point of the
deletion at either 38.765 or 38.911 Mb. This study confirms that TMPRSS2:ERG is
fused in approximately half of the prostate cancers through deletion of genomic
DNA between ERG and TMPRSS2. The deletion as cause of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion is
associated with clinical features for prostate cancer progression compared with
tumors that lack the TMPRSS2:ERG rearrangement.

PMID: 16951139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Int J Oncol. 2006 Jul;29(1):5-24.

Gene expression profiling of paired ovarian tumors obtained prior to and
following adjuvant chemotherapy: molecular signatures of chemoresistant tumors.

L'Espérance S(1), Popa I, Bachvarova M, Plante M, Patten N, Wu L, Têtu B,
Bachvarov D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Québec G1K 7P4,
Canada.

Chemotherapy (CT) resistance in ovarian cancer is related to multiple factors,
and assessment of these factors is necessary for the development of new drugs and
therapeutic regimens. In an effort to identify such determinants, we evaluated
the expression of approximately 21,000 genes using DNA microarray screening in
paired tumor samples taken prior to and after CT treatment from 6 patients with
predominantly advanced stage, high-grade epithelial ovarian cancer. A subset of
differentially expressed genes was selected from all microarray data by initial
filtering on confidence at p=0.05, followed by filtering on expression level
(>or=2-fold). Using these selection criteria, we found 121 genes to be commonly
up-regulated and 54 genes to be down-regulated in the post-CT tumors, compared to
primary tumors. Up-regulated genes in post-CT tumors included substantial number 
of genes with previously known implication in mechanisms of chemoresistance
(TOP2A, ETV4, ABCF2, PRDX2, COX2, COX7B, MUC1, MT3, MT2A), and tumorigenesis
(SCGB2A2, S100A9, YWHAE, SFN, ATP6AP1, MGC5528, ASS, TACC3, ARHGAP4, SRA1;
MGC35136, PSAP, SPTAN1, LGALS3BP, TUBA4, AMY2B, PPIA, COX1, GRB2, CTSL).
Down-regulated genes in post-CT samples mostly included genes implicated in
chemosensitivity (GRP, TRA1, ADPRTL1, TRF4-2), cell proliferation and cell cycle 
control (NGFRAP1, TPD52L1, TAX1BP1) and tumor suppression and apoptosis (SMOC2,
TIMP3, AXIN1, CASP4, P53SCV). Additionally, gene clustering analysis revealed the
existence of two distinct expression signatures of chemoresistant tumors, which
was further confirmed by assessment of some genetic (p53 gene mutation status)
and clinical parameters (CT regimens). Our data suggest that intrinsic and
acquired chemoresistant phenotypes of post-CT tumors may be attributed to the
combined action of different factors implicated in mechanisms of chemoresistance,
tumor invasion/progression and control of cell proliferation. This type of
molecular profiling could have important clinical implications in resolving
chemoresistance and the development of novel treatment strategies designed to
prevent its emergence.

PMID: 16773180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 23;345(1):216-21. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

ETV4 and Myeov knockdown impairs colon cancer cell line proliferation and
invasion.

Moss AC(1), Lawlor G, Murray D, Tighe D, Madden SF, Mulligan AM, Keane CO, Brady 
HR, Doran PP, MacMathuna P.

Author information: 
(1)Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, UCD, Ireland.
amoss@bidmc.harvard.edu

We have identified novel colorectal cancer-associated genes using NCBI's UNIGENE 
cDNA libraries. Colon cancer libraries were examined using Digital Differential
Display and disease-associated genes were selected. Among these were ETV4 and
MYEOV, novel colorectal cancer-associated genes. Samples of matched normal and
neoplastic colon were obtained from human subjects and gene expression was
quantified using real-time PCR. ETV4 gene expression was significantly increased 
in colonic neoplasia in comparison to matched normal colonic tissue (p<0.05).
Myeov expression was also increased in colon neoplasia in comparison to matched
normal tissue. The effect of siRNA-mediated knockdown of ETV4 and Myeov on cell
proliferation and invasion was assessed. ETV4 knockdown resulted in a 90%
decrease in cell proliferation (p<0.05) and a 67% decrease in cell invasion.
Myeov knockdown resulted in a 48% decrease in cell proliferation (p<0.05) and a
36% decrease in cell invasion. These data suggest that ETV4 and Myeov may provide
novel targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 16678123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 1;66(7):3396-400.

TMPRSS2:ETV4 gene fusions define a third molecular subtype of prostate cancer.

Tomlins SA(1), Mehra R, Rhodes DR, Smith LR, Roulston D, Helgeson BE, Cao X, Wei 
JT, Rubin MA, Shah RB, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301 Catherine
Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Although common in hematologic and mesenchymal malignancies, recurrent gene
fusions have not been well characterized in epithelial carcinomas. Recently,
using a novel bioinformatic approach, we identified recurrent gene fusions
between TMPRSS2 and the ETS family members ERG or ETV1 in the majority of
prostate cancers. Here, we interrogated the expression of all ETS family members 
in prostate cancer profiling studies and identified marked overexpression of ETV4
in 2 of 98 cases. In one such case, we confirmed the overexpression of ETV4 using
quantitative PCR, and by rapid amplification of cDNA ends, quantitative PCR, and 
fluorescence in situ hybridization, we show that the TMPRSS2 (21q22) and ETV4
(17q21) loci are fused in this case. This result defines a third molecular
subtype of prostate cancer and supports the hypothesis that dysregulation of ETS 
family members through fusions with TMRPSS2 may be an initiating event in
prostate cancer development.

PMID: 16585160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Biol Reprod. 2006 Apr;74(4):714-20. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Putative regulation of expression of members of the Ets variant 4 transcription
factor family and their downstream targets in the rat epididymis.

Yang L(1), Fox SA, Kirby JL, Troan BV, Hinton BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Several genes expressed in the initial segment of the epididymis depend on
factors from the testis that reach the epididymis via the luminal system. These
include gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase mRNA IV (Ggt_pr4), steroid 5 alpha
reductase (Srd5a1), glutathione peroxidase 5 (Gpx5), and cystatin-related
epididymal spermatogenic (Cst8) genes. Promoter analyses indicated that these
genes contain several ETS DNA-binding sites. Members of the polyomavirus enhancer
activator 3 (ETV4) family bind to ETS sites on the promoter of target genes to
regulate transcription. In this study, the role of ETV4 family members (ETV4,
ETV5, ETV1) in the transcription of initial segment specific genes was evaluated.
All three ETV4 family mRNAs are expressed in the principal cells of the initial
segment and depend upon the presence of testicular luminal fluid factors. ETV4
protein was localized to principal cell nuclei and displayed the highest
expression in the most proximal region of the initial segment. In addition, ETV4 
protein levels were diminished after loss of testicular luminal fluid factors. A 
dominant-negative construct of ETV5 was in vivo electroporated into the initial
segment to determine if ETV4 family members can regulate the transcription of
testicular luminal fluid factor-regulated genes. Quantitative PCR indicated that 
1 day postelectroporation, all three ETV4 family member mRNAs were significantly 
decreased. In addition, Ggt_pr4, Srd5a1, and Gpx5 mRNA levels were also
significantly decreased. The data suggest that ETV4 family members regulate their
own expression, and that they regulate transcription of a subset of genes that
are dependent upon testicular luminal fluid factors.

PMID: 16394217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 1;65(23):10776-82.

E1AF/PEA3 activates the Rho/Rho-associated kinase pathway to increase the
malignancy potential of non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

Hakuma N(1), Kinoshita I, Shimizu Y, Yamazaki K, Yoshida K, Nishimura M,
Dosaka-Akita H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

E1AF/PEA3, an Ets family transcription factor, is frequently overexpressed in
non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). Overexpression of E1AF increases motility
and invasion of VMRC-LCD and NCI-H226 NSCLC cells, which lack endogenous E1AF
expression, and the effect is synergistically increased by hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF). The small GTPase Rho/Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) pathway is also
involved in motility and invasion. To determine the role of the Rho/ROCK pathway 
in malignant phenotypes induced by E1AF, we analyzed VMRC-LCD cells transfected
with an E1AF expression vector (LCD-E1AF cells) or with empty vector (LCD-vector 
cells). LCD-E1AF cells had more GTP-bound (active) Rho than LCD-vector cells and 
Rho activation was synergistically increased by HGF. The Rho activation by E1AF
and HGF was also shown in NCI-H226 cells. Phosphorylation of myosin light chain
(MLC), a downstream effector of ROCK signaling, was higher in LCD-E1AF cells than
in LCD-vector cells, especially under HGF treatment. A specific ROCK inhibitor,
Y27632, strongly suppressed MLC phosphorylation, cell motility, and invasion. In 
nude mice implanted s.c. and intrapulmonarily, LCD-E1AF cells made more local
tumors than LCD-vector cells (six of six versus one of seven mice and four of
seven versus one of seven mice, respectively). Three of the four mice with lung
tumors from LCD-E1AF cells had lymph node metastases whereas the mouse with
LCD-vector tumors did not. LCD-E1AF tumors showed higher MLC phosphorylation than
LCD-vector tumors. These results suggest that E1AF activates the Rho/ROCK pathway
in an HGF-enhanced manner and its activation is important in E1AF-induced
motility and invasion as well as tumorigenesis and metastasis in NSCLC cells.

PMID: 16322223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jan 6;339(1):325-30. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Genomic structure and promoter activity of the E1AF gene, a member of the ETS
oncogene family.

Ishida S(1), Higashino F, Aoyagi M, Takahashi A, Suzuki T, Shindoh M, Fujinaga K,
Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hokkaido Institute of Public Health, N-19, W-12,
Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0819, Japan.

E1AF is a member of the ETS oncogene family and is thought to be a human
homologue of mouse PEA3. We have isolated a genomic clone of E1AF and analyzed
the promoter activity of its 5'-flanking region. We identified a variation in
exon 1, which depends on the cell type. There was no typical TATA box in the
5'-flanking region, but putative binding sites of a number of transcription
factors including PEA3 as well as CAAT boxes were seen. A luciferase reporter
assay indicated that the 5'-flanking region possesses promoter activity. Northern
blot studies demonstrated significant expression of the E1AF gene in restricted
tissues such as the pituitary gland, placenta, and fetal kidney. Moreover, the
E1AF promoter was activated by E1AF itself and estrogen receptor. These findings 
suggest that E1AF is a housekeeping gene, whose expression is controlled in
specific tissues.

PMID: 16297865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005 Oct;62(19-20):2359-68.

Gene signatures of testicular seminoma with emphasis on expression of ets variant
gene 4.

Gashaw I(1), Grümmer R, Klein-Hitpass L, Dushaj O, Bergmann M, Brehm R, Grobholz 
R, Kliesch S, Neuvians TP, Schmid KW, von Ostau C, Winterhager E.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty of the University Duisburg-Essen, Institute for Anatomy,
Hufelandstr. 55, 45122, Essen, Germany.

Gene expression patterns of testicular seminoma were analysed applying
oligonucleotide microarrays in 40 specimens of different tumour stages (pT1, pT2,
pT3) and in normal testes. Transcripts of maternally expressed 3 transcripts were
expressed in seminoma without correlation with delta-like 1 homologue expression 
indicating an impaired imprinting status in seminoma. Interestingly, the
transcripts of bromodomain-containing 2 and nuclear autoantigenic sperm protein
associated with spermatogenesis were significantly upregulated in progressing
tumour stages. Transcription factors TEA domain family member 4 and ETS variant
gene 4 (ETV4), weakly expressed in normal testis, were strongly augmented during 
tumourigenesis. For ETV4 expression, a significant correlation with the increased
expression of matrix metalloproteinase 2 and a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 
domain 15 was determined. The ETV4 protein was localised to nuclei of
spermatogonia and revealed an intense staining in seminoma cells. Taken together,
we characterised additional transcription factors and spermatogenesis-associated 
genes involved in the progression of seminoma.

PMID: 16158187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 1;65(15):6789-800.

Altered ErbB receptor signaling and gene expression in cisplatin-resistant
ovarian cancer.

Macleod K(1), Mullen P, Sewell J, Rabiasz G, Lawrie S, Miller E, Smyth JF,
Langdon SP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

The majority of ovarian cancer patients are treated with platinum-based
chemotherapy, but the emergence of resistance to such chemotherapy severely
limits its overall effectiveness. We have shown that development of resistance to
this treatment can modify cell signaling responses in a model system wherein
cisplatin treatment has altered cell responsiveness to ligands of the erbB
receptor family. A cisplatin-resistant ovarian carcinoma cell line PE01CDDP was
derived from the parent PE01 line by exposure to increasing concentrations of
cisplatin, eventually obtaining a 20-fold level of resistance. Whereas PE01 cells
were growth stimulated by the erbB receptor-activating ligands, such as
transforming growth factor-alpha (TGFalpha), NRG1alpha, and NRG1beta, the
PE01CDDP line was growth inhibited by TGFalpha and NRG1beta but unaffected by
NRG1alpha. TGFalpha increased apoptosis in PE01CDDP cells but decreased apoptosis
in PE01 cells. Differences in extracellular signal-regulated kinase and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling were also found, which may be implicated 
in the altered cell response to ligands. Microarray analysis revealed 51 genes
whose mRNA increased by at least 2-fold in PE01CDDP cells relative to PE01
(including FRA1, ETV4, MCM2, AXL, MT3, TRAP1, and FANCG), whereas 36 genes
(including IGFBP3, TRAM1, and KRT4 and KRT19) decreased by a similar amount.
Differential display reverse transcriptase-PCR identified altered mRNA expression
for TCP1, SLP1, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and ZXDA. Small interfering
RNA inhibition of FRA1, TCP1, and MCM2 expression was associated with reduced
growth and FRA1 inhibition with enhanced cisplatin sensitivity. Altered
expression of these genes by cytotoxic exposure may provide survival advantages
to cells including deregulation of signaling pathways, which may be critical in
the development of drug resistance.

PMID: 16061661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell Microbiol. 2005 Aug;7(8):1099-108.

Silencing or permanent activation: host-cell responses in models of persistent
Chlamydia pneumoniae infection.

Peters J(1), Hess S, Endlich K, Thalmann J, Holzberg D, Kracht M, Schaefer M,
Bartling G, Klos A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical School Hannover, D-30623 Hannover,
Germany.

Chlamydia pneumoniae causes respiratory infections. In chronic diseases
associated with Chlamydia, such as arteriosclerosis, C. pneumoniae is present in 
a persistent form, which might participate in pathogenesis of chronic
inflammatory disease. To elucidate how these intracellular bacteria modulate
host-cells during persistence, we compared the expression pattern of a range of
host genes after short (24 h) and long (up to 7 days) times of chlamydia
infection in HeLa-cells. One day post infection, in three cell-culture models of 
persistence, namely treatment with penicillin or IFN-gamma, or iron-depletion,
infection induced the genes of CTGF, IL-6, IL-8, IL-11, LIF, EGR-1 and ETV4 in a 
similar fashion. However, after a longer time, two modes of host-cell reaction
emerged that were dependent on the persistence model used. After IFN-gamma and
penicillin treatment chlamydia-induced host-cell gene expression was inhibited,
while it stayed upregulated in iron-depletion. Human monocytes/macrophages, in
which persistence naturally occurs, were additionally investigated: for several
genes, UV-inactivated and viable chlamydia caused long-lasting upregulation.
Thus, this study reveals (i) the ability of C. pneumoniae to participate in two
putative pathomechanisms of persistence, silencing and permanent activation,
which might represent different in vivo situations and (ii) a strong dependence
on the mode of persistence induction.

PMID: 16008577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Carcinog. 2005 May;43(1):13-7.

E1A-F is overexpressed early in human colorectal neoplasia and associated with
cyclooxygenase-2 and matrix metalloproteinase-7.

Boedefeld WM 2nd(1), Soong R, Weiss H, Diasio RB, Urist MM, Bland KI, Heslin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 35243, USA.

Studies suggest the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and matrilysin (MMP-7)
increase in the early stages of colorectal carcinogenesis, however their
interaction with other molecular markers is poorly understood. Results from cell 
line studies and mouse models suggest polyomavirus enhancer activator 3 (PEA3)
may play a role in the activation of COX-2 and MMP-7 promoters. However, the role
of E1A-F, the human homolog of murine PEA3, in colorectal cancer (CRC)
development has not been elucidated. In this study, we used real-time reverse
transcription (RT)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to measure the levels of
E1A-F, COX-2, and MMP-7 in matched normal mucosa, adenomas, and/or carcinomas
from 128 patients. Our results demonstrate significant overexpression of E1A-F
and MMP-7 in adenomas and E1A-F, COX-2, and MMP-7 in carcinomas. In carcinomas,
E1A-F expression was significantly associated with both COX-2 and MMP-7
overexpression. These results suggest E1A-F is overexpressed in early stages of
human CRC development and may be an important factor in the overexpression of
COX-2 and MMP-7.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15800927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncol Rep. 2005 Apr;13(4):715-20.

E1AF expression is closely correlated with malignant phenotype of tongue squamous
cell carcinoma through activation of MT1-MMP gene promoters.

Izumiyama Y(1), Ohiro Y, Higashino F, Yoshida K, Taguchi K, Todo S, Kohgo T,
Totsuka Y, Shindoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathobiological Science, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Dental Medicine, N13 W7, Kita-Ku, Sapporo 060-8586, Japan.

E1AF is an ets-oncogene family transcription factor that has been shown to
up-regulate multiple MMPs whereas MMP-2, a potent extracellular matrix degrading 
enzyme, is not up-regulated. We investigated the activation mechanism of MMP-2 in
oral squamous cell carcinoma. Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) assay was
utilized to investigate whether E1AF is able to up-regulate membrane type-1
matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP), which is known to activate MMP-2. Expression 
of the CAT reporter gene under the control of the MT1-MMP promoter was increased 
approximately 40-fold by co-transfection with the E1AF expression vector.
Real-time RT-PCR study was carried out in 25 patients with tongue squamous cell
carcinoma, and the mRNA expression level of E1AF and MT1-MMP was synergistically 
increased. These results indicate that E1AF positively regulates transcription
from MT1-MMP genes, which plays an important role in invasion and metastasis of
squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue by converting pro-MMP-2 into active-MMP-2.

PMID: 15756447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Carcinogenesis. 2005 May;26(5):892-9. Epub 2005 Feb 3.

Association of Ets-related transcriptional factor E1AF expression with
overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases, COX-2 and iNOS in the early stage of
colorectal carcinogenesis.

Nosho K(1), Yoshida M, Yamamoto H, Taniguchi H, Adachi Y, Mikami M, Hinoda Y,
Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, S.-1,
W.-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan. nosho@sapmed.ac.jp

It is now becoming clear that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a key role in
tumor development and growth. MMPs are overexpressed in a variety of premalignant
tumor tissues, including colorectal adenoma. Little is known about the mechanisms
underlying the overexpression of MMPs in adenoma tissues. E1AF, an Ets family
transcriptional factor, has been shown to play an important role in the
expression of MMPs and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in advanced colorectal cancers.
The aim of this study was to examine the E1AF expression and determine whether it
is correlated with the expression of MMPs, COX-2 and inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) in human colorectal adenoma and submucosal cancer (pT1). Using
the semi-quantitative RT-PCR, 90 colorectal tumors, including 63 adenomas and 27 
cancers (pT1), were analyzed for the expression of E1AF, MMPs, COX-2 and iNOS.
Immunohistochemical analysis and in vitro transfection assays were also
performed. E1AF mRNA was detected in 43 (47.8%) of the 90 colorectal tumors. E1AF
overexpression was significantly correlated with histopathology. E1AF expression 
was correlated significantly with the expression of MMP-1 and MMP-7.
Overexpression of COX-2 and iNOS mRNA expression was observed in 42.2% and 66.7% 
of the 90 colorectal tumors, respectively. COX-2 was correlated significantly
with size, gender, histopathology and E1AF. iNOS was correlated significantly
with size, histopathology, E1AF and COX-2. The correlation of E1AF expression
with COX-2 and iNOS expression was also demonstrated by immunohistochemistry.
Northern blot analysis of transfectants showed the effect of E1AF on COX-2
expression as well as iNOS on E1AF/COX-2 expression in colon cancer cell lines.
The results suggest that E1AF, in conjunction with the expression of MMP-1,
MMP-7, COX-2 and iNOS, plays an important role in the early stage of colorectal
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15695237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Feb 11;327(2):575-80.

E1AF degradation by a ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Takahashi A(1), Higashino F, Aoyagi M, Yoshida K, Itoh M, Kobayashi M, Totsuka Y,
Kohgo T, Shindoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathobiological Science, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Dental Medicine, North 13 West 7, Kita-ku 060-8586, Sapporo, Japan.

E1AF is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. In mammary tumors,
overexpression of E1AF is associated with tumorigenesis, but E1AF protein has
hardly been detected and its degradation mechanism is not yet clear. Here we show
that E1AF protein is stabilized by treatment with the 26S protease inhibitor
MG132. We found that E1AF was modified by ubiquitin through the C-terminal region
and ubiquitinated E1AF aggregated in nuclear dots, and that the inhibition of
proteasome-activated transcription from E1AF target promoters. These results
suggest that E1AF is degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, which has
some effect on E1AF function.

PMID: 15629152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12503-16. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Elevated beta1,4-galactosyltransferase I in highly metastatic human lung cancer
cells. Identification of E1AF as important transcription activator.

Zhu X(1), Jiang J, Shen H, Wang H, Zong H, Li Z, Yang Y, Niu Z, Liu W, Chen X, Hu
Y, Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Gene Research Center, Shanghai
Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

The elevated levels of beta1,4-galactosyltransferase I (GalT I; EC 2.4.1.38) are 
detected in highly metastatic lung cancer PGBE1 cells compared with its less
metastatic partner PGLH7 cells. Decreasing the GalT I surface expression by small
interfering RNA or interfering with the surface of GalT I function by mutation
inhibited cell adhesion on laminin, the invasive potential in vitro, and tyrosine
phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase. The mechanism by which GalT I activity 
is up-regulated in highly metastatic cells remains unclear. To investigate the
regulation of GalT I expression, we cloned the 5'-region flanking the
transcription start point of the GalT I gene (-1653 to +52). Cotransfection of
the GalT I promoter/luciferase reporter and the Ets family protein E1AF
expression plasmid increased the luciferase reporter activity in a dose-dependent
manner. By deletion and mutation analyses, we identified an Ets-binding site
between nucleotides -205 and -200 in the GalT I promoter that was critical for
responsiveness to E1AF. It was identified that E1AF could bind to and activate
the GalT I promoter by electrophoretic mobility shift assay in PGLH7 cells and
COS1 cells. A stronger affinity of E1AF for DNA has contributed to the elevated
expression of GalT I in PGBE1 cells. Stable transfection of the E1AF expression
plasmid resulted in increased GalT I expression in PGLH7 cells, and stable
transfectants migrated faster than control cells. Meanwhile, the content of the
beta1,4-Gal branch on the cell surface was increased in stably transfected PGLH7 
cells. GalT I expression can also be induced by epidermal growth factor and
dominant active Ras, JNK1, and ERK1. These data suggest an essential role for
E1AF in the activation of the human GalT I gene in highly metastatic lung cancer 
cells.

PMID: 15611127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cancer Lett. 2004 Dec 8;216(1):1-8.

E1AF, an ets-oncogene family transcription factor.

Shindoh M(1), Higashino F, Kohgo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathobiological Science, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Dental Medicine, N 13 W7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8586, Japan.
mshindoh@den.hokudai.ac.jp

E1AF is an ets-oncogene family transcription factor. E1AF was shown to upregulate
multiple matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) genes and contribute to the malignant
phenotype of cancer cells by inducing invasive and metastatic activities. E1AF is
upregulated by hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) stimulation, which indicates that
E1AF would participate in cell motility by HGF/scatter factor. On the other hand,
E1AF upregulates p21waf1/cip1 to induce cell cycle arrest when cells are exposed 
to stress. EWS/ETS fusions are frequently observed in Ewing's sarcoma, and we
have revealed that EWS/ETS chimeric protein activates telomerase activity by
upregulating hTERT. However, substitution ets binding site (EBS) mutants did not 
affect the responsiveness to EWS/E1AF. DNA-IP assay showed that the complexes
contained EWS/E1AF bound to the hTERT promoter, which suggested that EWS/ETS
functions as a co-activator for TERT transcription. Our findings that EWS/ETS
acts as a transcriptional co-factor may imply that the transcription pathway is
regulated by the interaction of transcription factors.

PMID: 15500943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Oct 1;299(2):525-32.

E1AF/PEA3 reduces the invasiveness of SiHa cervical cancer cells by activating
serine proteinase inhibitor squamous cell carcinoma antigen.

Iwasaki M(1), Nishikawa A, Akutagawa N, Fujimoto T, Teramoto M, Sakaguchi Y, Kato
H, Ito M, Yoshida K, Kudo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Sapporo Medical
University, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan.

E1AF/PEA3, a member of the Ets family of transcription factors, is associated
with the malignant characteristics of cancer cells. The initial aim of our study 
was to test whether the invasiveness of SiHa cervical cancer cells could be
diminished by transfection with antisense E1AF. Using an in vitro invasion assay 
in which cells penetrate a layer of Matrigel, we found that this was not the
case; indeed, the invasiveness of the transfectants was enhanced. To better
understand the mechanism of this enhancement, we used the cDNA microarray
technique to search for genes whose expression was altered in the antisense
E1AF-transfected SiHa cells. Among several genes affected, we found that
expression of squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCCA), a member of the ovalbumin
serine proteinase inhibitor family, was significantly reduced. Forced expression 
of E1AF enabled activation of SCCA expression, and Luciferase reporter assays
revealed that E1AF activates the SCCA promoter. Introduction of antisense SCCA
into SiHa cells inhibited production of SCCA protein and markedly increased the
invasiveness of the cells. Taken together, these results suggest that E1AF
suppresses the invasiveness of SiHa cervical cancer cells through transcriptional
activation of the SCCA serine proteinase inhibitor gene.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15350549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Virology. 2004 Mar 1;320(1):121-34.

Mode of transgene expression after fusion to early or late viral genes of a
conditionally replicating adenovirus via an optimized internal ribosome entry
site in vitro and in vivo.

Rivera AA(1), Wang M, Suzuki K, Uil TG, Krasnykh V, Curiel DT, Nettelbeck DM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Gene Therapy, Department of Medicine, and the Gene Therapy
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The expression of therapeutic genes by oncolytic viruses is a promising strategy 
to improve viral oncolysis, to augment gene transfer compared with a
nonreplicating adenoviral vector, or to combine virotherapy and gene therapy.
Both the mode of transgene expression and the locale of transgene insertion into 
the virus genome critically determine the efficacy of this approach. We report
here on the properties of oncolytic adenoviruses which contain the luciferase
cDNA fused via an optimized internal ribosome entry site (IRES) to the immediate 
early adenoviral gene E1A (AdDeltaE1AIL), the early gene E2B (AdDeltaE2BIL), or
the late fiber gene (AdDeltafiberIL). These viruses showed distinct kinetics of
transgene expression and luciferase activity. Early after infection, luciferase
activities were lower for these viruses, especially for AdDeltaE2BIL, compared
with nonreplicating AdTL, which contained the luciferase gene expressed from the 
strong CMV promoter. However, 6 days after infection, luciferase activities were 
approximately four (AdDeltaE1AIL) to six (AdDeltafiberIL) orders of magnitude
higher than for AdTL, reflecting virus replication and efficient transgene
expression. Similar results were obtained in vivo after intratumoral injection of
AdDeltaE2BIL, AdDeltafiberIL, and AdTL. AdDeltafiberIL and the parental virus,
Ad5-Delta24, resulted in similar cytotoxicity, but AdDeltaE2BIL and AdDeltaE1AIL 
were slightly attenuated. Disruption of the expression of neighboring viral genes
by insertion of the transgene was minimal for AdDeltaE2BIL and AdDeltafiberIL,
but substantial for AdDeltaE1AIL. Our observations suggest that insertion of
IRES-transgene cassettes into viral transcription units is an attractive strategy
for the development of armed oncolytic adenoviruses with defined kinetics and
strength of transgene expression.

PMID: 15003868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 1;63(23):8338-44.

EWS/ETS fusions activate telomerase in Ewing's tumors.

Takahashi A(1), Higashino F, Aoyagi M, Yoshida K, Itoh M, Kyo S, Ohno T, Taira T,
Ariga H, Nakajima K, Hatta M, Kobayashi M, Sano H, Kohgo T, Shindoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathobiological Science, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Dental Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

EWS/ETS is a chimeric protein identified in most Ewing's sarcomas. Although
EWS/ETS has been shown to activate transcription as a transcription factor, the
detailed targets of EWS/ETS in transformed cells have not been clarified. Herein,
we demonstrate that telomerase is a new target of EWS/ETS fusions. Both
telomerase activity and the expression level of telomerase reverse transcriptase 
(TERT) mRNA were up-regulated in NIH3T3 cells transformed by EWS/E1AF and
EWS/FLI1 as well as in two Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. Luciferase assay using the
TERT promoter revealed that EWS/E1AF and EWS/FLI1 function as positive regulators
of TERT transcription in an ETS binding site-independent manner. EWS/ETS appeared
to be included in the initiation complex of TERT transcription and to cooperate
with CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300. When EWS/FLI1 was knocked down in Ewing's
sarcomas cells by RNA interference, the expression level of TERT mRNA and the
telomerase activity were significantly decreased. These findings indicate that
EWS/ETS fusion proteins activate human telomerase activity in Ewing's tumors
through up-regulation of TERT gene expression, probably as a transcriptional
coactivator.

PMID: 14678994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Mar;25(3):405-11. Epub 2003 Nov 21.

Expression of PEA3/E1AF/ETV4, an Ets-related transcription factor, in breast
tumors: positive links to MMP2, NRG1 and CGB expression.

Bièche I(1), Tozlu S, Girault I, Onody P, Driouch K, Vidaud M, Lidereau R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncogénétique-INSERM E0017, Centre René Huguenin, St-Cloud,
France. i,bieche@stcloud-huguenin.org

The PEA3/E1AF/ETV4 gene encodes an Ets-related transcription factor that is
expressed in the epithelial cells of the mammary gland. Previous reports have
shown that PEA3 can up-regulate promoter activities of many genes associated with
tumorigenesis. A significant fraction of those encode matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP genes) required for degradation of the extracellular matrix. To better
obtain a molecular characterization of PEA3 expression in sporadic breast cancer,
we quantified PEA3 mRNA by means of real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction assay in a large series of human primary breast tumors. PEA3
expression showed wide variations in tumor tissues, being under-expressed in 30
of 130 (23.1%) and over-expressed in 18 of 130 (13.8%) compared with normal
breast tissues. High PEA3 mRNA levels correlated significantly with
Scarff-Bloom-Richardson histopathological grade III (P = 0.018) but not with poor
prognosis, suggesting that PEA3 is a marker of tumor aggressiveness rather than a
prognostic factor in human breast cancer. We also observed positive links between
the expression of PEA3 and those of MKI67 and ERBB2 (P = 0.034 and P = 0.045,
respectively) and an inverse relationship with ERalpha (P = 0.0016). Our results 
do not support recent findings suggesting that PEA3 could be a tumor-suppressor
gene that can act therapeutically in ERBB2 over-expressed tumors. Our results
also suggest major roles of the MMP2, NRG1 and CGB genes (which encode type I
gelatinase, heregulin and human chorionic gonadotropin beta subunit,
respectively) in the PEA3 pathway dysregulation observed in breast cancer. Taken 
together, the data confirm the role of the PEA3 gene in breast tumorigenesis, and
suggest the existence of numerous other still unknown genes transactivated by the
PEA3 transcription factor.

PMID: 14633660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Mar;25(3):325-32. Epub 2003 Nov 6.

Expression of ets-related transcriptional factor E1AF is associated with tumor
progression and over-expression of matrilysin in human gastric cancer.

Yamamoto H(1), Horiuchi S, Adachi Y, Taniguchi H, Nosho K, Min Y, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, South-1,
West-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan. h-yama@sapmed.ac.jp

Expression of E1AF/PEA3 (ETV4), an ets family transcriptional factor, has been
implicated in tumor progression through induction of matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP) expression. The aim of this study was to examine E1AF mRNA expression and
to determine whether it is correlated with progression of, and/or MMP expression 
in, human gastric cancer. Using the semi-quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), we analyzed 100 gastric cancer 
tissues for E1AF mRNA expression. Expression of ER81 (ETV1) and ERM (ETV5), the
other two members of the PEA3 subfamily, and Ets-1 and Ets-2 was also analyzed.
The results were correlated with clinicopathological characteristics and MMP
expression. Immunohistochemical analysis and an in vitro invasion assay were also
performed. E1AF mRNA expression was detected in 64% of the 100 gastric cancer
tissues, but was undetectable or only faintly detected in adjacent non-tumor
tissues. E1AF expression was significantly correlated with depth of invasion,
lymphatic and venous invasion, lymph node and distant metastasis, advance in
pathological tumor-node-metastasis stage and recurrence. Patients with
E1AF-positive tumors had significantly shorter overall and disease-free survival 
periods than did those with E1AF-negative tumors (P < 0.0001 and P < 0.0001,
respectively). E1AF expression retained its significant predictive value for
overall and disease-free survival in multivariate analysis that included
conventional clinicopathological factors (P = 0.0082 and P = 0.0096,
respectively). Among the MMPs analyzed, expression of matrilysin (MMP-7) was
significantly correlated with E1AF expression. Immunohistochemical expression of 
E1AF was predominantly observed at the invasive front, where the expression of
matrilysin was often co-localized. Antisense E1AF-transfected MKN45 gastric
cancer cells expressed reduced levels of matrilysin and were less invasive in
vitro than mock-transfected MKN45 cells. The results of this study suggest that
E1AF, the expression of which is closely correlated with the expression of
matrilysin, plays a key role in the progression of gastric cancer.

PMID: 14604892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Pathol. 2003 Oct;201(2):260-7.

Quantitative RT-PCR in cirrhotic nodules reveals gene expression changes
associated with liver carcinogenesis.

Colombat M(1), Paradis V, Bièche I, Dargère D, Laurendeau I, Belghiti J, Vidaud
M, Degott C, Bedossa P.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital Beaujon, Clichy, France.

Cirrhosis is considered to be the precursor of most hepatocellular carcinomas. To
gain insight into the early molecular mechanisms of liver carcinogenesis, this
study compared, using real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR), the expression levels of 31 selected genes in normal
livers, cirrhotic nodules, and hepatocellular carcinomas. Since cirrhosis is
composed of a mixture of polyclonal and monoclonal nodules, gene expression
levels were also compared according to the clonal status of the cirrhotic
nodules. The expression of eight of the 31 genes studied was significantly
increased (NEGF2, ANGPT1, ARF, KRT19, SFN, CLDN4, MMP7, and ETV4) in cirrhotic
nodules compared with normal liver, while only one was decreased (LYVE1). The
same trend of variation was observed in cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinomas
for all of these genes except KRT19. When gene expression variation was compared 
according to the clonal status of cirrhotic nodules, only the LYVE1 expression
level was significantly different. The LYVE1 gene expression level decreased
progressively from polyclonal cirrhotic nodules to monoclonal cirrhotic nodules
(polyclonal nodules 0.39 +/- 0.25; monoclonal nodules 0.20 +/- 0.14; p < 0.05)
and to hepatocellular carcinoma (0.07 +/- 0.1). In conclusion, this study
highlights the fact that among genes strongly dysregulated in hepatocellular
carcinoma, some are already abnormally expressed in cirrhosis. The decrease in
the expression level of one of these genes, LYVE1, was associated with
monoclonality in cirrhotic nodules.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 14517843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Pathol. 2003 Aug;200(5):568-76.

Association of ets-related transcriptional factor E1AF expression with tumour
progression and overexpression of MMP-1 and matrilysin in human colorectal
cancer.

Horiuchi S(1), Yamamoto H, Min Y, Adachi Y, Itoh F, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, South-1,
West-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan.

Expression of E1AF/PEA3 (ETV4), an ets family transcription factor, has been
implicated in the invasive potential of several cancer cell lines through
induction of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression. The aim of this study was
to examine E1AF mRNA expression and to determine whether it is correlated with
progression of, and/or MMP expression in, human colorectal cancer. Using the
semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), 100
colorectal cancer tissues were analysed for E1AF mRNA expression. Expression of
ER81 (ETV1) and ERM (ETV5), the other two members of the PEA3 subfamily, and
Ets-1 and Ets-2 was also analysed. The results were correlated with
clinicopathological characteristics and MMP expression. Immunohistochemical
analysis and an in vitro invasion assay were also performed. E1AF mRNA expression
was detected in 62% of the 100 colorectal cancer tissues, but was undetectable or
only faintly detected in adjacent non-tumour tissues. E1AF mRNA was detected in
all of the ten liver metastases from colorectal cancers. E1AF expression
correlated significantly with depth of invasion, lymphatic and venous invasion,
lymph node and distant metastasis, advance in pathological tumour-node-metastasis
stage, and recurrence. Patients with E1AF-positive tumours had significantly
shorter overall and disease-free survival periods than did those with
E1AF-negative tumours (p < 0.0001 and p < 0.0001, respectively). E1AF expression 
retained its significant predictive value for overall and disease-free survival
in multivariate analysis that included conventional clinicopathological factors
(p = 0.0066 and p = 0.0109, respectively). Among the MMPs analysed, expression of
MMP-1 and matrilysin correlated significantly with E1AF expression. In contrast, 
expression of ER81 and ERM did not correlate with clinicopathological
characteristics or the expression of these MMPs. Immunohistochemical expression
of E1AF was predominantly observed at the invasive front, where the expression of
MMP-1 and matrilysin and nuclear beta-catenin expression were often co-localized.
Antisense E1AF-transfected HT-29 colon cancer cells expressed reduced levels of
MMP-1 and matrilysin and were less invasive in vitro than neo-transfected HT-29
cells. The results of this study suggest that E1AF, the expression of which is
closely correlated with the expression of MMP-1 and matrilysin, plays a key role 
in the progression of colorectal cancer.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12898592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Cell. 2003 Jul;12(1):255-60.

A viral mechanism for remodeling chromatin structure in G0 cells.

Ghosh MK(1), Harter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Small DNA viruses force quiescent cells to reenter the cell cycle in order to
replicate their DNA. We report here that the adenovirus E1A protein creates an S 
phase environment in quiescent cells by overcoming the nucleosomal repression of 
E2F-targeted genes. These genes are surrounded by Lys-9-methylated H3 histones,
and their promoters are occupied by the pRb-related protein p130 and the
inhibitory transcription factor E2F4. Kinetic analysis indicates that E1A binds
to E2F promoters where it eliminates p130 and E2F4, resulting in the dramatic
elimination of H3 Lys-9 methylation. Thereafter, H3 Lys-9 acetylation occurs
along with the recruitment of activating E2F family members, and this is followed
by the transcriptional activity of E2F-targeted genes. These results indicate
that E1A has a role in reconfiguring chromatin structure and that this activity
is necessary to overcome the repressive mechanisms that maintain cells in a
quiescent state.

PMID: 12887910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2003 May;79(1):129-31.

E1AF expression levels are not associated with prognosis in human breast cancer.

Span PN(1), Manders P, Heuvel JJ, Beex LV, Sweep CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Endocrinology, University Medical Center Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. p.span@ace.umcn.nl

E1AF is a transcription factor involved in regulation of several
metastasis-associated genes, and is associated with overexpression of HER2/neu.
We were unable to find a clear prognostic value of E1AF expression in human
breast cancer. Furthermore, no association of E1AF levels with HER2/neu mRNA
levels, hormone receptor status, histological grade, tumor size, or lymph node
involvement was found.

PMID: 12779089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cells Tissues Organs. 2002;172(2):126-32.

Apoptotic genes in cancer therapy.

Opalka B(1), Dickopp A, Kirch HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Cancer Research), University of Essen,
Germany. bertram-opalka@uni-essen.de

Induction of apoptosis in malignant cells is a major goal of cancer therapy in
general and of certain cancer gene therapy strategies in particular. Numerous
apoptosis-regulating genes have been evaluated for this purpose. Besides the most
prominent p53 gene others include p16, p21, p27, E2F genes, FHIT, PTEN and
CASPASE genes. Recently, the potential for therapy of an adenoviral gene, E1A,
known for a long time for its apoptosis-inducing activity, has been discovered.
In experimental settings, these genes have proven their tumor-suppressive and
apoptosis-inducing activity. Clinical trials are currently being performed with
selected genes. By far the most studies transfer the p53 gene using retro- or
adenoviral vectors. Disease stabilization or other benefits were observed in a
limited number of patients when p53 was applied alone or in combination with
cytotoxic drugs. A second proapoptotic gene that has entered clinical trials is
adenovirus E1A. Here, too, disease stabilization as well as/or local regression
in one case have been demonstrated in selected patients. In all cases, side
effects were tolerable. To further improve E1A as a therapeutic transgene, we
have deleted transforming domains from the adenovirus 5 and 12 13S cDNAs. Mutants
were derived which had completely lost their transforming activity in combination
with the E1B oncogene but retained a pronounced tumor-suppressive activity. Cells
transduced with these constructs showed a highly reduced ability to grow in soft 
agar, and tumor growth in nude mice could be substantially suppressed. Outgrowing
tumors had lost E1A expression when analyzed in Western blots. These E1A
constructs may represent valuable tools for cancer gene therapy in the future.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12426489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Am J Pathol. 2002 Jun;160(6):2181-90.

Gene expression in Wilms' tumor mimics the earliest committed stage in the
metanephric mesenchymal-epithelial transition.

Li CM(1), Guo M, Borczuk A, Powell CA, Wei M, Thaker HM, Friedman R, Klein U,
Tycko B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

Wilms' tumor (WT) has been considered a prototype for arrested cellular
differentiation in cancer, but previous studies have relied on selected markers. 
We have now performed an unbiased survey of gene expression in WTs using
oligonucleotide microarrays. Statistical criteria identified 357 genes as
differentially expressed between WTs and fetal kidneys. This set contained 124
matches to genes on a microarray used by Stuart and colleagues (Stuart RO, Bush
KT, Nigam SK: Changes in global gene expression patterns during development and
maturation of the rat kidney. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:5649-5654) to
establish genes with stage-specific expression in the developing rat kidney.
Mapping between the two data sets showed that WTs systematically overexpressed
genes corresponding to the earliest stage of metanephric development, and
underexpressed genes corresponding to later stages. Automated clustering
identified a smaller group of 27 genes that were highly expressed in WTs compared
to fetal kidney and heterologous tumor and normal tissues. This signature set was
enriched in genes encoding transcription factors. Four of these, PAX2, EYA1,
HBF2, and HOXA11, are essential for cell survival and proliferation in early
metanephric development, whereas others, including SIX1, MOX1, and SALL2, are
predicted to act at this stage. SIX1 and SALL2 proteins were expressed in the
condensing mesenchyme in normal human fetal kidneys, but were absent (SIX1) or
reduced (SALL2) in cells at other developmental stages. These data imply that the
blastema in WTs has progressed to the committed stage in the
mesenchymal-epithelial transition, where it is partially arrested in
differentiation. The WT-signature set also contained the Wnt receptor FZD7, the
tumor antigen PRAME, the imprinted gene NNAT and the metastasis-associated
transcription factor E1AF.

PMCID: PMC1850829
PMID: 12057921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2000 Jul;38(7):552-3.

[The invasive ability of bladder cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu Y(1), Hou S, Li Y, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, People's Hospital, Beijing Medical University, Beijing 
100044, China.

OBJECTIVE: To find a direct method for testing the invasive ability of bladder
cancer.
METHOD: The invasive ability of 49 specimens of primarily cultured bladder
cancer, transfected BIU-87 cells with pcDNA3-E1AF and untransfected BIU-87 cells 
was evaluated by Matrigel invasion assay.
RESULTS: Sixteen of the 49 specimens were found to penetrate the matrigel
barrier, and the result of the Matrigel invasion was related to the grade of the 
tumor cells. The number of positive cells of transfected BIU-87 was remarkably
larger than that of untransfected BIU-87.
CONCLUSIONS: Matrigel invasion assay is a simple, direct and dependable method,
and could be used clinically to test the invasive ability of bladder cancer.

PMID: 11832108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Virol. 2001 Oct;75(20):9579-84.

Adenovirus vector designed for expression of toxic proteins.

Edholm D(1), Molin M, Bajak E, Akusjärvi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, BMC, Uppsala University, 
SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

To construct recombinant adenoviruses expressing biologically active proteins may
be impossible, or result in a significant reduction in virus yield, if the
protein expressed has an inhibitory effect on virus replication or cellular
growth. To overcome this problem, we previously designed adenovirus vectors
expressing foreign proteins from inducible promoters. However, during our work
with a replication-deficient virus expressing the ASF/SF2 splicing factor from a 
progesterone antagonist-inducible gene cassette, we discovered that ASF/SF2 was
expressed at a significant level in the 293 producer cell line, even in the
absence of inducer. 293 cells code for adenovirus E1A and E1B proteins and thus
support the growth of E1-deficient adenoviruses. Here we show that this
background ASF/SF2 expression results from a low level of E1A-mediated
transactivation of the basal promoter driving transgene expression. To overcome
the problem of leaky expression, we reconstructed a novel gene cassette that
combines an inducible promoter and a Lac repressor protein-based block to reduce 
transcriptional elongation. We show that this novel vector system dramatically
reduced background transgene expression and therefore should be useful for the
rescue and propagation of high-titer stocks of recombinant adenoviruses
expressing toxic proteins.

PMCID: PMC114528
PMID: 11559789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int J Cancer. 2001 Sep;93(6):786-91.

Expression of E1AF/PEA3, an Ets-related transcription factor in human
non-small-cell lung cancers: its relevance in cell motility and invasion.

Hiroumi H(1), Dosaka-Akita H, Yoshida K, Shindoh M, Ohbuchi T, Fujinaga K,
Nishimura M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

Cell invasion and metastasis characterize the malignant potential of
non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). We have previously reported that E1AF, a
member of the Ets-related transcription factor family, confers invasive phenotype
on breast cancer and oral squamous-cell carcinoma cell lines. In our study, we
analyzed the E1AF expression in cell lines and resected tumors of NSCLCs by
Northern blot and in situ hybridization analyses and found that 15 of 17 cell
lines and 12 of 19 tumors expressed E1AF mRNA while normal lung tissue and
concomitant normal cells within tumors did not. To examine the biologic
importance of E1AF in NSCLCs, we introduced the E1AF gene into VMRC-LCD and
NCI-H226, NSCLC cell lines lacking E1AF expression, and examined cell motility
and invasion activities. E1AF-transfected VMRC-LCD cells showed increased cell
motility that was 2-fold that of parental and vector-transfected control cells (p
< 0.01), and both cell motility and invasion were increased 1.6-fold in NCI-H226 
(p < 0.01). Furthermore, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), which is one of the most
effective cell-scattering factors, stimulated the motile and invasive activities 
in E1AF-transfected VMRC-LCD and NCI-H226 cells but not in their parental or
vector-transfected control cells. Ets-1 mRNA expression was found in
E1AF-transfected VMRC-LCD cells but not in parental or vector-transfected cells. 
HGF further induced expression of the Ets-1 and urokinase-type plasminogen
activator (uPA) genes specifically in E1AF-transfected cells. These findings
suggest that E1AF plays a substantial role in the cell motility and invasion of
NSCLCs.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11519038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Gynecol Oncol. 2000 Nov;79(2):256-63.

Expression of various matrix proteases and Ets family transcriptional factors in 
ovarian cancer cell lines: correlation to invasive potential.

Nishikawa A(1), Iwasaki M, Akutagawa N, Manase K, Yamashita S, Endo T, Kudo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Sapporo Medical
University, S1 W16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo, 060-8543, Japan. anisikaw@sapmed.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to determine the important molecules
responsible for the invasive activity of ovarian cancer cells.
METHODS: We compared the biological characteristics, that is, growth rate,
motility, and invasive activity, of five ovarian cancer cell lines with the gene 
expression of various matrix proteases (matrix metalloproteinase-1 [MMP-1],
MMP-2, MMP-9, membrane-type MMP type 1 [MT1-MMP], MT2-MMP, MT3-MMP, urokinase
plasminogen activator [uPA]), their inhibitors (tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase type 1 [TIMP-1], TIMP-2, plasminogen activator inhibitor type
1, [PAI-1], and PAI-2), and the potential transcriptional regulators E1AF and
Ets-1.
RESULTS: There was no clear correlation in the growth rate, motility, and
invasion, suggesting that there are independent properties for malignant
potential in ovarian cancer cells. However, HTBOA, a poorly differentiated cancer
cell line, exhibited highly invasive activity, rapid growth, and increased
motility. This cell line also expressed both Ets transcriptional factors, E1AF
and Ets-1, and many matrix-degrading enzymes. Three cell lines that expressed
E1AF showed rapid cell growth. The highly invasive cell lines, HTBOA and HTOA
(well-differentiated serous cystadenocarcinoma), produced either MMP-2 or MMP-1, 
and both cell lines expressed MT1-MMP and uPA. Furthermore, the active forms of
pro-MMP-2 and pro-MMP-1 were detected in HTBOA and HTOA by zymography.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that activated MMP-2 and MMP-1 are important in the
invasive activity of these ovarian cancer cells.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11063654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Carcinogenesis. 2000 Jun;21(6):1079-85.

Hepatocyte growth factor upregulates E1AF that induces oral squamous cell
carcinoma cell invasion by activating matrix metalloproteinase genes.

Hanzawa M(1), Shindoh M, Higashino F, Yasuda M, Inoue N, Hida K, Ono M, Kohgo T, 
Nakamura M, Notani K, Fukuda H, Totsuka Y, Yoshida K, Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Radiology, Hokkaido University School of Dentistry, North
13 West 7 Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0813, Japan.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is thought to play a role in cell motility and
invasion. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have been implicated in invasion and
metastasis of tumor cells. We have previously reported that the Ets-oncogene
family transcription factor E1AF positively regulates transcription of MMP genes 
in transient expression assays and that overexpression of the E1AF gene confers
an invasive phenotype on breast cancer cells. Here we examined the effect of HGF 
on E1AF and MMP gene expression in terms of the invasive potential of the oral
squamous cell carcinoma cell line HSC3. HGF stimulated expression of the E1AF
gene. The levels of MMP-1, -3 and -9 mRNAs increased in cells treated with HGF
and correlated with E1AF upregulation. In contrast, no obvious upregulation of
MMP-1 and -9 mRNA was observed in ASE1AFHSC3 cells transfected with the antisense
E1AF expression vector into parental HSC3 cells. The wild-type MMP-9 gene
promoter was activated by endogenous E1AF in HSC3 cells, and chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) activities increased when HGF was added to transfected
cells. On the other hand, CAT activity was reduced to almost two-thirds of the
wild-type activity when HSC3 cells were transfected with a CAT reporter plasmid
driven by a mutant MMP-9 promoter lacking the Ets-binding site, and induction of 
CAT activity was not observed upon addition of HGF. Analysis of organotypic raft 
cultures revealed that HSC3 cells invaded and degraded collagen gel actively upon
addition of HGF. These results suggest that HGF induces expression of the
Ets-related E1AF transcription factor gene whose product in turn activates MMP
genes and leads to oral cancer cell invasion.

PMID: 10836994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Gene. 1999 Nov 15;240(1):201-7.

Genomic organization of the human e1af gene,a member of Ets transcription
factors.

Coutte L(1), Monté D, Baert J, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8526 CNRS, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, BP
447 1 rue Calmette, 59021, Lille, France.

The E1AF protein belongs to the family of Ets transcription factors and is
involved in the regulation of metastasis gene expression. It has recently been
reported in an undifferentiated child sarcoma that part of this gene could be
fused by translocation to the ews gene. We show here that the human e1af gene,
which is located in the q21 region of chromosome 17, is organized in 13 exons
distributed along 19kb of genomic DNA. Its two main functional domains, the
acidic domain and the DNA-binding ETS domain, are each encoded by three different
exons. The 3'-untranslated region of e1af is 0.7kb. The 5'-untranslated region is
about 0.3kb and is composed of a first exon upstream from the exon containing the
first methionine. These data could possibly accelerate an understanding of the
molecular basis of putative inherited diseases linked to E1AF.

PMID: 10564827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Oncogene. 1999 Mar 4;18(9):1771-6.

Increased E1AF expression in mouse fibrosarcoma promotes metastasis through
induction of MT1-MMP expression.

Habelhah H(1), Okada F, Kobayashi M, Nakai K, Choi S, Hamada J, Moriuchi T, Kaya 
M, Yoshida K, Fujinaga K, Hosokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Cancer Institute, Hokkaido University School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

In this study, we investigated the role of E1AF, a member of ets family
transcription factor, in the acquisition of metastatic capacity by non-metastatic
mouse fibrosarcoma cell clone, QR-32. The QR-32 cell clone grows progressively
after co-implantation with gelatin sponge in syngeneic C57BL/6 mice. The cell
lines (QRsP) established from arising tumors after the co-implantation exhibited 
enhanced tumorigenicity and pulmonary metastasis in vivo as compared with parent 
QR-32 cells. The enhanced pulmonary metastasis of QRsP cells was correlated well 
with augmented production of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and increased
expression of membrane-type 1-MMP (MT1-MMP). The QRsP cells also acquired higher 
chemokinetic activities to fibronectin and higher invasive activities through a
reconstituted basement membrane. Furthermore we observed the elevated mRNA
expression of E1AF in QRsP cells compared to parent QR-32 cells. Therefore, we
transfected QR-32 cells with E1AF cDNA. Overexpression of E1AF in the QR-32 cells
resulted in the induction of MT1-MMP expression and converting an exogenously
added precursor MMP-2 into active form. E1AF transfectants exhibited more motile 
and invasive activities, and moderately increased pulmonary metastatic activities
than parental QR-32 cells in vivo, although their metastatic activities were
lower than those of QRsP cells. These findings suggest that the increased
expression of E1AF in fibrosarcoma contributes to invasive phenotypes including
MT1-MMP expression and enhanced cell migration, but not sufficient for exhibiting
highly metastatic activity in vivo.

PMID: 10208438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Anim Genet. 1999 Feb;30(1):73.

Detection of an SSCP in the 3' untranslated region of the bovine ETV4 gene.

Lowden S(1), Drinkwater R.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Tropical Agriculture, Molecular Animal Genetics Centre, Level 3 Gehrmann
Laboratories, University of Queensland, Australia.

PMID: 10050299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;82(3-4):278-83.

The genomic breakpoint and chimeric transcripts in the EWSR1-ETV4/E1AF gene
fusion in Ewing sarcoma.

Ishida S(1), Yoshida K, Kaneko Y, Tanaka Y, Sasaki Y, Urano F, Umezawa A, Hata J,
Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, School of
Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo (Japan).

Chromosome translocation creates a fusion between the EWSR1 gene and an ETS
family gene. The fusion between these two genes is a characteristic feature of
Ewing sarcoma. We previously identified a fourth translocation,
t(17;22)(q12;q12), in genomic DNA isolated from cells of patients affected with
Ewing sarcoma. The discovery of this translocation suggested that there might be 
a novel EWSR1-ETV4 fusion gene. In the present study, we determined the genomic
breakpoint and characterized the chimeric transcript of the EWSR1-ETV4 fusion
gene in two t(17;22) Ewing sarcomas. Reverse transcriptase-PCR assay showed an
in-frame fusion between the 5'-terminal region of EWSR1 and the 3' end of ETV4
(alias E1AF, PEA3); the chimeric transcript could thus serve as a template for
expression of a protein composed of the N-terminal portion of EWSR1 fused to the 
DNA-binding domain of ETV4. Long PCR and sequence analysis of genomic DNA
revealed that either exon 8 or intron 7 of EWSR1 is fused to the same intron of
ETV4 in both tumors. Several palindromic oligomer sequences were found close to
the breakpoints in both genes. The 159-bp Alu-like sequence was repeated in the
breakpoint region of the ETV4 gene. These observations suggest a mechanism of
EWSR1-ETV4 gene fusion.

PMID: 9858836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;82(1-2):99-100.

Assignment of the E1A-regulated transcription factor E4F gene (E4F1) to human
chromosome band 16p13.3 by in situ hybridization and somatic cell hybrids.

Saccone S(1), Sandy P, Meroni G, Gostissa M, Della Valle G, Del Sal G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Animale Università degli Studi di Catania, Catania,
Italy.

PMID: 9763670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Korean Med Sci. 1998 Aug;13(4):355-60.

Phylogenetically interrelated ETS genes, ETV1, ERM and E1A-F locate on different 
chromosomes.

Jeon IS(1), Shapiro DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN, USA.

ETV1, ERM and E1A-F are members of the multigene ETS domain containing a class of
transcription factors, first identified in the genome of the avian retrovirus
E26. Based upon extensive homology between these genes within their ETS domain
(96% identity each other), these three genes comprise a distinct sub-family of
ETS genes as a human PEA3 sub-family. By analyzing somatic cell hybrid
segregating human chromosomes, the genes encoding ETV1, ERM and E1A-F were
localized to human chromosome 7, 3 and 17, respectively. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization confirmed these assignments and allowed mapping of the genes to
7p22 (ETV1), 3q29 (ERM) and 17q12 (E1A-F). These results suggest the ancestral
PEA3 gene may have duplicated first, then dispersed to other chromosomal
locations.

PMCID: PMC3054419
PMID: 9741538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1998 Jul;89(7):703-11.

Molecular analysis of Ewing's sarcoma: another fusion gene, EWS-E1AF, available
for diagnosis.

Urano F(1), Umezawa A, Yabe H, Hong W, Yoshida K, Fujinaga K, Hata J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo.

Ewing's sarcoma, one of the most malignant tumors of children and young adults,
expresses specific chimeric genes, e.g. EWS-FLI-1, EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1 and EWS-FEV.
In this paper, we extensively characterized a new fusion gene, EWS-EIAF by means 
of whole cDNA sequencing, RNA blot analysis, DNA blot analysis and chromosomal
analysis, and showed it to be available for the diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma and 
to participate in the oncogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma. Furthermore, we conducted a
genetic analysis of Ewing family tumors in conjunction with immunohistochemical
analysis and ultrastructural analysis. Our results demonstrate some limitations
of both genetic analysis and histopathological analysis, and establish the
relationship between neurogenic phenotypes and chimera genes.

PMID: 9738976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Oral Oncol. 1997 Nov;33(6):426-30.

Expression of E1AF, an ets-family transcription factor, is correlated with the
invasive phenotype of oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Hida K(1), Shindoh M, Yoshida K, Kudoh A, Furaoka K, Kohgo T, Fujinaga K, Totsuka
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery, Hokkaido University School of Dentistry, Sapporo, 
Japan.

E1AF is a newly identified ets-oncogene family transcription factor. Previous
reports have noted that E1AF can upregulate promoter activities of several matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) genes and showed that invasive potentials of oral
squamous cell carcinoma-derived cell lines are correlated with expression of E1AF
and MMPs. The invasive phenotype is restrained by transfection with an antisense 
E1AF expression vector. Thus, E1AF is thought to be highly correlated with
malignant potentials of cancer cells. However, little is known about E1AF
expression and cancer cell malignancies in in vivo tumours. In the present study,
27 oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) specimens were examined using RT-PCR,
Southern blot hybridisation and in situ hybridisation (ISH) and compared to the
clinicopathological parameters. Among the 27 patients, E1AF was detected in 15
cases. E1AF mRNA was detected in 13 of 17 invasive SCCs, whereas the majority of 
SCCs not expressing E1AF showed an expansive growth pattern. Increased prevalence
of E1AF-positive oral SCC was observed in cases with nodal metastasis. These
results indicate that E1AF may be involved in cancer cell malignancies through
its ability to promote invasive potential.

PMID: 9509127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jul 9;236(1):79-82.

Activation of the p21(Waf1/Cip1) promoter by the ets oncogene family
transcription factor E1AF.

Funaoka K(1), Shindoh M, Yoshida K, Hanzawa M, Hida K, Nishikata S, Totsuka Y,
Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Oral Surgery, Hokkaido University School of Dentistry,
Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

p21(Waf1/Cip1) is one of the key regulatory proteins in cell cycle, terminal
differentiation, and apoptosis. Its promoter was shown to be transactivated by
the wild-type p53 protein as well as in a p53-independent manner. In this report,
we demonstrate that E1AF, an ets-related transcription factor, activates the
human p21(Waf1/Cip1) promoter by interacting with the ets-binding sites located
close to the two previously identified p53-responsive elements. Northern blot
analysis revealed that p21(Waf1/Cip1) and E1AF were correlatively upregulated in 
response to cisplatin treatment in SiHa cells. Transient expression assays
demonstrated that E1AF can activate the p21(Waf1/Cip1) promoter-driven luciferase
reporter gene in SiHa cells. The p21(Waf1/Cip1) promoter activity was also
increased in p53-null Saos2 osteosarcoma cells, but was markedly reduced when the
ets-binding sites were deleted. These results indicate that E1AF positively
regulates transcription from the p21(Waf1/Cip1) promoter in response to genotoxic
stresses.

PMID: 9223430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Am J Pathol. 1997 Jun;150(6):2125-32.

Antisense E1AF transfection restrains oral cancer invasion by reducing matrix
metalloproteinase activities.

Hida K(1), Shindoh M, Yasuda M, Hanzawa M, Funaoka K, Kohgo T, Amemiya A, Totsuka
Y, Yoshida K, Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery, Hokkaido University School of Dentistry, Japan.

E1AF is a newly identified human ets-family transcription factor. We have
reported that E1AF can up-regulate transcription of matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP) genes and confers invasive phenotype on human cancer cells. HSC3 is an oral
squamous-cell-carcinoma-derived cell line, and it manifests high levels of E1AF
and MMP-1 and -9 gene expression that are associated with invasive potential. We 
reconstructed an E1AF antisense expression vector, transfected HSC3 cells with
the vector, and obtained HSC3AS cells that express E1AF antisense RNA. HSC3AS
showed decreasing mRNA and protein levels of MMP-1, -3, and -9. Moreover, HSC3AS 
showed lower invasive potential in vitro three-dimensional raft culture and in
vivo implantation into nude mice. These results imply that transfection of
antisense E1AF inhibits tumor invasion by down-regulating MMP genes.

PMCID: PMC1858336
PMID: 9176403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1997 Apr;88(4):394-400.

Two transcription factors, E1AF and N-myc, correlate with the invasiveness of
neuroblastoma cell lines.

Taguchi K(1), Yoshida K, Sasaki F, Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University, School of Medicine, Chuo-ku.

The ets transcription factor E1AF can activate several matrix-degrading
metalloproteinase (MMP) genes and is implicated in enhancement of tumor cell
invasion. Here we compared the invasive activity of five human neuroblastoma cell
lines (TGW, GOTO, SK-N-BE, SK-N-SH and SK-N-AS), which exhibit distinct levels of
N-myc amplification, together with the expression of E1AF. Extracellular
matrix-degrading proteases and their inhibitor proteins, which play an important 
role in local invasion, were also analyzed. The activity to invade through
reconstituted basement membrane was high in cells (TGW, GOTO, and SK-N-BE) with
N-myc amplification, and these cells produced relatively large amounts of E1AF
mRNA, correlating with the invasive activities. Of several matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and a tissue inhibitor of MMPs (TIMP), only
membrane-bound type 1 MMP (MT1-MMP) was specifically detected in N-myc-amplified 
cells, suggesting a role of MT1-MMP in neuroblastoma cell invasion. MMP-2 (72 kD 
type IV collagenase), TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 were expressed in all five cell lines.
Urokinase-type plasminogen activator was undetectable. These findings indicate
that the transcription factors E1AF and N-myc are related to malignant phenotypes
of neuroblastoma.

PMID: 9197532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Feb 15;219(2):608-12.

A novel chimera gene between EWS and E1A-F, encoding the adenovirus E1A
enhancer-binding protein, in extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma.

Urano F(1), Umezawa A, Hong W, Kikuchi H, Hata J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma/PNET, a tumor of the bone and soft tissue, is one of the most
common causes of tumor death among youths. This tumor does not have specific
phenotypes, but does have characteristic chromosomal translocations. Furthermore,
the expression of EWS/FLI-1 or EWS/ERG chimeric genes was found to be generated
through a t(11;22)(q24;q12) or a t(21;22)(q22;q12) translocation. In this study, 
we identified a new chimera gene between the transactivation domain of EWS and
E1A-F, encoding the adenovirus E1A enhancer-binding protein. Since E1A-F is known
to activate matrix metalloproteinase genes, the chimera gene may possibly be
involved in tumor progression and could be a novel tumor marker for Ewing's
sarcoma/PNET.

PMID: 8605035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1996 Feb;15(2):115-21.

Fusion of an ETS-family gene, EIAF, to EWS by t(17;22)(q12;q12) chromosome
translocation in an undifferentiated sarcoma of infancy.

Kaneko Y(1), Yoshida K, Handa M, Toyoda Y, Nishihira H, Tanaka Y, Sasaki Y,
Ishida S, Higashino F, Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Chemotherapy, Saitama Cancer Center Hospital, Japan.

EIAF is a newly isolated ETS-family gene that is located on 17q21 and codes for
the adenovirus EIA enhancer-binding protein. In our chromosome analysis of 18 of 
the Ewing family of tumors and undifferentiated sarcomas, we found
t(17;22)(q12;q12) in an MIC2 antigen-positive undifferentiated sarcoma of
infancy. On Southern blot analysis, EWS and EIAF cDNA probes hybridized to the
same rearranged band, indicating that an EWS-EIAF fusion gene was formed in the
tumor. Further Southern blot analysis using four EIAF cDNA probes of different
sizes showed that the breakpoint lies in the region upstream to the ETS domain of
the EIAF gene. EIAF may be the fourth ETS-family gene to be identified forming a 
fusion gene with EWS. We assume that the RNA binding domain of EWS may have been 
replaced by the DNA binding domain of EIAF in the EWS-EIAF fusion protein as in
other fusion proteins previously characterized in Ewing sarcoma and other types
of sarcomas.

PMID: 8834175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Genomics. 1995 Jul 20;28(2):357-9.

Assignment of the ets-related transcription factor E1A-F gene (ETV4) to human
chromosome region 17q21.

Isobe M(1), Yamagishi F, Yoshida K, Higashino F, Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Laboratory, Faculty of Engineering, Toyama
University, Japan.

PMID: 8530053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogene. 1995 Apr 6;10(7):1461-3.

Ets-related protein E1A-F can activate three different matrix metalloproteinase
gene promoters.

Higashino F(1), Yoshida K, Noumi T, Seiki M, Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Sapporo Medical University, School of
Medicine, Japan.

An Ets-related E1A-F has been characterized as an enhancer-binding protein for
the adenovirus E1A gene. Here we show, in transient expression assays, that E1A-F
can activate three different subclasses of the matrix metalloproteinase gene
promoters. Expressions of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter
gene under the control of stromelysin, type I collagenase and 92 kD type IV
collagenase promoters were increased approximately 10- to 20-fold by
co-transfection with the E1A-F expression vector. Activation levels were as much 
high as those obtained by exogenous expression of AP-1 transcription factor.
These results suggest that E1A-F positively regulates transcriptions from matrix 
metalloproteinase genes that are associated with invasion and metastasis of tumor
cells.

PMID: 7731700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Feb 11;21(3):547-53.

Isolation of a cDNA encoding the adenovirus E1A enhancer binding protein: a new
human member of the ets oncogene family.

Higashino F(1), Yoshida K, Fujinaga Y, Kamio K, Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

The cDNA encoding adenovirus E1A enhancer-binding protein E1A-F was isolated by
screening a HeLa cell lambda gt11 expression library for E1A-F site-specific DNA 
binding. One cDNA clone produced recombinant E1A-F protein with the same DNA
binding specificity as that endogenous to HeLa cells. Sequence analysis of the
cDNA showed homology with the ETS-domain, a region required for sequence-specific
DNA binding and common to all ets oncogene members. Analysis of the longest cDNA 
revealed about a 94% identity in amino acids between human E1A-F and mouse PEA3
(polyomavirus enhancer activator 3), a recently characterized ets oncogene
member. E1A-F was encoded by a 2.5kb mRNA in HeLa cells, which was found to
increase during the early period of adenovirus infection. In contrast, ets-2 mRNA
was significantly reduced in infected HeLa cells. The results indicate that E1A
enhancer binding protein E1A-F is a member of the ets oncogene family and is
probably a human homologue of mouse PEA3.

PMCID: PMC309151
PMID: 8441666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


