
1. PLoS Biol. 2016 Feb 19;14(2):e1002382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002382.
eCollection 2016.

Ret and Etv4 Promote Directed Movements of Progenitor Cells during Renal
Branching Morphogenesis.

Riccio P(1), Cebrian C(1), Zong H(2,)(3), Hippenmeyer S(4), Costantini F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York, United States of America. (2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and
Cancer Biology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville,
Virginia, United States of America. (3)Center for Brain Immunology and Glia,
University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, United
States of America. (4)Developmental Neurobiology, IST Austria (Institute of
Science and Technology Austria), Klosterneuburg, Austria.

Branching morphogenesis of the epithelial ureteric bud forms the renal collecting
duct system and is critical for normal nephron number, while low nephron number
is implicated in hypertension and renal disease. Ureteric bud growth and
branching requires GDNF signaling from the surrounding mesenchyme to cells at the
ureteric bud tips, via the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase and coreceptor Gfra1; Ret
signaling up-regulates transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5, which are also
critical for branching. Despite extensive knowledge of the genetic control of
these events, it is not understood, at the cellular level, how renal branching
morphogenesis is achieved or how Ret signaling influences epithelial cell
behaviors to promote this process. Analysis of chimeric embryos previously
suggested a role for Ret signaling in promoting cell rearrangements in the
nephric duct, but this method was unsuited to study individual cell behaviors
during ureteric bud branching. Here, we use Mosaic Analysis with Double Markers
(MADM), combined with organ culture and time-lapse imaging, to trace the
movements and divisions of individual ureteric bud tip cells. We first examine
wild-type clones and then Ret or Etv4 mutant/wild-type clones in which the mutant
and wild-type sister cells are differentially and heritably marked by green and
red fluorescent proteins. We find that, in normal kidneys, most individual tip
cells behave as self-renewing progenitors, some of whose progeny remain at the
tips while others populate the growing UB trunks. In Ret or Etv4 MADM clones, the
wild-type cells generated at a UB tip are much more likely to remain at, or move 
to, the new tips during branching and elongation, while their Ret-/- or Etv4-/-
sister cells tend to lag behind and contribute only to the trunks. By tracking
successive mitoses in a cell lineage, we find that Ret signaling has little
effect on proliferation, in contrast to its effects on cell movement. Our results
show that Ret/Etv4 signaling promotes directed cell movements in the ureteric bud
tips, and suggest a model in which these cell movements mediate branching
morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4760680
PMID: 26894589  [PubMed - in process]


2. Brain Res Bull. 2016 Mar;121:215-26. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.02.010.
Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor promotes vesicular glutamate transporter 3
expression and neurite outgrowth of dorsal root ganglion neurons through the
activation of the transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5.

Liu D(1), Liu Z(2), Liu H(3), Li H(4), Pan X(5), Li Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012,
China. Electronic address: cyyzld@163.com. (2)Department of Anatomy, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address:
zhen@sdu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Rheumatology, Shandong University Qilu
Hospital, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address: huaxiangliu@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, Shandong University Qilu Hospital, Jinan 250012,
China. Electronic address: lihao462929@163.com. (5)Department of Otolaryngology, 
Shandong University Qilu Hospital, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address:
13606371129@163.com. (6)Department of Anatomy, Shandong University School of
Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. Electronic address: zli@sdu.edu.cn.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is critical for sensory neuron survival 
and is necessary for vesicular glutamate transporter 3 (VGLUT3) expression.
Whether the transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 are involved in these
BDNF-induced effects remains unclear. In the present study, primary cultured
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons were used to test the link between BDNF and
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 on VGLUT3 expression and neurite outgrowth.
BDNF promoted the mRNA and protein expression of Etv4 and Etv5 in DRG neurons.
These effects were blocked by extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2) inhibitor PD98059 but not phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor
LY294002 or phospholipase C-<U+03B3> (PLC-<U+03B3>) inhibitor U73122. Etv4 siRNA and Etv5 siRNA
effectively blocked the VGLUT3 expression and neurite elongation induced by BNDF.
The overexpression of Etv4 or Etv5 potentiated the effects of BNDF-induced
neurite elongation and growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43), medium
neurofilament (NF-M), and light neurofilament (NF-L) expression while these
effects could be inhibited by Etv4 and Etv5 siRNA. These data imply that Etv4 and
Etv5 are essential transcription factors in modulating BDNF/TrkB
signaling-mediated VGLUT3 expression and neurite outgrowth. BDNF, through the
ERK1/2 signaling pathway, activates Etv4 and Etv5 to initiate GAP-43 expression, 
promote neurofilament (NF) protein expression, induce neurite outgrowth, and
mediate VGLUT3 expression for neuronal function improvement. The biological
effects initiated by BDNF/TrkB signaling linked to E26 transformation-specific
(ETS) transcription factors are important to elucidate neuronal differentiation, 
axonal regeneration, and repair in various pathological states.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876757  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 19;291(8):3947-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.705103. Epub 2015 
Dec 30.

Regulation of c-Maf and aA-Crystallin in Ocular Lens by Fibroblast Growth Factor 
Signaling.

Xie Q(1), McGreal R(2), Harris R(3), Gao CY(4), Liu W(1), Reneker LW(5), Musil
LS(6), Cvekl A(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Genetics, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461. (2)From the Departments of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and. (3)Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461. (4)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental
Biology, National Eye Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. (5)Department of
Ophthalmology, Mason Eye Institute, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri
65212, and. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health
Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239. (7)From the Departments of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, ales.cvekl@einstein.yu.edu.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling regulates a multitude of cellular
processes, including cell proliferation, survival, migration, and
differentiation. In the vertebrate lens, FGF signaling regulates fiber cell
differentiation characterized by high expression of crystallin proteins. However,
a direct link between FGF signaling and crystallin gene transcriptional machinery
remains to be established. Previously, we have shown that the bZIP proto-oncogene
c-Maf regulates expression of aA-crystallin (Cryaa) through binding to its
promoter and distal enhancer, DCR1, both activated by FGF2 in cell culture.
Herein, we identified and characterized a novel FGF2-responsive region in the
c-Maf promoter (-272/-70, FRE). Both c-Maf and Cryaa regulatory regions contain
arrays of AP-1 and Ets-binding sites. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
established binding of c-Jun (an AP-1 factor) and Etv5/ERM (an Ets factor) to
these regions in lens chromatin. Analysis of temporal and spatial expression of
c-Jun, phospho-c-Jun, and Etv5/ERM in wild type and ERK1/2 deficient lenses
supports their roles as nuclear effectors of FGF signaling in mouse embryonic
lens. Collectively, these studies show that FGF signaling up-regulates expression
of aA-crystallin both directly and indirectly via up-regulation of c-Maf. These
molecular mechanisms are applicable for other crystallins and genes highly
expressed in terminally differentiated lens fibers.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4759173 [Available on 2017-02-19]
PMID: 26719333  [PubMed - in process]


4. BioData Min. 2015 Dec 29;8:45. doi: 10.1186/s13040-015-0077-x. eCollection 2015.

Characterizing gene-gene interactions in a statistical epistasis network of
twelve candidate genes for obesity.

De R(1), Hu T(2), Moore JH(3), Gilbert-Diamond D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
USA. (2)Department of Computer Science, Memorial University, St. John's, NL
Canada. (3)Institute for Biomedical Informatics, The Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology, 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent findings have reemphasized the importance of epistasis, or
gene-gene interactions, as a contributing factor to the unexplained heritability 
of obesity. Network-based methods such as statistical epistasis networks (SEN),
present an intuitive framework to address the computational challenge of studying
pairwise interactions between thousands of genetic variants. In this study, we
aimed to analyze pairwise interactions that are associated with Body Mass Index
(BMI) between SNPs from twelve genes robustly associated with obesity (BDNF,
ETV5, FAIM2, FTO, GNPDA2, KCTD15, MC4R, MTCH2, NEGR1, SEC16B, SH2B1, and TMEM18).
METHODS: We used information gain measures to identify all SNP-SNP interactions
among and between these genes that were related to obesity (BMI<U+2009>><U+2009>30 kg/m(2))
within the Framingham Heart Study Cohort; interactions exceeding a certain
threshold were used to build an SEN. We also quantified whether interactions tend
to occur more between SNPs from the same gene (dyadicity) or between SNPs from
different genes (heterophilicity).
RESULTS: We identified a highly connected SEN of 709 SNPs and 1241 SNP-SNP
interactions. Combining the SEN framework with dyadicity and heterophilicity
analyses, we found 1 dyadic gene (TMEM18, P-value<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.047) and 3 heterophilic
genes (KCTD15, P-value<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.045; SH2B1, P-value<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003; and TMEM18,
P-value<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). We also identified a lncRNA SNP (rs4358154) as a key node
within the SEN using multiple network measures.
CONCLUSION: This study presents an analytical framework to characterize the
global landscape of genetic interactions from genome-wide arrays and also to
discover nodes of potential biological significance within the identified
network.

PMCID: PMC4693412
PMID: 26715945  [PubMed]


5. Cell. 2015 Dec 3;163(6):1457-67. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.076. Epub 2015 Nov
25.

ß-Cell Insulin Secretion Requires the Ubiquitin Ligase COP1.

Suriben R(1), Kaihara KA(2), Paolino M(1), Reichelt M(3), Kummerfeld SK(4),
Modrusan Z(5), Dugger DL(1), Newton K(1), Sagolla M(3), Webster JD(3), Liu J(4), 
Hebrok M(2), Dixit VM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (2)Diabetes Center, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143 USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Genentech, 1 
DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (4)Department of Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. 
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. (6)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South
San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. Electronic address: dixit@gene.com.

A variety of signals finely tune insulin secretion by pancreatic ß cells to
prevent both hyper-and hypoglycemic states. Here, we show that post-translational
regulation of the transcription factors ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 by the ubiquitin
ligase COP1 (also called RFWD2) in ß cells is critical for insulin secretion.
Mice lacking COP1 in ß cells developed diabetes due to insulin granule docking
defects that were fully rescued by genetic deletion of Etv1, Etv4, and Etv5.
Genes regulated by ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 in the absence of mouse COP1 were enriched
in human diabetes-associated genes, suggesting that they also influence human
ß-cell pathophysiology. In normal ß cells, ETV4 was stabilized upon membrane
depolarization and limited insulin secretion under hyperglycemic conditions.
Collectively, our data reveal that ETVs negatively regulate insulin secretion for
the maintenance of normoglycemia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26627735  [PubMed - in process]


6. Dev Cell. 2015 Nov 9;35(3):322-32. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.10.006.

FGF-Regulated ETV Transcription Factors Control FGF-SHH Feedback Loop in Lung
Branching.

Herriges JC(1), Verheyden JM(1), Zhang Z(2), Sui P(1), Zhang Y(3), Anderson
MJ(3), Swing DA(4), Zhang Y(1), Lewandoski M(3), Sun X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA. (2)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA; Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (3)Cancer and Developmental Biology Lab, National
Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (4)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program,
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (5)Laboratory of Genetics,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address:
xsun@wisc.edu.

The mammalian lung forms its elaborate tree-like structure following a largely
stereotypical branching sequence. While a number of genes have been identified to
play essential roles in lung branching, what coordinates the choice between
branch growth and new branch formation has not been elucidated. Here we show that
loss of FGF-activated transcription factor genes, Etv4 and Etv5 (collectively
Etv), led to prolonged branch tip growth and delayed new branch formation.
Unexpectedly, this phenotype is more similar to mutants with increased rather
than decreased FGF activity. Indeed, an increased Fgf10 expression is observed,
and reducing Fgf10 dosage can attenuate the Etv mutant phenotype. Further
evidence indicates that ETV inhibits Fgf10 via directly promoting Shh expression.
SHH in turn inhibits local Fgf10 expression and redirects growth, thereby
initiating new branches. Together, our findings establish ETV as a key node in
the FGF-ETV-SHH inhibitory feedback loop that dictates branching periodicity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4763945 [Available on 2016-11-09]
PMID: 26555052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 7;35(40):13713-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1403-15.2015.

Substrate Availability of Mutant SPT Alters Neuronal Branching and Growth Cone
Dynamics in Dorsal Root Ganglia.

Jun BK(1), Chandra A(1), Kuljis D(1), Schmidt BP(1), Eichler FS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02114; and Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02114. (2)Neuroscience Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114; and Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114 feichler@partners.org.

Serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT) is a key enzyme in the first step of
sphingolipid biosynthesis. Mutations in the SPTLC1 gene that encodes for SPT
subunits cause hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1. However, little is
understood about how mutant SPT regulates mechanisms of sensory neuron and axonal
growth. Using transgenic mice overexpressing the C133W SPT mutant, we found that 
mutant dorsal root ganglia (DRG) during growth in vitro exhibit increased neurite
length and branching, coinciding with elevated expression of actin-cross-linking 
proteins at the neuronal growth cone, namely phosphorylated Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin.
In addition, inhibition of SPT was able to reverse the mutant phenotype. Because 
mutant SPT preferentially uses l-alanine over its canonical substrate l-serine,
we also investigated the effects of substrate availability on DRG neurons.
Supplementation with l-serine or removal of l-alanine independently restored
normal growth patterns in mutant SPTLC1(C133W) DRG. Therefore, we report that
substrate availability and selectivity of SPT influence the regulation of neurite
growth in DRG neurons.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 
1 is an autosomal-dominant disorder that leads to a sensory neuropathy due to
mutations in the serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT) enzyme. We investigated how
mutant SPT and substrate levels regulate neurite growth. Because SPT is an
important enzyme in the synthesis of sphingolipids, our data are of broader
significance to other peripheral and metabolic disorders.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3513713-07$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4595622 [Available on 2016-04-07]
PMID: 26446223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. BMC Genomics. 2015 Aug 12;16:592. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1783-y.

Cell cycle control, DNA damage repair, and apoptosis-related pathways control
pre-ameloblasts differentiation during tooth development.

Liu C(1), Niu Y(2), Zhou X(3), Xu X(4), Yang Y(5), Zhang Y(6), Zheng L(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China. liuchengcheng519@163.com. (2)Key
Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College
of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China. yulong.niu@aol.com.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China. zhouxd@scu.edu.cn. (4)State Key Laboratory
of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, PR China. nixux1982@hotmail.com. (5)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and 
Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, PR China. yangyi528@scu.edu.cn. (6)Department of Orofacial
Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
yan.zhang2@ucsf.edu. (7)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China
Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China.
zhenglw399@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Ameloblast differentiation is the most critical stepwise process in
amelogenesis, and it is controlled by precise molecular events. To better
understand the mechanism controlling pre-ameloblasts (PABs) differentiation into 
secretory ameloblasts (SABs), a more precise identification of molecules and
signaling networks will elucidate the mechanisms governing enamel formation and
lay a foundation for enamel regeneration.
RESULTS: We analyzed transcriptional profiles of human PABs and SABs. From a
total of 28,869 analyzed transcripts, we identified 923 differentially expressed 
genes (DEGs) with p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 and Fold-change<U+2009>><U+2009>2. Among the DEGs, 647 genes showed 
elevated expression in PABs compared to SABs. Notably, 38 DEGs displayed greater 
than eight-fold changes. Comparative analysis revealed that highly expressed
genes in PABs were involved in cell cycle control, DNA damage repair and
apoptosis, while highly expressed genes in SABs were related to cell adhesion and
extracellular matrix. Moreover, coexpression network analysis uncovered two
highly conserved sub-networks contributing to differentiation, containing
transcription regulators (RUNX2, ETV1 and ETV5), solute carrier family members
(SLC15A1 and SLC7A11), enamel matrix protein (MMP20), and a polymodal excitatory 
ion channel (TRPA1).
CONCLUSIONS: By combining comparative analysis and coexpression networks, this
study provides novel biomarkers and research targets for ameloblast
differentiation and the potential for their application in enamel regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4534026
PMID: 26265206  [PubMed - in process]


9. Biochem J. 2015 Aug 15;470(1):77-90. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150238. Epub 2015 Jun 16.

The NHERF2 sequence adjacent and upstream of the ERM-binding domain affects
NHERF2-ezrin binding and dexamethasone stimulated NHE3 activity.

Yang J(1), Sarker R(1), Singh V(1), Sarker P(1), Yin J(1), Chen TE(1), Chaerkady 
R(2), Li X(1), Tse CM(1), Donowitz M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, U.S.A. (2)Department of
Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205, U.S.A. (3)Departments of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, 
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205,
U.S.A. Department of Physiology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, U.S.A. mdonowit@jhmi.edu.

In the brush border of intestinal and kidney epithelial cells, scaffolding
proteins ezrin, Na(+)-H(+) exchanger regulatory factor (NHERF)1 and NHERF2 play
important roles in linking transmembrane proteins to the cytoskeleton and
assembling signalling regulatory complexes. The last 30 carboxyl residues of
NHERF1 and NHERF2 form the EBDs [ezrin, radixin and moesin (ERM)-binding domain].
The current study found that NHERF1/2 contain an ERM-binding regulatory sequence 
(EBRS), which facilitates the interaction between the EBD and ezrin. The EBRSs
are located within 24 and 19 residues immediately upstream of EBDs for NHERF1 and
NHERF2 respectively. In OK (opossum kidney) epithelial cells, EBRSs are necessary
along with the EBD to distribute NHERF1 and NHERF2 exclusively to the apical
domain. Furthermore, phosphorylation of Ser(303) located in the EBRS of NHERF2,
decreases the binding affinity for ezrin, dislocates apical NHERF2 into the
cytosol and increases the NHERF2 microvillar mobility rate. Moreover, increased
phosphorylation of Ser(303) was functionally significant preventing acute
stimulation of NHE3 (Na(+)-H(+) exchanger 3) activity by dexamethasone.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMCID: PMC4613507
PMID: 26251448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Development. 2015 Aug 1;142(15):2696-703. doi: 10.1242/dev.122044.

Yap and Taz are required for Ret-dependent urinary tract morphogenesis.

Reginensi A(1), Hoshi M(2), Boualia SK(3), Bouchard M(3), Jain S(2), McNeill
H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada 
M5G 1X5 reginensi@lunenfeld.ca mcneill@lunenfeld.ca. (2)Departments of Internal
Medicine (Renal Division) and Pathology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (3)Goodman Cancer Research Centre and
Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Canada H3A 1A3.
(4)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada 
M5G 1X5 Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 
M5G 1X5 reginensi@lunenfeld.ca mcneill@lunenfeld.ca.

Despite the high occurrence of congenital abnormalities of the lower urinary
tract in humans, the molecular, cellular and morphological aspects of their
development are still poorly understood. Here, we use a conditional knockout
approach to inactivate within the nephric duct (ND) lineage the two effectors of 
the Hippo pathway, Yap and Taz. Deletion of Yap leads to hydronephrotic kidneys
with blind-ending megaureters at birth. In Yap mutants, the ND successfully
migrates towards, and contacts, the cloaca. However, close analysis reveals that 
the tip of the Yap(-/-) ND forms an aberrant connection with the cloaca and does 
not properly insert into the cloaca, leading to later detachment of the ND from
the cloaca. Taz deletion from the ND does not cause any defect, but analysis of
Yap(-/-);Taz(-/-) NDs indicates that both genes play partially redundant roles in
ureterovesical junction formation. Aspects of the Yap(-/-) phenotype resemble
hypersensitivity to RET signaling, including excess budding of the ND, increased 
phospho-ERK and increased expression of Crlf1, Sprouty1, Etv4 and Etv5.
Importantly, the Yap(ND) (-/-) ND phenotype can be largely rescued by reducing
Ret gene dosage. Taken together, these results suggest that disrupting Yap/Taz
activities enhances Ret pathway activity and contributes to pathogenesis of lower
urinary tract defects in human infants.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4529030 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26243870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Oncol. 2015 Nov;9(9):1852-67. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2015.07.001. Epub 2015
Jul 15.

PEA3 transcription factors are downstream effectors of Met signaling involved in 
migration and invasiveness of Met-addicted tumor cells.

Kherrouche Z(1), Monte D(2), Werkmeister E(3), Stoven L(1), De Launoit Y(1),
Cortot AB(4), Tulasne D(5), Chotteau-Lelievre A(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Université de Lille, SIRIC ONCOLille, Lille 59021, France. (2)CNRS USR 3078,
Institut de Recherche Interdisciplinaire, Université de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq 
59658, France. (3)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur 
de Lille, Université de Lille, SIRIC ONCOLille, Lille 59021, France; BioImaging
Center Lille Nord de France, Lille 59021, France. (4)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de
Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille, SIRIC
ONCOLille, Lille 59021, France; Thoracic Oncology Department, Lille University
Hospital, Université de Lille, France. (5)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de 
Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille, SIRIC ONCOLille, Lille
59021, France. Electronic address: david.tulasne@ibl.cnrs.fr.

Various solid tumors including lung or gastric carcinomas display aberrant
activation of the Met receptor which correlates with aggressive phenotypes and
poor prognosis. Although downstream signaling of Met is well described, its
integration at the transcriptional level is poorly understood. We demonstrate
here that in cancer cells harboring met gene amplification, inhibition of Met
activity with tyrosine kinase inhibitors or specific siRNA drastically decreased 
expression of ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5, three transcription factors constituting the
PEA3 subgroup of the ETS family, while expression of the other members of the
family were less or not affected. Similar link between Met activity and PEA3
factors expression was found in lung cancer cells displaying resistance to EGFR
targeted therapy involving met gene amplification. Using silencing experiments,
we demonstrate that the PEA3 factors are required for efficient migration and
invasion mediated by Met, while other biological responses such as proliferation 
or unanchored growth remain unaffected. PEA3 overexpression or silencing revealed
that they participated in the regulation of the MMP2 target gene involved in
extracellular matrix remodeling. Our results demonstrated that PEA3-subgroup
transcription factors are key players of the Met signaling integration involved
in regulation of migration and invasiveness.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26238631  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22460-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.675595. Epub
2015 Jul 29.

ETS-related transcription factors ETV4 and ETV5 are involved in proliferation and
induction of differentiation-associated genes in embryonic stem (ES) cells.

Akagi T(1), Kuure S(2), Uranishi K(3), Koide H(3), Costantini F(4), Yokota T(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan,
tadayuki@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)the Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Helsinki, 00790 Helsinki, Finland, and. (3)From the Department of Stem Cell
Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa University, 13-1
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan. (4)the Department of Genetics
and Development, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York 10032.
(5)From the Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan,
tyokota@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

The pluripotency and self-renewal capacity of embryonic stem (ES) cells is
regulated by several transcription factors. Here, we show that the ETS-related
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 (Etv4/5) are specifically expressed in
undifferentiated ES cells, and suppression of Oct3/4 results in down-regulation
of Etv4/5. Simultaneous deletion of Etv4 and Etv5 (Etv4/5 double knock-out (dKO))
in ES cells resulted in a flat, epithelial cell-like appearance, whereas the
morphology changed into compact colonies in a 2i medium (containing two
inhibitors for GSK3 and MEK/ERK). Expression levels of self-renewal marker genes,
including Oct3/4 and Nanog, were similar between wild-type and dKO ES cells,
whereas proliferation of Etv4/5 dKO ES cells was decreased with overexpression of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (p16/p19, p15, and p57). A differentiation
assay revealed that the embryoid bodies derived from Etv4/5 dKO ES cells were
smaller than the control, and expression of ectoderm marker genes, including
Fgf5, Sox1, and Pax3, was not induced in dKO-derived embryoid bodies. Microarray 
analysis demonstrated that stem cell-related genes, including Tcf15, Gbx2, Lrh1, 
Zic3, and Baf60c, were significantly repressed in Etv4/5 dKO ES cells. The
artificial expression of Etv4 and/or Etv5 in Etv4/5 dKO ES cells induced
re-expression of Tcf15 and Gbx2. These results indicate that Etv4 and Etv5,
potentially through regulation of Gbx2 and Tcf15, are involved in the ES cell
proliferation and induction of differentiation-associated genes in ES cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566222 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26224636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Aug 18;43(14):7110-21. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv650. Epub 2015
Jun 29.

Characterization of ERM transactivation domain binding to the ACID/PTOV domain of
the Mediator subunit MED25.

Landrieu I(1), Verger A(2), Baert JL(2), Rucktooa P(2), Cantrelle FX(2), Dewitte 
F(2), Ferreira E(2), Lens Z(2), Villeret V(2), Monté D(3).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8576, Université de Lille, Parc CNRS de la Haute Borne, 50 avenue de 
Halley, B.P. 70478, 59658 Villeneuve d'Ascq Cedex, France
isabelle.landrieu@univ-lille1.fr. (2)CNRS UMR 8576, Université de Lille, Parc
CNRS de la Haute Borne, 50 avenue de Halley, B.P. 70478, 59658 Villeneuve d'Ascq 
Cedex, France. (3)CNRS UMR 8576, Université de Lille, Parc CNRS de la Haute
Borne, 50 avenue de Halley, B.P. 70478, 59658 Villeneuve d'Ascq Cedex, France
didier.monte@iri.univ-lille1.fr.

The N-terminal acidic transactivation domain (TAD) of ERM/ETV5 (ERM38-68), a PEA3
group member of Ets-related transcription factors, directly interacts with the
ACID/PTOV domain of the Mediator complex subunit MED25. Molecular details of this
interaction were investigated using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy. The TAD is disordered in solution but has a propensity to adopt
local transient secondary structure. We show that it folds upon binding to MED25 
and that the resulting ERM-MED25 complex displays characteristics of a fuzzy
complex. Mutational analysis further reveals that two aromatic residues in the
ERM TAD (F47 and W57) are involved in the binding to MED25 and participate in the
ability of ERM TAD to activate transcription. Mutation of a key residue Q451 in
the VP16 H1 binding pocket of MED25 affects the binding of ERM. Furthermore,
competition experiments show that ERM and VP16 H1 share a common binding
interface on MED25. NMR data confirms the occupancy of this binding pocket by ERM
TAD. Based on these experimental data, a structural model of a functional
interaction is proposed. This study provides mechanistic insights into the
Mediator-transactivator interactions.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4538835
PMID: 26130716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 15;6(27):23533-47.

miR-93/miR-106b/miR-375-CIC-CRABP1: a novel regulatory axis in prostate cancer
progression.

Choi N(1), Park J(1), Lee JS(1), Yoe J(1), Park GY(1), Kim E(1), Jeon H(2), Cho
YM(3), Roh TY(1,)(2), Lee Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Pohang, Kyungbuk, Republic of Korea. (2)Division of Integrative Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Kyungbuk,
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Capicua (CIC) has been implicated in pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia
type-1 (SCA1) neurodegenerative disease and some types of cancer; however, the
role of CIC in prostate cancer remains unknown. Here we show that CIC suppresses 
prostate cancer progression. CIC expression was markedly decreased in human
prostatic carcinoma. CIC overexpression suppressed prostate cancer cell
proliferation, invasion, and migration, whereas CIC RNAi exerted opposite
effects. We found that knock-down of CIC derepresses expression of ETV5 and
CRABP1 in LNCaP and PC-3 cells, respectively, thereby promoting cell
proliferation and invasion. We also discovered that miR-93, miR-106b, and
miR-375, which are known to be frequently overexpressed in prostate cancer
patients, cooperatively down-regulate CIC levels to promote cancer progression.
Altogether, we suggest miR-93/miR-106b/miR-375-CIC-CRABP1 as a novel key
regulatory axis in prostate cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4695135
PMID: 26124181  [PubMed - in process]


15. Cancer Cell. 2015 Jul 13;28(1):114-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.05.008. Epub
2015 Jun 11.

Erk Negative Feedback Control Enables Pre-B Cell Transformation and Represents a 
Therapeutic Target in Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.

Shojaee S(1), Caeser R(2), Buchner M(1), Park E(3), Swaminathan S(1), Hurtz C(1),
Geng H(1), Chan LN(1), Klemm L(1), Hofmann WK(4), Qiu YH(5), Zhang N(6), Coombes 
KR(6), Paietta E(7), Molkentin J(8), Koeffler HP(9), Willman CL(10), Hunger
SP(11), Melnick A(12), Kornblau SM(5), Müschen M(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of
Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0AH, UK. (3)Department of
Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0AH, UK. (4)III. Medizinische
Klinik, Medizinische Fakultät Mannheim, Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg 68167,
Germany. (5)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. (7)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10466, USA. (8)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute and Cincinnati Children's Hospital, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45247, USA. (9)Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Cancer Science Institute
of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117599, Singapore.
(10)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico Cancer Center, Albuquerque,
NM 87102, USA. (11)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (12)Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Weill 
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA. (13)Department of Laboratory
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
Electronic address: markus.muschen@ucsf.edu.

Studying mechanisms of malignant transformation of human pre-B cells, we found
that acute activation of oncogenes induced immediate cell death in the vast
majority of cells. Few surviving pre-B cell clones had acquired permissiveness to
oncogenic signaling by strong activation of negative feedback regulation of Erk
signaling. Studying negative feedback regulation of Erk in genetic experiments at
three different levels, we found that Spry2, Dusp6, and Etv5 were essential for
oncogenic transformation in mouse models for pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL). Interestingly, a small molecule inhibitor of DUSP6 selectively induced
cell death in patient-derived pre-B ALL cells and overcame conventional
mechanisms of drug-resistance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4565502
PMID: 26073130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 25;35(8):952-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.155. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

LPP inhibits collective cell migration during lung cancer dissemination.

Kuriyama S(1), Yoshida M(2), Yano S(3), Aiba N(1), Kohno T(4), Minamiya Y(5),
Goto A(2), Tanaka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Biochemistry, Graduate School and Faculty
of Medicine, Akita University, Akita, Japan. (2)Department of Cellular and Organ 
pathology, Graduate School of and Faculty of Medicine, Akita University, Akita,
Japan. (3)Division of Medical Oncology, Cancer Therapeutics Development Program, 
Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan. (4)Division of
Genome Biology, Group for Development of Molecular Diagnostics and Individualized
Therapy, National Cancer Research Center Institute, Chiba, Japan. (5)Department
of Thorasic Surgery, Akita University, Akita, Japan.

Lipoma preferred partner (LPP) is a LIM domain protein, which has multiple
functions as an actin-binding protein and a transcriptional coactivator, and it
has been suggested that LPP has some roles in cell migration or invasion,
however, its role in cancer cells remains to be elucidated. Here, we showed that 
LPP degraded N-cadherin in lung cancer, PC14PE6 cells via regulating the
expression of matrix metalloproteinase 15 (MMP-15), and loss-of-LPP increases
collective cell migration (CCM) and dissemination consequently. Knockdown of LPP 
and its functional partner, Etv5, markedly restores the full-length N-cadherin
and increases cell-cell adhesion. We investigated the common target of LPP and
Etv5, and found that MMP-15 is transcribed as their direct transcriptional
target. Furthermore, MMP-15 could directly digest the N-cadherin extracellular
domain. LPP knockdown in PC14PE6 cells increases N-cadherin-dependent CCM in the 
three-dimensional collagen gel invasion assays, and promoted the dissemination of
cancer cells when they were orthotopically implanted in nude mice.
Immunohistochemistry of lung adenocarcinoma specimens revealed the heterogeneity 
of LPP intensity and complementary expression of LPP and N-cadherin in the
primary tumors. These findings suggest that loss-of-LPP, Etv5 or MMP-15 can be a 
prognostic marker of increasing malignancy.

PMID: 26028032  [PubMed - in process]


17. Ann Neurol. 2015 Sep;78(3):355-74. doi: 10.1002/ana.24443. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

CIC inactivating mutations identify aggressive subset of 1p19q codeleted gliomas.

Gleize V(1), Alentorn A(1,)(2), Connen de Kérillis L(1), Labussière M(1),
Nadaradjane AA(1), Mundwiller E(3), Ottolenghi C(4), Mangesius S(1), Rahimian
A(5), Ducray F(6); POLA network, Mokhtari K(1,)(5,)(7), Villa C(7), Sanson
M(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Université, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Inserm, CNRS, UM 75, U 1127, UMR
7225, ICM, Paris, France. (2)AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service
de Neurologie 2, Paris, France. (3)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, 
Plateforme de Génotypage et Séquençage, Paris, France. (4)Biochimie Métabolique, 
Université Paris Descartes et Inserm U1124, Paris, France. (5)AP-HP,
Onconeurothèque, Paris, France. (6)Hôpital Neurologique, Service de Neurologie B,
Lyon, France. (7)AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Laboratoire de
Neuropathologie R Escourolle, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: CIC gene is frequently mutated in oligodendroglial tumors with 1p19q
codeletion. However, clinical and biological impact remain poorly understood.
METHODS: We sequenced the CIC gene on 127 oligodendroglial tumors (109 with the
1p19q codeletion) and analyzed patients' outcome. We compared magnetic resonance 
imaging, transcriptomic profile, and CIC protein expression of CIC wild-type (WT)
and mutant gliomas. We compared the level of expression of CIC target genes on
Hs683-IDH1(R132H) cells transfected with lentivirus encoding mutant and WT CIC.
RESULTS: We found 63 mutations affecting 60 of 127 patients, virtually all 1p19q 
codeleted and IDH mutated (59 of 60). In the 1p19q codeleted gliomas, CIC
mutations were associated with a poorer outcome by uni- (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001) and
multivariate analysis (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.016). CIC mutation prognostic impact was validated
on the TCGA cohort. CIC mutant grade II codeleted gliomas spontaneously grew
faster than WTs. Transcriptomic analysis revealed an enrichment of proliferative 
pathways and oligodendrocyte precursor cell gene expression profile in CIC mutant
gliomas, with upregulation of normally CIC repressed genes ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and 
CCND1. Various missense mutations resulted in CIC protein expression loss.
Moreover, a truncating CIC mutation resulted in a defect of nuclear targeting of 
CIC protein to the nucleus in a human glioma cell line expressing IDH1(R132H) and
overexpression of CCND1 and other new target genes of CIC, such as DUSP4 and
SPRED1.
INTERPRETATION: CIC mutations result in protein inactivation with upregulation of
CIC target genes, activation of proliferative pathways, inhibition of
differentiation, and poorer outcome in patients with a 1p19q codeleted glioma.

© 2015 American Neurological Association.

PMID: 26017892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2015 Jun;32(5):467-78. doi: 10.1007/s10585-015-9720-7. Epub 
2015 Apr 30.

Nidogen 1 and Nuclear Protein 1: novel targets of ETV5 transcription factor
involved in endometrial cancer invasion.

Pedrola N(1), Devis L, Llauradó M, Campoy I, Martinez-Garcia E, Garcia M,
Muinelo-Romay L, Alonso-Alconada L, Abal M, Alameda F, Mancebo G, Carreras R,
Castellví J, Cabrera S, Gil-Moreno A, Matias-Guiu X, Iovanna JL, Colas E,
Reventós J, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Group in Ginaecology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron,
Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Passeig Vall
d'Hebron, 119-129, 08035, Barcelona, Spain.

Endometrial cancer is the most frequent malignancy of the female genital tract in
western countries. Our group has previously characterized the upregulation of the
transcription factor ETV5 in endometrial cancer with a specific and significant
increase in those tumor stages associated with myometrial invasion. We have shown
that ETV5 overexpression in Hec1A endometrial cancer cells induces epithelial to 
mesenchymal transition resulting in the acquisition of migratory and invasive
capabilities. In the present work, we have identified Nidogen 1 (NID1) and
Nuclear Protein 1 (NUPR1) as direct transcriptional targets of ETV5 in
endometrial cancer cells. Inhibition of NID1 and NUPR1 in ETV5 overexpressing
cells reduced cell migration and invasion in vitro and reduced tumor growth and
dissemination in an orthotopic endometrial cancer model. Importantly, we
confirmed a significant increase of NUPR1 and NID1 protein expression in the
invasion front of the tumor compared to their paired superficial zone,
concomitant to ETV5 overexpression. Altogether, we conclude that NID1 and NUPR1
are novel targets of ETV5 and are actively cooperating with ETV5 at the invasion 
front of the tumor in the acquisition of an invasive phenotype to jointly drive
endometrial cancer invasion.

PMID: 25924802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 29;290(22):13692-709. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.646737. Epub
2015 Apr 12.

Structures of the Ets Protein DNA-binding Domains of Transcription Factors Etv1, 
Etv4, Etv5, and Fev: DETERMINANTS OF DNA BINDING AND REDOX REGULATION BY
DISULFIDE BOND FORMATION.

Cooper CD(1), Newman JA(1), Aitkenhead H(1), Allerston CK(1), Gileadi O(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus
Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom. (2)From the
Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research
Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom
opher.gileadi@sgc.ox.ac.uk.

Ets transcription factors, which share the conserved Ets DNA-binding domain,
number nearly 30 members in humans and are particularly involved in developmental
processes. Their deregulation following changes in expression, transcriptional
activity, or by chromosomal translocation plays a critical role in
carcinogenesis. Ets DNA binding, selectivity, and regulation have been
extensively studied; however, questions still arise regarding binding specificity
outside the core GGA recognition sequence and the mode of action of Ets
post-translational modifications. Here, we report the crystal structures of Etv1,
Etv4, Etv5, and Fev, alone and in complex with DNA. We identify previously
unrecognized features of the protein-DNA interface. Interactions with the DNA
backbone account for most of the binding affinity. We describe a highly
coordinated network of water molecules acting in base selection upstream of the
GGAA core and the structural features that may account for discrimination against
methylated cytidine residues. Unexpectedly, all proteins crystallized as
disulfide-linked dimers, exhibiting a novel interface (distant to the DNA
recognition helix). Homodimers of Etv1, Etv4, and Etv5 could be reduced to
monomers, leading to a 40-200-fold increase in DNA binding affinity. Hence, we
present the first indication of a redox-dependent regulatory mechanism that may
control the activity of this subset of oncogenic Ets transcription factors.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4447949
PMID: 25866208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nature. 2015 May 21;521(7552):352-6. doi: 10.1038/nature14274. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

Early reprogramming regulators identified by prospective isolation and mass
cytometry.

Lujan E(1), Zunder ER(2), Ng YH(3), Goronzy IN(4), Nolan GP(2), Wernig M(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305, USA [2] Department of Genetics, Stanford 
University, Stanford, California 94305, USA [3] Department of Pathology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305, USA. (2)Baxter Laboratory in Stem Cell
Biology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USA. (3)1] Institute for Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA [2]
Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA [3]
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California 94305, USA. (4)1] Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA [2] Department of 
Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

In the context of most induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell reprogramming methods,
heterogeneous populations of non-productive and staggered productive
intermediates arise at different reprogramming time points. Despite recent
reports claiming substantially increased reprogramming efficiencies using
genetically modified donor cells, prospectively isolating distinct reprogramming 
intermediates remains an important goal to decipher reprogramming mechanisms.
Previous attempts to identify surface markers of intermediate cell populations
were based on the assumption that, during reprogramming, cells progressively lose
donor cell identity and gradually acquire iPS cell properties. Here we report
that iPS cell and epithelial markers, such as SSEA1 and EpCAM, respectively, are 
not predictive of reprogramming during early phases. Instead, in a systematic
functional surface marker screen, we find that early reprogramming-prone cells
express a unique set of surface markers, including CD73, CD49d and CD200, that
are absent in both fibroblasts and iPS cells. Single-cell mass cytometry and
prospective isolation show that these distinct intermediates are transient and
bridge the gap between donor cell silencing and pluripotency marker acquisition
during the early, presumably stochastic, reprogramming phase. Expression
profiling reveals early upregulation of the transcriptional regulators Nr0b1 and 
Etv5 in this reprogramming state, preceding activation of key pluripotency
regulators such as Rex1 (also known as Zfp42), Dppa2, Nanog and Sox2. Both
factors are required for the generation of the early intermediate state and fully
reprogrammed iPS cells, and thus represent some of the earliest known regulators 
of iPS cell induction. Our study deconvolutes the first steps in a hierarchical
series of events that lead to pluripotency acquisition.

PMCID: PMC4441548
PMID: 25830878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Reproduction. 2015 May;149(5):445-52. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0506.

Ras/ERK1/2 pathway regulates the self-renewal of dairy goat spermatogonia stem
cells.

Niu Z(1), Zheng L(1), Wu S(1), Mu H(1), Ma F(1), Song W(1), Zhu H(1), Wu J(1), He
X(1), Hua J(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary MedicineShaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering and
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, People's Republic
of China. (2)College of Veterinary MedicineShaanxi Centre of Stem Cells
Engineering and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
People's Republic of China jinlianhua@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

Spermatogonia stem cells (SSCs), also named the male germline stem cells (mGSCs),
which is located at the base of the seminiferous tubules of testis, is the basis 
for generating sperm steadily in male animals. Currently, there are some
preliminary study on the self-renewal and differentiation of SSCs, but further
mechanism, especially in large animals, has not been clearly understood.
Ras/ERK1/2 pathway is widely distributed in multiple cells in vivo. It plays an
important role in cell proliferation, differentiation and so on. However, the
study on the function for the self-renewal of dairy goats SSCs has not been
investigated. In this study, the dairy goat SSCs characterization were evaluated 
by semi-RT-PCR, alkaline phosphatase (AP) staining, and immunofluorescence
staining. Then, Ras/ERK1/2 pathway was blocked by specific MEK1/2 inhibitor
PD0325901. We analyzed the proliferation by cell number, cell growth curve, Brdu 
incorporation assay, and cell cycle analysis. The results showed that the
proliferation was significantly inhibited by PD0325901. Cell apoptosis induced by
blocking the Ras/ERK1/2 pathway was analyzed by TUNEL. The expression of ETV5 and
BCL6B, the downstream gene of Ras/ERK1/2 pathway, was downregulated. This study
suggest that the Ras/ERK1/2 pathway plays a critical role in maintaining the
self-renewal of dairy goat SSCs via regulation of ETV5 and BCL6B. This study laid
a foundation for insights into the mechanism of SSCs self-renewal
comprehensively.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25820901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Physiol Behav. 2015 Oct 15;150:38-42. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.03.027. Epub
2015 Mar 24.

The obesity-associated transcription factor ETV5 modulates circulating
glucocorticoids.

Gutierrez-Aguilar R(1), Thompson A(2), Marchand N(3), Dumont P(3), Woods SC(2),
de Launoit Y(3), Seeley RJ(4), Ulrich-Lai YM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati, United States;
Laboratorio de Enfermedades Metabólicas Obesidad y Diabetes, Hospital Infantil de
México Federico Gómez, Mexico. Electronic address: ruthgutierrezhimfg@gmail.com. 
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of
Cincinnati, 2170 East Galbraith Road, Cincinnati, OH 45237, United States.
(3)UMR8161 CNRS, Université de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de
Biologie de Lille, 1 Rue Calmette, 59021 Lille CEDEX, France. (4)Department of
Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati, United States.

The transcription factor E-twenty-six version 5 (ETV5) has been linked with
obesity in genome-wide association studies. Moreover, ETV5-deficient mice
(knockout; KO) have reduced body weight, lower fat mass, and are resistant to
diet-induced obesity, directly linking ETV5 to the regulation of energy balance
and metabolism. ETV5 is expressed in hypothalamic brain regions that regulate
both metabolism and HPA axis activity, suggesting that ETV5 may also modulate HPA
axis function. In order to test this possibility, plasma corticosterone levels
were measured in ETV5 KO and wildtype (WT) mice before (pre-stress) and after
(post-stress) a mild stressor (intraperitoneal injection). ETV5 deficiency
increased both pre- and post-stress plasma corticosterone, suggesting that loss
of ETV5 elevated glucocorticoid tone. Consistent with this idea, ETV5 KO mice
have reduced thymus weight, suggestive of increased glucocorticoid-induced thymic
involution. ETV5 deficiency also decreased the mRNA expression of glucocorticoid 
receptor (GR), mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), and vasopressin receptor 1A in
the hypothalamus, without altering vasopressin, corticotropin-releasing hormone, 
or oxytocin mRNA expression. In order to test whether reduced MR and GR
expression affected glucocorticoid negative feedback, a dexamethasone suppression
test was performed. Dexamethasone reduced plasma corticosterone in both ETV5 KO
and WT mice, suggesting that glucocorticoid negative feedback was unaltered by
ETV5 deficiency. In summary, these data suggest that the obesity-associated
transcription factor ETV5 normally acts to diminish circulating glucocorticoids. 
This might occur directly via ETV5 actions on HPA-regulatory brain circuitry,
and/or indirectly via ETV5-induced alterations in metabolic factors that then
influence the HPA axis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4546891 [Available on 2016-10-15]
PMID: 25813907  [PubMed - in process]


23. Leukemia. 2015 Sep;29(9):1857-67. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.86. Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Identification of Ezrin-Radixin-Moesin proteins as novel regulators of pathogenic
B-cell receptor signaling and tumor growth in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Pore D(1), Bodo J(2), Danda A(1), Yan D(1), Phillips JG(3), Lindner D(3), Hill
BT(4), Smith MR(4), Hsi ED(2), Gupta N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA. (2)Department of Clinical Pathology, Institute of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (3)Department of
Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 
USA. (4)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Taussig Cancer Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a hematological cancer associated with
an aggressive clinical course. The predominant subtypes of DLBCL display features
of chronic or tonic B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling. However, it is not
known whether the spatial organization of the BCR contributes to the regulation
of pro-survival signaling pathways and cell growth. Here, we show that primary
DLBCL tumors and patient-derived DLBCL cell lines contain high levels of
phosphorylated Ezrin-Radixin-Moesin (ERM) proteins. The surface BCRs in both
activated B cell and germinal B cell subtype DLBCL cells co-segregate with
phosphoERM suggesting that the cytoskeletal network may support localized BCR
signaling and contribute to pathogenesis. Indeed, ablation of
membrane-cytoskeletal linkages by dominant-negative mutants, pharmacological
inhibition and knockdown of ERM proteins disrupted cell surface BCR organization,
inhibited proximal and distal BCR signaling, and reduced the growth of DLBCL cell
lines. In vivo administration of the ezrin inhibitor retarded the growth of DLBCL
tumor xenografts, concomitant with reduction in intratumor phosphoERM levels,
dampened pro-survival signaling and induction of apoptosis. Our results reveal a 
novel ERM-based spatial mechanism that is coopted by DLBCL cells to sustain tumor
cell growth and survival.

PMCID: PMC4558318
PMID: 25801911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Jun;19(3):143-5. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.02.007.
Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Distinctive immunohistochemical staining in littoral cell angioma using ERG and
WT-1.

O'Malley DP(1), Kim YS(2), Weiss LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clarient Pathology Services, Aliso Viejo, CA; MD Anderson Cancer
Center/University of Texas, Houston, TX. Electronic address:
dennis.omalley@ge.com. (2)City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA.
Electronic address: yokim@coh.org. (3)Clarient Pathology Services, Aliso Viejo,
CA. Electronic address: Lawrence.weiss@ge.com.

Littoral cell angioma (LCA) is a rare vascular tumor of the spleen. It has an
immunohistochemical staining pattern that is somewhat distinctive but can still
be occasionally confused with other vascular and stromal proliferations in the
spleen. In this study, LCA was evaluated using Ets-related gene (ERG) and Wilms
tumor-1 (WT-1), relatively recently described vascular markers. In addition,
other vascular lesions including normal spleen, hemangiomas, hamartoma, peliosis,
and sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation were evaluated using these
stains. In LCA, ERG stains the endothelial cells of the tumor as expected. ERG
also was uniformly positive in vascular elements of other lesions except
peliosis. However, in contrast to most other vascular elements, LCA was negative 
for WT-1 staining. This staining pattern may prove useful in diagnosing LCA and
may provide insight into the derivation of the distinctive tumor.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25792460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Neurochem. 2015 Jun;133(5):617-28. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13061. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

Noise-induced cochlear F-actin depolymerization is mediated via ROCK2/p-ERM
signaling.

Han Y(1), Wang X, Chen J, Sha SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

Our previous work has suggested that traumatic noise activates Rho-GTPase
pathways in cochlear outer hair cells (OHCs), resulting in cell death and
noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL). In this study, we investigated Rho effectors, 
Rho-associated kinases (ROCKs), and the targets of ROCKs, the
ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) proteins, in the regulation of the cochlear actin
cytoskeleton using adult CBA/J mice under conditions of noise-induced temporary
threshold shift (TTS) and permanent threshold shift (PTS) hearing loss, which
result in changes to the F/G-actin ratio. The levels of cochlear ROCK2 and p-ERM 
decreased 1 h after either TTS- or PTS-noise exposure. In contrast, ROCK2 and
p-ERM in OHCs decreased only after PTS-, not after TTS-noise exposure. Treatment 
with lysophosphatidic acid, an activator of the Rho pathway, resulted in
significant reversal of the F/G-actin ratio changes caused by noise exposure and 
attenuated OHC death and NIHL. Conversely, the down-regulation of ROCK2 by
pretreatment with ROCK2 siRNA reduced the expression of ROCK2 and p-ERM in OHCs, 
exacerbated TTS to PTS, and worsened OHC loss. Additionally, pretreatment with
siRNA against radixin, an ERM protein, aggravated TTS to PTS. Our results
indicate that a ROCK2-mediated ERM-phosphorylation signaling cascade modulates
noise-induced hair cell loss and NIHL by targeting the cytoskeleton. We propose
the following cascade following noise trauma leading to alteration of the F-actin
arrangement in the outer hair cell cytoskeleton: Noise exposure reduces the
levels of GTP-RhoA and subsequently diminishes levels of RhoA effector ROCK2
(Rho-associated kinase 2). Phosphorylation of ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) by ROCK2
normally allows ERM to cross-link actin filaments with the plasma membrane.
Noise-decreased levels of ROCK results in reduction of phosphorylation of ERM
that leads to depolymerization of actin filaments. Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA),
an agonist of RhoA, binds to the G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) leading to
activation of RhoA through Ga12/13 and RhoGEF. Administration of LPA rescues the 
noise-diminished F/G-actin ratio.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC4406832 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25683353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Biol. 2015 Apr 1;400(1):139-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.01.023. Epub 2015
Feb 9.

Region-specific regulation of cell proliferation by FGF receptor signaling during
the Wolffian duct development.

Okazawa M(1), Murashima A(2), Harada M(3), Nakagata N(4), Noguchi M(5), Morimoto 
M(5), Kimura T(6), Ornitz DM(7), Yamada G(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Osaka, Japan. (2)Department of Developmental Genetics,
Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera,
Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. (3)Department of Clinical Anatomy, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo, Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku 113-8519, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Division of Reproductive
Engineering, Center for Animal Resources and Development, Kumamoto University,
2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (5)Laboratory for Lung Development, RIKEN 
Center for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuou-ku, Kobe
650-0047, Hyogo, Japan. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Osaka,
Japan. (7)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (8)Department of Developmental Genetics,
Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera,
Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. Electronic address: transg8@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

The Wolffian duct (WD) is a primordium of the male reproductive tract and kidney 
collecting duct system. Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs), members of
the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family, are essential for kidney development. 
Although the functions of FGFR signaling in kidney morphogenesis have been
analyzed, their function in WD development has not been comprehensively
investigated. Here, we demonstrate that Fgfr2 is the major Fgfr gene expressed
throughout the WD epithelia and that it is essential for the maintenance of the
WD, specifically in the caudal part of the WD. Hoxb7-Cre mediated inactivation of
Fgfr2 in the mouse WD epithelia resulted in the regression of the caudal part of 
the WD and abnormal male reproductive tract development. Cell proliferation and
expression of the downstream target genes of RTK signaling (Etv4 and Etv5) were
decreased in the caudal part of the WD epithelia in the mutant embryos. Cranial
(rostral) WD formation and ureteric budding were not affected. Ret, Etv4, and
Etv5 expression were sustained in the ureteric bud of the mutant embryos. Taken
together, these data suggest region-specific requirements for FGFR2 signaling in 
the developing caudal WD epithelia.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4382079
PMID: 25678108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Discov. 2015 May;5(5):550-63. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-1050. Epub 2015
Feb 4.

Suppression of CHK1 by ETS Family Members Promotes DNA Damage Response Bypass and
Tumorigenesis.

Lunardi A(1), Varmeh S(1), Chen M(1), Taulli R(1), Guarnerio J(1), Ala U(1),
Seitzer N(1), Ishikawa T(1), Carver BS(2), Hobbs RM(1), Quarantotti V(1), Ng
C(1), Berger AH(1), Nardella C(1), Poliseno L(1), Montironi R(3), Castillo-Martin
M(4), Cordon-Cardo C(4), Signoretti S(5), Pandolfi PP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Department of 
Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan
Kettering Institute, Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (3)Institute of Pathological Anatomy
and Histopathology, Polytechnic University of the Marche Region (Ancona), United 
Hospitals, Ancona, Italy. (4)Department of Pathology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York. (5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (6)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center,
Department of Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. ppandolf@bidmc.harvard.edu.

The ETS family of transcription factors has been repeatedly implicated in
tumorigenesis. In prostate cancer, ETS family members, such as ERG, ETV1, ETV4,
and ETV5, are frequently overexpressed due to chromosomal translocations, but the
molecular mechanisms by which they promote prostate tumorigenesis remain largely 
undefined. Here, we show that ETS family members, such as ERG and ETV1, directly 
repress the expression of the checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1), a key DNA damage
response cell-cycle regulator essential for the maintenance of genome integrity. 
Critically, we find that ERG expression correlates with CHK1 downregulation in
human patients and demonstrate that Chk1 heterozygosity promotes the progression 
of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia into prostatic invasive
carcinoma in Pten(+) (/-) mice. Importantly, CHK1 downregulation sensitizes
prostate tumor cells to etoposide but not to docetaxel treatment. Thus, we
identify CHK1 as a key functional target of the ETS proto-oncogenic family with
important therapeutic implications.SIGNIFICANCE: Genetic translocation and
aberrant expression of ETS family members is a common event in different types of
human tumors. Here, we show that through the transcriptional repression of CHK1, 
ETS factors may favor DNA damage accumulation and consequent genetic instability 
in proliferating cells. Importantly, our findings provide a rationale for testing
DNA replication inhibitor agents in ETS-positive TP53-proficient tumors.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25653093  [PubMed - in process]


28. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 10;6(7):5217-36.

Specific and redundant activities of ETV1 and ETV4 in prostate cancer
aggressiveness revealed by co-overexpression cellular contexts.

Mesquita D(1), Barros-Silva JD(1), Santos J(1), Skotheim RI(2,)(3), Lothe
RA(2,)(3), Paulo P(1,)(2,)(3), Teixeira MR(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cancer Genetics Group - CI-IPOP, Portuguese
Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal. (2)Department of Cancer Prevention,
Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Nydalen, Oslo, Norway. (3)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (4)Department of Pathology and
Molecular Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS),
University of Porto, Portugal.

Genomic rearrangements involving ETS transcription factors are found in 50-70% of
prostate carcinomas. While the large majority of the rearrangements involve ERG, 
around 10% involve members of the PEA3 subfamily (ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5). Using a
panel of prostate cancer cell lines we found co-overexpression of ETV1 and ETV4
in two cell line models of advanced prostate cancer (MDA-PCa-2b and PC3) and
questioned whether these PEA3 family members would cooperate in the acquisition
of oncogenic properties or show functional redundancy. Using shRNAs we found that
ETV1 and ETV4 have partially overlapping functions, with ETV1 being more relevant
for cell invasion and ETV4 for anchorage-independent growth. In vitro expression 
signatures revealed the regulation of both specific and shared candidate targets 
that may resemble cellular mechanisms in vivo by interaction with the same
intermediate partners. By combining the phenotypic impact data and the gene
expression profiles of in vitro models with clinico-pathological features and
gene expression profiles of ETS-subtyped tumors, we identified a set of eight
genes associated with advanced stage and a set of three genes associated with
higher Gleason score, supporting an oncogenic role of ETV1 and ETV4
overexpression and revealing gene sets that may be useful as prognostic markers.

PMCID: PMC4467144
PMID: 25595908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3565-72. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2993-7. Epub 2014
Dec 28.

Overexpression of ETV4 is associated with poor prognosis in prostate cancer:
involvement of uPA/uPAR and MMPs.

Qi M(1), Liu Z, Shen C, Wang L, Zeng J, Wang C, Li C, Fu W, Sun Y, Han B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shandong University Medical School, Jinan, 250012,
China.

ETS gene fusions involving ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and FLI1 define a distinct
class of prostate cancer (PCa), and this might have a bearing on diagnosis,
prognosis, and rational therapeutic targeting. In the current study, we focused
on the clinicopathological significance of ETV4 in Chinese PCa patients and the
mechanisms whereby ETV4 overexpression mediates tumor invasion in the prostate.
Overall, ETV4 overexpression was identified in 30.4 % (45/148) of PCa cases by
immunohistochemistry. Accordingly, ETV4 was rearranged in only 1.6 % (2/128) of
PCa patients. Clinically, ETV4 overexpression was significantly correlated with
Gleason score (P = 0.045) and pathological tumor stage (P = 0.041). Multivariate 
Cox regression analysis indicated that ETV4 is an unfavorable independent
prognostic factor (P = 0.040). Functional studies further showed that small
interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of ETV4 significantly decreases proliferation
and invasion of PC-3 cell and partially reverses epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in vitro. Notably, ETV4 knockdown significantly downregulated
expression of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor (uPAR) at
messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that ETV4 regulates uPA expression through direct binding to its
promoter region. Additionally, ETV4 knockdown was also observed to significantly 
inhibit expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9. In conclusion, 
for the first time, our study suggested that ETV4 is an independent poor
prognostic factor in Chinese PCa patients. Silencing of ETV4 suppresses invasion 
of PCa cells by inhibiting the expression of uPA/uPAR as well as MMPs. Further
studies will be needed to determine whether ETV4 could be regarded as a potential
target for the management and prevention of PCa.

PMID: 25544710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Reproduction. 2015 Apr;149(4):R159-67. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0481. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

Regulation of spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal and spermatocyte meiosis by
Sertoli cell signaling.

Chen SR(1), Liu YX(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive BiologyInstitute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Reproductive BiologyInstitute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100101, China liuyx@ioz.ac.cn.

Spermatogenesis is a continuous and productive process supported by the
self-renewal and differentiation of spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs), which arise
from undifferentiated precursors known as gonocytes and are strictly controlled
in a special 'niche' microenvironment in the seminiferous tubules. Sertoli cells,
the only somatic cell type in the tubules, directly interact with SSCs to control
their proliferation and differentiation through the secretion of specific
factors. Spermatocyte meiosis is another key step of spermatogenesis, which is
regulated by Sertoli cells on the luminal side of the blood-testis barrier
through paracrine signaling. In this review, we mainly focus on the role of
Sertoli cells in the regulation of SSC self-renewal and spermatocyte meiosis,
with particular emphasis on paracrine and endocrine-mediated signaling pathways. 
Sertoli cell growth factors, such as glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor 
(GDNF) and fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), as well as Sertoli cell
transcription factors, such as ETS variant 5 (ERM; also known as ETV5),
nociceptin, neuregulin 1 (NRG1), and androgen receptor (AR), have been identified
as the most important upstream factors that regulate SSC self-renewal and
spermatocyte meiosis. Other transcription factors and signaling pathways
(GDNF-RET-GFRA1 signaling, FGF2-MAP2K1 signaling, CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling,
CCL9-CCR1 signaling, FSH-nociceptin/OPRL1, retinoic acid/FSH-NRG/ERBB4, and
AR/RB-ARID4A/ARID4B) are also addressed.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25504872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Adolesc Health. 2015 Jan;56(1):66-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2014.07.020.
Epub 2014 Oct 3.

Associations between menarche-related genetic variants and pubertal growth in
male and female adolescents.

Tu W(1), Wagner EK(2), Eckert GJ(1), Yu Z(1), Hannon T(3), Pratt JH(4), He C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana. (2)Department of Epidemiology, Richard M. Fairbanks School
of Public Health, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(4)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana; The Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Richard M. Fairbanks School of Public Health,
Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana; Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center,
Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana. Electronic address: chunhe@iu.edu.

PURPOSE: Previous studies have identified novel genetic variants associated with 
age at menarche in females of European descent. The pubertal growth effects of
these variants have not been carefully evaluated in non-European descent groups. 
We aimed to examine the effects of 31 newly identified menarche-related
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on growth outcomes in African-American
(AA) and European-American (EA) children in a prospective cohort.
METHODS: We analyzed longitudinal data collected from 263 AAs and 338 EAs
enrolled between ages 5 and 17 years; the subjects were followed semiannually for
an average of 6 years. The associations between the SNPs and growth-related
outcomes, including weight, height, and body mass index (BMI), were examined
using mixed-effect models.
RESULTS: Longitudinal analyses revealed that 4 (near or in genes VGLL3, PEX2,
CA10, and SKOR2) of the 14 menarche-only-related SNPs were associated with
changes in weight and BMI in EA and AA (p = .0032), but none of them was
associated with changes in height. Of the eight menarche-timing and BMI-related
SNPs, none was associated with changes in height, but three (in or near genes
NEGR1, ETV5, and FTO) were associated with more rapid increases in weight and/or 
BMI in EA (p = .0059). Among the nine menarche-timing and height-related SNPs,
four (in or near genes ZBTB38, LOC728666, TBX2, and CABLES) were associated with 
changes in weight or height in EA and AA (p = .0042).
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants related to age at menarche were found to be
associated with various growth parameters in healthy adolescents. The identified 
associations were often race and sex specific.

Copyright © 2015 Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4275397
PMID: 25287989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2014 Dec;27(6):506-10. doi: 10.1097/QCO.0000000000000104.

Mycobacterium abscessus: challenges in diagnosis and treatment.

Benwill JL(1), Wallace RJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Medicine bMycobacteria/Nocardia Research Laboratory at The
University of Texas Health Science Center at Tyler, Tyler, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Mycobacterium abscessus is the most common rapidly growing
mycobacterium that causes lung disease. This review describes recently published 
literature regarding M. abscessus taxonomy, environmental niche, diagnosis,
management and outcome in pulmonary disease in adults and adolescents with cystic
fibrosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: The classification of M. abscessus subsp. abscessus, M.
abscessus subsp. massiliense and M. abscessus subsp. bolletii is useful
clinically because of the discovery of the erm(41) gene, which is responsible for
macrolide resistance in M. abscessus. Macrolide susceptibility is key for
successful treatment of M. abscessus subsp. massiliense. The poor outcome and
eradication of M. abscessus subsp. abscessus remains both a diagnostic and
treatment challenge in approximately 80% of isolates that are macrolide
resistant. Molecular studies, such as genotyping, may allow prediction of disease
progression. Overall, there is a dearth of new literature surrounding M.
abscessus.
SUMMARY: New studies differentiating M. abscessus subsp. abscessus and M.
abscessus subsp. massiliense based on the erm(41) gene demonstrate the latter to 
have a better prognosis and improved treatment outcomes. M. abscessus subsp.
abscessus remains a formidable pathogen in diagnosis and treatment.

PMID: 25268925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Cancer. 2014 Sep 27;13:223. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-223.

Molecular profiling of circulating tumor cells links plasticity to the metastatic
process in endometrial cancer.

Alonso-Alconada L, Muinelo-Romay L, Madissoo K, Diaz-Lopez A, Krakstad C, Trovik 
J, Wik E, Hapangama D, Coenegrachts L, Cano A, Gil-Moreno A, Chiva L, Cueva J,
Vieito M, Ortega E, Mariscal J, Colas E, Castellvi J, Cusido M, Dolcet X, Nijman 
HW, Bosse T, Green JA, Romano A, Reventos J, Lopez-Lopez R, Salvesen HB, Amant F,
Matias-Guiu X, Moreno-Bueno G, Abal M(1); ENITEC Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Medical Oncology; Health Research Institute of Santiago (IDIS), 
SERGAS, Trav, Choupana s/n 15706, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
miguel.abal.posada@sergas.es.

BACKGROUND: About 20% of patients diagnosed with endometrial cancer (EC) are
considered high-risk with unfavorable prognosis. In the framework of the European
Network for Individualized Treatment in EC (ENITEC), we investigated the presence
and phenotypic features of Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC) in high-risk EC
patients.
METHODS: CTC isolation was carried out in peripheral blood samples from 34
patients, ranging from Grade 3 Stage IB to Stage IV carcinomas and recurrences,
and 27 healthy controls using two methodologies. Samples were subjected to
EpCAM-based immunoisolation using the CELLection Epithelial Enrich kit
(Invitrogen, Dynal) followed by RTqPCR analysis. The phenotypic determinants of
endometrial CTC in terms of pathogenesis, hormone receptor pathways, stem cell
markers and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) drivers were asked.
Kruskal-Wallis analysis followed by Dunn's post-test was used for comparisons
between groups. Statistical significance was set at p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05.
RESULTS: EpCAM-based immunoisolation positively detected CTC in high-risk
endometrial cancer patients. CTC characterization indicated a remarkable
plasticity phenotype defined by the expression of the EMT markers ETV5, NOTCH1,
SNAI1, TGFB1, ZEB1 and ZEB2. In addition, the expression of ALDH and CD44 pointed
to an association with stemness, while the expression of CTNNB1, STS, GDF15,
RELA, RUNX1, BRAF and PIK3CA suggested potential therapeutic targets. We further 
recapitulated the EMT phenotype found in endometrial CTC through the
up-regulation of ETV5 in an EC cell line, and validated in an animal model of
systemic dissemination the propensity of these CTC in the accomplishment of
metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results associate the presence of CTC with high-risk EC.
Gene-expression profiling characterized a CTC-plasticity phenotype with stemness 
and EMT features. We finally recapitulated this CTC-phenotype by over-expressing 
ETV5 in the EC cell line Hec1A and demonstrated an advantage in the promotion of 
metastasis in an in vivo mouse model of CTC dissemination and homing.

PMCID: PMC4190574
PMID: 25261936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Dec;35(12):2679-86. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu198. Epub 2014
Sep 18.

ETV5 transcription program links BDNF and promotion of EMT at invasive front of
endometrial carcinomas.

Alonso-Alconada L(1), Eritja N(2), Muinelo-Romay L(3), Barbazan J(1), Lopez-Lopez
R(1), Matias-Guiu X(2), Gil-Moreno A(4), Dolcet X(2), Abal M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Medical Oncology, Health Research Institute of Santiago (IDIS), 
Fundacion Ramon Dominguez, SERGAS, Trav. Choupana s/n, 15706 Santiago de
Compostela, Spain, Oncology Pathology Group, Dept. de Ciencies Mediques Basiques,
Universitat de Lleida, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, Institut de
Recerca Biomedica de Lleida, IRBLleida, 25198 Lleida, Spain, Liquid Biopsy
Analysis Unit, Health Research Institute of Santiago (IDIS), Complexo
Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela (SERGAS), Trav. Choupana
s/n, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain and Research Unit in Biomedicine, Vall
d'Hebron Research Institute and Hospital and Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona,
08035 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Oncology Pathology Group, Dept. de Ciencies Mediques
Basiques, Universitat de Lleida, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova,
Institut de Recerca Biomedica de Lleida, IRBLleida, 25198 Lleida, Spain.
(3)Liquid Biopsy Analysis Unit, Health Research Institute of Santiago (IDIS),
Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela (SERGAS), Trav.
Choupana s/n, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain and. (4)Research Unit in
Biomedicine, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute and Hospital and Universitat
Autonoma de Barcelona, 08035 Barcelona, Spain. (5)Translational Medical Oncology,
Health Research Institute of Santiago (IDIS), Fundacion Ramon Dominguez, SERGAS, 
Trav. Choupana s/n, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain, Oncology Pathology
Group, Dept. de Ciencies Mediques Basiques, Universitat de Lleida, Hospital
Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, Institut de Recerca Biomedica de Lleida,
IRBLleida, 25198 Lleida, Spain, Liquid Biopsy Analysis Unit, Health Research
Institute of Santiago (IDIS), Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de 
Compostela (SERGAS), Trav. Choupana s/n, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain and 
Research Unit in Biomedicine, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute and Hospital and
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, 08035 Barcelona, Spain
miguel.abal.posada@sergas.es.

Myometrial infiltration represents a main clinical determinant of endometrial
carcinomas (EC) presenting as aggressive high-grade deeply invasive neoplasms,
substantially associated with risk of recurrence and death. The up-regulation of 
ETV5 transcription factor linked to the promotion of epithelial to mesenchymal
transition is considered as a basic mechanism underlying the initial steps of EC 
invasion. In this work, we aimed to investigate the transcription program of
tumor invasion regulated by ETV5. We performed a comparative Chip-on-chip
analysis at invasive front and superficial area of human EC. ETV5 specific
binding to promoter regions of genes related to cellular migration, adhesion and 
invasion at deep invasion tumor areas highlighted the relevance of neural
networks associated with cellular plasticity. Interestingly, brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) demonstrated a principal role orchestrating
ETV5-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in endometrial cancer.
Impairment of the BDNF/tropomyosin-related kinase B (TrkB)/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase axis in endometrial cancer cell lines reversed the
aggressive and invasive phenotype promoted by the up-regulation of ETV5 at the
invasive front of EC. Likewise, BDNF directly impacted on the efficiency of ETV5 
promoted metastasis in a mice model of endometrial distant dissemination. These
results translate the recognized role of BDNF/TrkB on neural plasticity into a
relevant cancer metastasis event; suggest common mechanisms shared by neural
development and tumor invasion; and offer new therapeutic opportunities
specifically directed against disseminated disease in endometrial cancer.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25233929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Sep;22(8):e32-40. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000095.

Novel RNA hybridization method for the in situ detection of ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 
gene fusions in prostate cancer.

Kunju LP(1), Carskadon S, Siddiqui J, Tomlins SA, Chinnaiyan AM, Palanisamy N.

Author information: 
(1)*Michigan Center for Translational Pathology Departments of Pathology
§Urology Comprehensive Cancer Center <U+2225>Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

The genetic basis of 50% to 60% of prostate cancer (PCa) is attributable to
rearrangements in E26 transformation-specific (ETS) (ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5), 
BRAF, and RAF1 genes and overexpression of SPINK1. The development and validation
of reliable detection methods are warranted to classify various molecular
subtypes of PCa for diagnostic and prognostic purposes. ETS gene rearrangements
are typically detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction methods. Recently, monoclonal
antibodies against ERG have been developed that detect the truncated ERG protein 
in immunohistochemical assays where staining levels are strongly correlated with 
ERG rearrangement status by fluorescence in situ hybridization. However, specific
antibodies for ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 are unavailable, challenging their clinical
use. We developed a novel RNA in situ hybridization-based assay for the in situ
detection of ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues
from prostate needle biopsies, prostatectomy, and metastatic PCa specimens using 
RNA probes. Further, with combined RNA in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry we identified a rare subset of PCa with dual ETS gene
rearrangements in collisions of independent tumor foci. The high specificity and 
sensitivity of RNA in situ hybridization provides an alternate method enabling
bright-field in situ detection of ETS gene aberrations in routine clinically
available PCa specimens.

PMCID: PMC4159774
PMID: 25203299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Urol Oncol. 2015 Mar;33(3):108.e5-13. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2014.07.015. Epub
2014 Aug 28.

Molecular profiling of ETS gene rearrangements in patients with prostate cancer
registered in REDEEM clinical trial.

Palanisamy N(1), Tsodikov A(2), Yan W(3), Suleman K(3), Rittmaster R(4), Lucia
SM(5), Chinnaiyan AM(6), Fleshner N(7), Kunju LP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI. (2)Department 
of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO. (6)Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; University of Michigan
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI; Department of Urology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. (7)Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI. Electronic
address: lkunju@med.umich.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Androgen-induced E26 transformation-specific (ETS) gene
fusion-positive tumors have been associated with aggressive prostate cancer. The 
aim is to evaluate the ETS gene rearrangement status on initial biopsy of
patients registered in the Reduction by Dutasteride of Clinical Progression
Events in Expectant Management trial study and determine if gene fusion status
was associated with disease progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Initial biopsy material from 146 men registered in
Reduction by Dutasteride of Clinical Progression Events in Expectant Management
trial study treated with dutasteride (73/146, 50%) and as placebo (73/146, 50%)
were reviewed, and ERG and SPINK1 immunohistochemistry was performed. ERG- and
SPINK1-negative cancer samples were evaluated for ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5
rearrangements by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Frequency of ETS gene
aberrations in both groups was correlated with cancer progression including
prostate-specific antigen progression, Gleason progression, and progression-free 
survival by logistic analysis, pairwise differences, and chunk likelihood ratio
tests for the genotype groups.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Of the 146 patients, 99 (67.8%) (placebo, 51;
dutasteride, 48) samples displayed the following Gleason patterns: 3+3 = 6 in 80 
(54.8%) (placebo, 39; dutasteride, 41), 3+4 = 7 in 18 (12.3%) (placebo, 11;
dutasteride, 7), and 4+4 = 8 in 1(0.68%) (placebo, 1). The remaining 47 samples
showed atypical glands in 5 (3.4%) (placebo, 2; dutasteride, 3), HGPIN in 9
(6.1%) (placebo, 5; dutasteride, 4), and benign in 33 (22.6%) (placebo, 15;
dutasteride, 18). Immunohistochemistry findings were positive for ERG and SPINK1 
in 56 (56%) (placebo, 31; dutasteride, 25) and 9 (6.1%) (placebo, 5; dutasteride,
4) cases, respectively. ETV1 and ETV4 rearrangements were noted in 2 cases (1.4%)
(placebo, 1; dutasteride, 1) and 1 (0.7%) (placebo, 1) case, respectively. No
significant differences in the incidence of prostate cancer molecular aberrations
between the groups were observed. There was no evidence that ETS fusion status
was associated with disease progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25175425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 26;452(3):490-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.110. Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Snail regulates the motility of oral cancer cells via RhoA/Cdc42/p-ERM pathway.

Li YY(1), Zhou CX(2), Gao Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Peking University School and Hospital of
Stomatology, Beijing, PR China. (2)Department of Oral Pathology, Peking
University School and Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, PR China. Electronic
address: zhoucx2008@126.com. (3)Department of Oral Pathology, Peking University
School and Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, PR China. Electronic address:
gaoyan0988@163.com.

The transcriptional factor Snail has been reported to possess properties related 
to cancer progression; however, the mechanism for it is not fully understood. Our
data showed that Snail knockdown by small interfering RNA in two OSCC cell lines,
WSU-HN6 and CAL27, significantly inhibited cell migration and invasion which also
resulted in decreased cell motility, such as impaired cell spreading on type I
collagen substrate, reduced filopodia, and premature assembly of stress fibers.
In addition, Snail-silencing decreased Cdc42 activity but increased RhoA
activity, accompanied by the downregulation in both p-ERM expression and cell
motility. Meanwhile, endogenous p-ERM was found specifically co-precipitated with
activated Cdc42, but not RhoA, and this co-association was decreased by
Snail-silencing. The small molecule inhibitors of Rho-associated kinase (Y27632) 
markedly enhanced Cdc42 activity and the association of p-ERM with activated
Cdc42, increasing cell motility remarkably. Using immunohistochemistry, Snail and
p-ERM overexpressions were found in OSCC tissues correlated with nodal metastasis
and shorter survival. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Snail
regulates cell motility through RhoA/Cdc42/p-ERM pathway and may serve as a
biomarker to predict prognosis for OSCC patients. Although RhoA and Cdc42 are
concurrently regulated downstream of Snail, there is a direct interplay between
them, which indicates RhoA has to be inactivated at some point in cell motility
cycle.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25172658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Virus Res. 2014 Nov 4;192:6-15. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.07.027. Epub 2014
Aug 19.

p38MAPK, Rho/ROCK and PKC pathways are involved in influenza-induced cytoskeletal
rearrangement and hyperpermeability in PMVEC via phosphorylating ERM.

Zhang C(1), Wu Y(2), Xuan Z(1), Zhang S(1), Wang X(1), Hao Y(1), Wu J(1), Zhang
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing, PR China. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, PR China. Electronic address:
aqiwuying@hotmail.com.

Severe influenza infections are featured by acute lung injury, a syndrome of
pulmonary microvascular leak. A growing number of evidences have shown that the
pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (PMVEC) are critical target of
influenza virus, promoting microvascular leak. It is reported that there are
multiple mechanisms by which influenza virus could elicit increased pulmonary
endothelial permeability, in both direct and indirect manners.
Ezrin/radixin/moesin family proteins, the linkers between plasma membrane and
actin cytoskeleton, have been reported to be involved in cell adhesion, motility 
and may modulate endothelial permeability. Studies have also shown that ERM is
phosphorylated in response to various stimuli via p38MAPK, Rho/ROCK or PKC
pathways. However, it is unclear that whether influenza infection could induce
ERM phosphorylation and its relocalization. In the present study, we have found
that there are cytoskeletal reorganization and permeability increases in the
course of influenza virus infection, accompanied by upregulated levels of p-ERM. 
p-ERM's aggregation along the periphery of PMVEC upon influenza virus infection
was detected via confocal microscopy. Furthermore, we sought to determine the
role of p38MAPK, Rho/ROCK and PKC pathways in ERM phosphorylation as well as
their involvement in influenza virus-induced endothelial malfunction. The
activation of p38MAPK, Rho/ROCK and PKC pathways upon influenza virus stimulation
were observed, as evidenced by the evaluation of phosphorylated p38 (p-p38),
phosphorylated MKK (p-MKK) in p38MAPK pathway, ROCK1 in Rho/ROCK pathway and
phosphorylated PKC (p-PKC) in PKC pathway. We also showed that virus-induced ERM 
phosphorylation was reduced by using p38MAPK inhibitor, SB203580 (20 µM),
Rho/ROCK inhibitor, Y27632 (20 µM), PKC inhibitor, LY317615 (10 µM).
Additionally, influenza virus-induced F-actin reorganization and
hyperpermeability were attenuated by pretreatment with SB203580, Y27632 and
LY317615. Taken together, we provide the first evidence that p38MAPK, Rho/ROCK
and PKC are involved in influenza-induced cytoskeletal changes and permeability
increases in PMVEC via phosphorylating ERM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25150189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Jan;116(1):37-44. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24940.

The epigenetic regulation of SOX9 by miR-145 in human chondrosarcoma.

Mak IW(1), Singh S, Turcotte R, Ghert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada;
Department of Surgery, Juravinski Cancer Centre, Hamilton Health Sciences,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Chondrosarcoma is the most common primary bone malignancy in the adult population
with a high rate of pulmonary metastasis. Chondrosarcoma is managed with surgical
excision as the tumors do not respond well to conventional chemotherapy or
radiation therapy. Thus, there exists a dire need to develop systemic treatment
options to target chondrosarcoma cells for metastatic spread. We hypothesized
that the expression of miR-145 is low in chondrosarcoma, leading to decreased
transcriptional control of SOX9 (the master regulator of chondrogenesis), and
downstream activation of the transcription factor ETV5. We have previously shown 
that ETV5 activates MMP-2 expression in chondrosarcoma, which in turn increases
local bone matrix resorption. In this study, we confirm high expression of SOX9
in human chondrosarcoma using real-time PCR, Western blotting, and
immunofluorescence. An ETV5 promoter-reporter plasmid was transfected into
chondrosarcoma cells to determine if SOX9 directly regulates the expression of
ETV5. Co-transfection of the ETV5 promoter-plasmid with SOX9 lentivirus
significantly increased the luciferase activity derived from the ETV5 promoter,
from which the regulatory relationship between SOX9 and ETV5 is established.
MiR-145 was found to be down-regulated in chondrosarcoma cell lines, patient
samples, and further confirmed with a public sarcoma database. After stable
miR-145 lentiviral transfection, the subsequent mRNA expression levels of SOX9,
ETV5, and MMP-2 were significantly decreased in chondrosarcoma cells. The results
generated by this study may have important clinical significance in the treatment
of patients with chondrosarcoma in that targeted miRNA may have the potential to 
downregulate the upstream activators of proteases such as MMP-2.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25145279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Neuroimage. 2014 Nov 15;102 Pt 2:548-57. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.07.041.
Epub 2014 Jul 27.

Obesity gene NEGR1 associated with white matter integrity in healthy young
adults.

Dennis EL(1), Jahanshad N(1), Braskie MN(1), Warstadt NM(1), Hibar DP(1),
Kohannim O(2), Nir TM(1), McMahon KL(3), de Zubicaray GI(4), Montgomery GW(5),
Martin NG(5), Toga AW(1), Wright MJ(6), Thompson PM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Imaging Genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck
School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Center for Advanced Imaging,
Univ. of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. (4)School of Psychology, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. (5)Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Brisbane, Australia. (6)School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia; Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)Imaging Genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck
School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Departments of Neurology,
Psychiatry, Radiology, Engineering, and Ophthalmology, Keck School of Medicine of
USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: pthomp@usc.edu.

Obesity is a crucial public health issue in developed countries, with
implications for cardiovascular and brain health as we age. A number of
commonly-carried genetic variants are associated with obesity. Here we aim to see
whether variants in obesity-associated genes--NEGR1, FTO, MTCH2, MC4R, LRRN6C,
MAP2K5, FAIM2, SEC16B, ETV5, BDNF-AS, ATXN2L, ATP2A1, KCTD15, and TNN13K--are
associated with white matter microstructural properties, assessed by high angular
resolution diffusion imaging (HARDI) in young healthy adults between 20 and 30
years of age from the Queensland Twin Imaging study (QTIM). We began with a
multi-locus approach testing how a number of common genetic risk factors for
obesity at the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) level may jointly influence
white matter integrity throughout the brain and found a wide spread genetic
effect. Risk allele rs2815752 in NEGR1 was most associated with lower white
matter integrity across a substantial portion of the brain. Across the area of
significance in the bilateral posterior corona radiata, each additional copy of
the risk allele was associated with a 2.2% lower average FA. This is the first
study to find an association between an obesity risk gene and differences in
white matter integrity. As our subjects were young and healthy, our results
suggest that NEGR1 has effects on brain structure independent of its effect on
obesity.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4269485
PMID: 25072390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2014 Jun;37(3):179-91. doi: 10.1007/s13402-014-0171-y. Epub
2014 Jun 12.

Identification of GPM6A and GPM6B as potential new human lymphoid
leukemia-associated oncogenes.

Charfi C(1), Edouard E, Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, Département des Sciences Biologiques,
Centre BioMed, Université du Québec à Montréal, Case Postale 8888, Succursale
Centre-ville, Montréal, QC, H3C-3P8, Canada, charfi.cyndia@courrier.uqam.ca.

BACKGROUND: Previously, we found that the Graffi murine leukemia virus (MuLV) is 
able to induce a wide spectrum of hematologic malignancies in vivo. Using
high-density oligonucleotide microarrays, we established the gene expression
profiles of several of these malignancies, thereby specifically focusing on genes
deregulated in the lymphoid sub-types. We observed over-expression of a variety
of genes, including Arntl2, Bfsp2, Gfra2, Gpm6a, Gpm6b, Nln, Fbln1, Bmp7, Etv5
and Celsr1 and, in addition, provided evidence that Fmn2 and Parm-1 may act as
novel oncogenes. In the present study, we assessed the expression patterns of
eight selected human homologs of these genes in primary human B-cell
malignancies, and explored the putative oncogenic potential of GPM6A and GPM6B.
METHODS: The gene expression levels of the selected human homologs were tested in
human B-cell malignancies by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The protein expression
profiles of human GPM6A and GPM6B were analyzed by Western blotting. The
localization and the effect of GPM6A and GPM6B on the cytoskeleton were
determined using confocal and indirect immunofluorescence microscopy. To confirm 
the oncogenic potential of GPM6A and GPM6B, classical colony formation assays in 
soft agar and focus forming assays were used. The effects of these proteins on
the cell cycle were assessed by flow cytometry analysis.
RESULTS: Using semi-quantitative RT-PCR, we found that most of the primary B-cell
malignancies assessed showed altered expression patterns of the genes tested,
including GPM6A and GPM6B. Using confocal microscopy, we found that the GPM6A
protein (isoform 3) exhibits a punctate cytoplasmic localization and that the
GPM6B protein (isoform 4) exhibits a peri-nuclear and punctate cytoplasmic
localization. Interestingly, we found that exogenous over-expression of both
proteins in NIH/3T3 cells alters the actin and microtubule networks and induces
the formation of long filopodia-like protrusions. Additionally, we found that
these over-expressing NIH/3T3 cells exhibit anchorage-independent growth and
enhanced proliferation rates. Cellular transformation (i.e., loss of contact
inhibition) was, however, only observed after exogenous over-expression of GPM6B.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that several human homologs of the genes found 
to be deregulated in Graffi MuLV experimental mouse models may serve as candidate
biomarkers for human B-cell malignancies. In addition, we found that GPM6A and
GPM6B may act as novel oncogenes in the development of these malignancies.

PMID: 24916915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Kidney Int. 2014 Nov;86(5):1049-55. doi: 10.1038/ki.2014.104. Epub 2014 Apr 23.

Validating single-cell genomics for the study of renal development.

Jain S(1), Noordam MJ(2), Hoshi M(3), Vallania FL(4), Conrad DF(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Renal Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA [2] Department of Pathology and
Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Washington University, School of Medicine, St Louis,
Missouri, USA. (3)Renal Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA. (4)1] Department of
Genetics, Washington University, School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA [2] 
Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA.

Single-cell genomics will enable studies of the earliest events in kidney
development, although it is unclear if existing technologies are mature enough to
generate accurate and reproducible data on kidney progenitors. Here we designed a
pilot study to validate a high-throughput assay to measure the expression levels 
of key regulators of kidney development in single cells isolated from embryonic
mice. Our experiment produced 4608 expression measurements of 22 genes, made in
small cell pools, and 28 single cells purified from the RET-positive ureteric
bud. There were remarkable levels of concordance with expression data generated
by traditional microarray analysis on bulk ureteric bud tissue with the
correlation between our average single-cell measurements and GUDMAP measurements 
for each gene of 0.82-0.85. Nonetheless, a major motivation for single-cell
technology is to uncover dynamic biology hidden in population means. There was
evidence for extensive and surprising variation in expression of Wnt11 and Etv5, 
both downstream targets of activated RET. The variation for all genes in the
study was strongly consistent with burst-like promoter kinetics. Thus, our
results can inform the design of future single-cell experiments, which are poised
to provide important insights into kidney development and disease.

PMCID: PMC4207726
PMID: 24759149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Jul;15(7):888-94. doi: 10.4161/cbt.28879. Epub 2014 Apr
22.

ERM/ETV5 and RUNX1/AML1 expression in endometrioid adenocarcinomas of endometrium
and association with neoplastic progression.

de Sousa VP(1), Chaves CB(2), Huguenin JF(3), Moreira FC(4), de Reis BS(4),
Chimelli L(4), Bergmann A(5), Simão Tde A(6), Pinto LF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Carcinogênese Molecular; Centro de Pesquisa (CPQ); Instituto
Nacional de Câncer (INCA); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (2)Programa de Carcinogênese
Molecular; Centro de Pesquisa (CPQ); Instituto Nacional de Câncer (INCA); Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil; Departamento de Ginecologia Oncológica; Instituto Nacional de
Câncer (INCA); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (3)Departamento de Ginecologia Oncológica;
Instituto Nacional de Câncer (INCA); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (4)Divisão de
Patologia (DIPAT); Instituto Nacional de Câncer (INCA); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Epidemiologia Clínica Aplicada à Oncologia; Instituto Nacional de Câncer
(INCA); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (6)Programa de Carcinogênese Molecular; Centro de
Pesquisa (CPQ); Instituto Nacional de Câncer (INCA); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;
Laboratório de Toxicologia e Biologia Molecular; Departamento de Bioquímica;
Instituto de Biologia Roberto Alcantara Gomes (IBRAG); Universidade do Estado do 
Rio de Janeiro (UERJ); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The majority of endometrioid endometrial carcinomas (EEC) is diagnosed at stage
I. Among these, 30% present myometrial invasion (stage IB), which is associated
with tumor spread and relapse after primary treatment. Although an increased
expression of RUNX1/AML1 and ERM/ETV5 in EEC have been suggested to be associated
with early events of myometrial infiltration, there is no data regarding its
expression along the evolution of EEC and possible associations with other
clinicopathological parameters. Therefore, ERM/ETV5 and RUNX1/AML1 protein and
gene expression profiles were assessed in different EEC stages to evaluate their 
role in endometrial carcinogenesis. RUNX1/AML1 and ERM/ETV5 proteins were
analyzed by immunohistochemistry in 219 formalin fixed paraffin embedded
endometrioid tumors and in 12 normal atrophic and proliferative endometrium
samples. RUNX1/AML1 and ERM/ETV5 genes expression were analyzed by RT-qPCR.
RUNX1/AML1 and ERM/ETV5 expression were decreased with increasing EEC stage, with
a positive correlation between protein and gene expression for ERM/ETV5, but not 
for RUNX1/AML1. Both proteins were present in the nucleus of the tumor cells,
whereas RUNX1/AML1, but not ERM/ETV5, was expressed in 7 out of 12 normal
endometrial samples, with its expression being restricted to the cytoplasm of the
positive cells. We concluded that there is a higher expression of ERM/ETV5 in
early stages of EEC, whereas there seems to be a RUNX1/AML1 translocation from
cytoplasm to nucleus in EEC neoplastic transformation.

PMCID: PMC4100989
PMID: 24756106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Jul;53(7):622-33. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22172. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

Distinct transcriptional signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 fusion-positive 
round cell tumors compared to EWSR1-rearranged Ewing sarcomas: further evidence
toward distinct pathologic entities.

Specht K(1), Sung YS, Zhang L, Richter GH, Fletcher CD, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Round cell sarcomas harboring CIC-DUX4 fusions have recently been described as
highly aggressive soft tissue tumors of children and young adults. Due to partial
morphologic and immunohistochemical overlap with Ewing sarcoma (ES),
CIC-DUX4-positive tumors have generally been classified as ES-like and managed
similarly; however, a systematic comparison at the molecular and
immunohistochemical levels between these two groups has not yet been conducted.
Based on an initial observation that CIC-DUX4-positive tumors show nuclear
immunoreactivity for WT1 and ETS transcription factors, FLI1 and ERG, we
performed a detailed immunohistochemical and molecular analysis including these
markers, to further investigate the relationship between CIC-DUX4 tumors and ES. 
The study group included 21 CIC-DUX4-positive sarcomas and 20 EWSR1-rearranged
ES. Immunohistochemically, CIC-DUX4 sarcomas showed membranous CD99 positivity in
18 (86%) cases, but only 5 (24%) with a diffuse pattern, while WT1 and FLI1 were 
strongly positive in all cases. ERG was positive in 18% of cases. All ES
expressed CD99 and FLI1, while ERG positivity was only seen in EWSR1-ERG fusion
positive ES. WT1 was negative in all ES. Expression profiling validated by q-PCR 
revealed a distinct gene signature associated with CIC-DUX4 fusion, with
upregulation of ETS transcription factors (ETV4, ETV1, and ETV5) and WT1, among
top overexpressed genes compared to ES, other sarcomas and normal tissue. In
conclusion, the distinct gene signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 sarcomas
suggest a distinct pathogenesis from ES. The consistent WT1 expression may
provide a useful clue in the diagnosis in the context of round cell sarcomas
negative for EWSR1 rearrangement. © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4108073
PMID: 24723486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 7;9(4):e94159. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094159. eCollection 
2014.

AAV-mediated gene transfer of the obesity-associated gene Etv5 in rat midbrain
does not affect energy balance or motivated behavior.

Boender AJ(1), Koning NA(1), van den Heuvel JK(2), Luijendijk MC(1), van Rozen
AJ(1), la Fleur SE(2), Adan RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Neuroscience, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Several genome-wide association studies have implicated the transcription factor 
E-twenty- six version 5 (Etv5) in the regulation of body mass index. Further
substantiating the role of Etv5 in feeding behavior are the findings that
targeted disruption of Etv5 in mice leads to decreased body weight gain and that 
expression of Etv5 is decreased in the ventral tegmental area and substantia
nigra pars compacta (VTA/SNpc) after food restriction. As Etv5 has been suggested
to influence dopaminergic neurotransmission by driving the expression of genes
that are responsible for the synthesis and release of dopamine, we investigated
if expression levels of Etv5 are dependent on nutritional state and subsequently 
influence the expression levels of tyrosine hydroxylase. While it was shown that 
Etv5 expression in the VTA/SNpc increases after central administration of leptin 
and that Etv5 was able to drive expression of tyrosine hydroxylase in vitro,
AAV-mediated gene transfer of Etv5 into the VTA/SNpc of rats did not alter
expression of tyrosine hydroxylase in vivo. Moreover, AAV-mediated gene transfer 
of Etv5 in the VTA/SNpc did not affect measures of energy balance or performances
in a progressive ratio schedule. Thus, these data do not support a role for
increased expression of Etv5 in the VTA/SNpc in the regulation of feeding
behavior.

PMCID: PMC3978017
PMID: 24710089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Viruses. 2014 Mar 24;6(3):1454-72. doi: 10.3390/v6031454.

A role for CD81 and hepatitis C virus in hepatoma mobility.

Brimacombe CL(1), Wilson GK(2), Hübscher SG(3), McKeating JA(4), Farquhar MJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Hepatitis Research Group, Institute for Biomedical Research, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. C.L.Brimacombe@bham.ac.uk. (2)Viral
Hepatitis Research Group, Institute for Biomedical Research, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. G.K.Wilson@bham.ac.uk. (3)Centre for Liver
Research and NIHR Birmingham Liver Biomedical Research Unit, Institute for
Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
S.G.Hubscher@bham.ac.uk. (4)Viral Hepatitis Research Group, Institute for
Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
S.G.Hubscher@bham.ac.uk. (5)Viral Hepatitis Research Group, Institute for
Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
M.J.Farquhar@bham.ac.uk.

Tetraspanins are a family of small proteins that interact with themselves, host
transmembrane and cytosolic proteins to form tetraspanin enriched microdomains
(TEMs) that regulate important cellular functions. Several tetraspanin family
members are linked to tumorigenesis. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an
increasing global health burden, in part due to the increasing prevalence of
hepatitis C virus (HCV) associated HCC. The tetraspanin CD81 is an essential
receptor for HCV, however, its role in hepatoma biology is uncertain. We
demonstrate that antibody engagement of CD81 promotes hepatoma spread, which is
limited by HCV infection, in an actin-dependent manner and identify an essential 
role for the C-terminal interaction with Ezrin-Radixin-Moesin (ERM) proteins in
this process. We show enhanced hepatoma migration and invasion following
expression of CD81 and a reduction in invasive potential upon CD81 silencing. In 
addition, we reveal poorly differentiated HCC express significantly higher levels
of CD81 compared to adjacent non-tumor tissue. In summary, these data support a
role for CD81 in regulating hepatoma mobility and propose CD81 as a tumour
promoter.

PMCID: PMC3970161
PMID: 24662676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2014 Jun;30:14-26. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.02.005. Epub
2014 Feb 19.

Transcriptional control of spermatogonial maintenance and differentiation.

Song HW(1), Wilkinson MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (2)Department
of Reproductive Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address:
mfwilkinson@ucsd.edu.

Spermatogenesis is a multistep process that generates millions of spermatozoa per
day in mammals. A key to this process is the spermatogonial stem cell (SSC),
which has the dual property of continually renewing and undergoing
differentiation into a spermatogonial progenitor that expands and further
differentiates. In this review, we will focus on how these proliferative and
early differentiation steps in mammalian male germ cells are controlled by
transcription factors. Most of the transcription factors that have so far been
identified as promoting SSC self-renewal (BCL6B, BRACHYURY, ETV5, ID4, LHX1, and 
POU3F1) are upregulated by glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF).
Since GDNF is crucial for promoting SSC self-renewal, this suggests that these
transcription factors are responsible for coordinating the action of GDNF in
SSCs. Other transcription factors that promote SSC self-renewal are expressed
independently of GDNF (FOXO1, PLZF, POU5F1, and TAF4B) and thus may act in
non-GDNF pathways to promote SSC cell growth or survival. Several transcription
factors have been identified that promote spermatogonial differentiation (DMRT1, 
NGN3, SOHLH1, SOHLH2, SOX3, and STAT3); some of these may influence the decision 
of an SSC to commit to differentiate while others may promote later
spermatogonial differentiation steps. Many of these transcription factors
regulate each other and act on common targets, suggesting they integrate to form 
complex transcriptional networks in self-renewing and differentiating
spermatogonia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4043860
PMID: 24560784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Reprod Toxicol. 2014 Jun;45:87-93. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2014.01.009. Epub 2014
Feb 4.

Lipopolysaccharide inhibits the self-renewal of spermatogonial stem cells in
vitro via downregulation of GDNF expression in Sertoli cells.

Zhang X(1), Shi K(1), Li Y(2), Zhang H(1), Hao J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Experimental Teratology,
Department of Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine, Shandong University, 
Jinan 250012, PR China. (2)Obstetric Genetic Disease Laboratory, Maternal and
Child Health Hospital of Zibo City, Zibo 255029, PR China. (3)Key Laboratory of
the Ministry of Education for Experimental Teratology, Department of Histology
and Embryology, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, PR China. 
Electronic address: haojing@sdu.edu.cn.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) can reduce sperm count and sperm quality. The molecular 
mechanisms underlying this process are not fully understood. In this report, we
investigated the effects of LPS-treated Sertoli cells on self-renewal and
differentiation of spermatogoinial stem cells (SSCs). Sertoli cell cultures were 
established and incubated with LPS (10µg/ml) for 1, 2 or 3 days, respectively.
The culture media were collected and used as conditioned media (CM) to culture
SSCs. The expression of glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), stem cell 
factor (SCF) and bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) in Sertoli cells treated
with LPS was analyzed by RT-PCR and Western blotting. The results showed that the
expression of SSC differentiation markers, c-kit and Sohlh2, was increased, while
the expression of SSC self-renewal markers, plzf, oct4, and PCNA, was repressed
when cultured in CM from LPS-treated Sertoli cells. GDNF levels in Sertoli cells 
and CM reduced dramatically after LPS treatments, while SCF and BMP4 levels did
not show any significant changes. Moreover, correlated with the GDNF levels in
CM, GDNF target genes, Bcl6b and Etv5, were reduced markedly in SSCs. Our results
suggest that LPS inhibits the expression of GDNF in Sertoli cells, and might
prevent the SSC self-renewal via down-regulation of GDNF target genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24503145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e87335. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087335. eCollection
2014.

BMI-associated alleles do not constitute risk alleles for polycystic ovary
syndrome independently of BMI: a case-control study.

Louwers YV(1), Rayner NW(2), Herrera BM(3), Stolk L(4), Groves CJ(2), Barber
TM(5), Uitterlinden AG(6), Franks S(7), Laven JS(1), McCarthy MI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Subdivision of Reproductive Medicine,
Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Wellcome
Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom ;
Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom. (3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (5)Oxford Centre for
Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC University Medical
Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands ; Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (7)Institute of
Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) has a strong genetic background
and the majority of patients with PCOS have elevated BMI levels. The aim of this 
study was to determine to which extent BMI-increasing alleles contribute to risk 
of PCOS when contemporaneous BMI is taken into consideration.
METHODS: Patients with PCOS and controls were recruited from the United Kingdom
(563 cases and 791 controls) and The Netherlands (510 cases and 2720 controls).
Cases and controls were of similar BMI. SNPs mapping to 12 BMI-associated loci
which have been extensively replicated across different ethnicities, i.e., BDNF, 
FAIM2, ETV5, FTO, GNPDA2, KCTD15, MC4R, MTCH2, NEGR1, SEC16B, SH2B1, and TMEM18, 
were studied in association with PCOS within each cohort using the additive
genetic model followed by a combined analysis. A genetic allelic count risk score
model was used to determine the risk of PCOS for individuals carrying increasing 
numbers of BMI-increasing alleles.
RESULTS: None of the genetic variants, including FTO and MC4R, was associated
with PCOS independently of BMI in the meta-analysis. Moreover, no differences
were observed between cases and controls in the number of BMI-risk alleles
present and no overall trend across the risk score groups was observed.
CONCLUSION: In this combined analysis of over 4,000 BMI-matched individuals from 
the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, we observed no association of BMI risk
alleles with PCOS independent of BMI.

PMCID: PMC3909077
PMID: 24498077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Jul;134(1):204-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.12.021. 
Epub 2014 Jan 31.

The transcription factor Etv5 controls TH17 cell development and allergic airway 
inflammation.

Pham D(1), Sehra S(2), Sun X(3), Kaplan MH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Ind; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Ind. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Ind. (3)Laboratory of
Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wis. (4)Department of Pediatrics,
Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Ind; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Ind. Electronic address:
mkaplan2@iupui.edu.

BACKGROUND: The differentiation of TH17 cells, which promote pulmonary
inflammation, requires the cooperation of a network of transcription factors.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to define the role of Etv5, an Ets-family transcription
factor, in TH17 cell development and function.
METHODS: TH17 development was examined in primary mouse T cells wherein Etv5
expression was altered by retroviral transduction, small interfering RNA
targeting a specific gene, and mice with a conditional deletion of Etv5 in T
cells. The direct function of Etv5 on the Il17 locus was tested with chromatin
immunoprecipitation and reporter assays. The house dust mite-induced allergic
inflammation model was used to test the requirement for Etv5-dependent TH17
functions in vivo.
RESULTS: We identify Etv5 as a signal transducer and activator of transcription
3-induced positive regulator of TH17 development. Etv5 controls TH17
differentiation by directly promoting Il17a and Il17f expression. Etv5 recruits
histone-modifying enzymes to the Il17a-Il17f locus, resulting in increased active
histone marks and decreased repressive histone marks. In a model of allergic
airway inflammation, mice with Etv5-deficient T cells have reduced airway
inflammation and IL-17A/F production in the lung and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
compared with wild-type mice, without changes in TH2 cytokine production.
CONCLUSIONS: These data define signal transducer and activator of transcription
3-dependent feed-forward control of TH17 cytokine production and a novel role for
Etv5 in promoting T cell-dependent airway inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4209254
PMID: 24486067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 8;8(11):e78940. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078940. eCollection
2013.

PKC<U+03B8> regulates T cell motility via ezrin-radixin-moesin localization to the
uropod.

Cannon JL(1), Asperti-Boursin F, Letendre KA, Brown IK, Korzekwa KE, Blaine KM,
Oruganti SR, Sperling AI, Moses ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico
School of Medicine, Albuquerque, New Mexico, United States of America ;
Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, United States of America.

Cell motility is a fundamental process crucial for function in many cell types,
including T cells. T cell motility is critical for T cell-mediated immune
responses, including initiation, activation, and effector function. While many
extracellular receptors and cytoskeletal regulators have been shown to control T 
cell migration, relatively few signaling mediators have been identified that can 
modulate T cell motility. In this study, we find a previously unknown role for
PKC<U+03B8> in regulating T cell migration to lymph nodes. PKC<U+03B8> localizes to the
migrating T cell uropod and regulates localization of the MTOC, CD43 and ERM
proteins to the uropod. Furthermore, PKC<U+03B8>-deficient T cells are less responsive
to chemokine induced migration and are defective in migration to lymph nodes. Our
results reveal a novel role for PKC<U+03B8> in regulating T cell migration and
demonstrate that PKC<U+03B8> signals downstream of CCR7 to regulate protein localization
and uropod formation.

PMCID: PMC3826749
PMID: 24250818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mech Dev. 2014 Feb;131:57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2013.10.003. Epub 2013 Nov 9.

The ETS transcription factor Etv1 mediates FGF signaling to initiate proneural
gene expression during Xenopus laevis retinal development.

Willardsen M(1), Hutcheson DA(1), Moore KB(1), Vetter ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. (2)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. Electronic 
address: monica.vetter@neuro.utah.edu.

Fibroblast growth factor signaling plays a significant role in the developing
eye, regulating both patterning and neurogenesis. Members of the
Pea3/Etv4-subfamily of ETS-domain transcription factors (Etv1, Etv4, and Etv5)
are transcriptional activators that are downstream targets of FGF/MAPK signaling,
but whether they are required for eye development is unknown. We show that in the
developing Xenopus laevis retina, etv1 is transiently expressed at the onset of
retinal neurogenesis. We found that etv1 is not required for eye specification,
but is required for the expression of atonal-related proneural bHLH transcription
factors, and is also required for retinal neuron differentiation. Using
transgenic reporters we show that the distal atoh7 enhancer, which is required
for the initiation of atoh7 expression in the Xenopus retina, is responsive to
both FGF signaling and etv1 expression. Thus, we conclude that Etv1 acts
downstream of FGF signaling to regulate the initiation of neurogenesis in the
Xenopus retina.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3959783
PMID: 24219979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e77311. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077311.
eCollection 2013.

A missense mutation in the transcription factor ETV5 leads to sterility,
increased embryonic and perinatal death, postnatal growth restriction, renal
asymmetry and polydactyly in the mouse.

Jamsai D(1), Clark BJ, Smith SJ, Whittle B, Goodnow CC, Ormandy CJ, O'Bryan MK.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

ETV5 (Ets variant gene 5) is a transcription factor that is required for
fertility. In this study, we demonstrate that ETV5 plays additional roles in
embryonic and postnatal developmental processes in the mouse. Through a
genome-wide mouse mutagenesis approach, we generated a sterile mouse line that
carried a nonsense mutation in exon 12 of the Etv5 gene. The mutation led to the 
conversion of lysine at position 412 into a premature termination codon (PTC)
within the ETS DNA binding domain of the protein. We showed that the
PTC-containing allele produced a highly unstable mRNA, which in turn resulted in 
an undetectable level of ETV5 protein. The Etv5 mutation resulted in male and
female sterility as determined by breeding experiments. Mutant males were sterile
due to a progressive loss of spermatogonia, which ultimately resulted in a
Sertoli cell only phenotype by 8 week-of-age. Further, the ETV5 target genes
Cxcr4 and Ccl9 were significantly down-regulated in mutant neonate testes. CXCR4 
and CCL9 have been implicated in the maintenance and migration of spermatogonia, 
respectively. Moreover, the Etv5 mutation resulted in several developmental
abnormalities including an increased incidence of embryonic and perinatal
lethality, postnatal growth restriction, polydactyly and renal asymmetry. Thus,
our data define a physiological role for ETV5 in many aspects of development
including embryonic and perinatal survival, postnatal growth, limb patterning,
kidney development and fertility.

PMCID: PMC3804586
PMID: 24204802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Diabetologia. 2014 Feb;57(2):383-91. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3096-5. Epub 2013
Nov 5.

The role of the transcription factor ETV5 in insulin exocytosis.

Gutierrez-Aguilar R(1), Kim DH, Casimir M, Dai XQ, Pfluger PT, Park J, Haller A, 
Donelan E, Park J, D'Alessio D, Woods SC, MacDonald PE, Seeley RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 2170 East Galbraith
Road, Cincinnati, OH, 45237, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Genome-wide association studies have revealed an association of 
the transcription factor ETS variant gene 5 (ETV5) with human obesity. However,
its role in glucose homeostasis and energy balance is unknown.
METHODS: Etv5 knockout (KO) mice were monitored weekly for body weight (BW) and
food intake. Body composition was measured at 8 and 16 weeks of age. Glucose
metabolism was studied, and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion was measured in 
vivo and in vitro.
RESULTS: Etv5 KO mice are smaller and leaner, and have a reduced BW and lower fat
mass than their wild-type controls on a chow diet. When exposed to a high-fat
diet, KO mice are resistant to diet-induced BW gain. Despite a greater insulin
sensitivity, KO mice have profoundly impaired glucose tolerance associated with
impaired insulin secretion. Morphometric analysis revealed smaller islets and a
reduced beta cell size in the pancreatic islets of Etv5 KO mice. Knockdown of
ETV5 in an insulin-secreting cell line or beta cells from human donors revealed
intact mitochondrial and Ca(2+) channel activity, but reduced insulin exocytosis.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: This work reveals a critical role for ETV5 in
specifically regulating insulin secretion both in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3947344
PMID: 24190582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Cell Sci. 2013 Dec 15;126(Pt 24):5626-34. doi: 10.1242/jcs.132613. Epub 2013
Oct 7.

Etv5a regulates the proliferation of ventral mesoderm cells and the formation of 
hemato-vascular derivatives.

Chen SY(1), Shih HY, Lin SJ, Hsiao CD, Li ZC, Cheng YC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Taoyuan 33383, Taiwan.

Hematopoietic and vascular endothelial cells constitute the circulatory system
and are both generated from the ventral mesoderm. However, the molecules and
signaling pathways involved in ventral mesoderm formation and specification
remain unclear. We found that zebrafish etv5a was expressed in the ventral
mesoderm during gastrulation. Knockdown of Etv5a using morpholinos increased the 
proliferation of ventral mesoderm cells and caused defects in hematopoietic
derivatives and in vascular formation. By contrast, the formation of other
mesodermal derivatives, such as pronephros, somites and the gut wall, was not
affected. Knockdown specificity was further confirmed by overexpression of an
etv5a construct lacking its acidic domain. In conclusion, our data reveal that
etv5a is essential for the inhibition of ventral mesoderm cell proliferation and 
for the formation of the hemato-vascular lineage.

PMID: 24101720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Oct 3;93(4):661-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.08.012.

Fine Mapping and Identification of BMI Loci in African Americans.

Gong J(1), Schumacher F, Lim U, Hindorff LA, Haessler J, Buyske S, Carlson CS,
Rosse S, Buková P, Fornage M, Gross M, Pankratz N, Pankow JS, Schreiner PJ,
Cooper R, Ehret G, Gu CC, Houston D, Irvin MR, Jackson R, Kuller L, Henderson B, 
Cheng I, Wilkens L, Leppert M, Lewis CE, Li R, Nguyen KD, Goodloe R, Farber-Eger 
E, Boston J, Dilks HH, Ritchie MD, Fowke J, Pooler L, Graff M, Fernandez-Rhodes
L, Cochrane B, Boerwinkle E, Kooperberg C, Matise TC, Le Marchand L, Crawford DC,
Haiman CA, North KE, Peters U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. Electronic address: jgong@fhcrc.org.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) primarily performed in European-ancestry 
(EA) populations have identified numerous loci associated with body mass index
(BMI). However, it is still unclear whether these GWAS loci can be generalized to
other ethnic groups, such as African Americans (AAs). Furthermore, the putative
functional variant or variants in these loci mostly remain under investigation.
The overall lower linkage disequilibrium in AA compared to EA populations
provides the opportunity to narrow in or fine-map these BMI-related loci.
Therefore, we used the Metabochip to densely genotype and evaluate 21 BMI GWAS
loci identified in EA studies in 29,151 AAs from the Population Architecture
using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) study. Eight of the 21 loci (SEC16B,
TMEM18, ETV5, GNPDA2, TFAP2B, BDNF, FTO, and MC4R) were found to be associated
with BMI in AAs at 5.8 × 10(-5). Within seven out of these eight loci, we found
that, on average, a substantially smaller number of variants was correlated (r(2)
> 0.5) with the most significant SNP in AA than in EA populations (16 versus 55).
Conditional analyses revealed GNPDA2 harboring a potential additional independent
signal. Moreover, Metabochip-wide discovery analyses revealed two BMI-related
loci, BRE (rs116612809, p = 3.6 × 10(-8)) and DHX34 (rs4802349, p = 1.2 ×
10(-7)), which were significant when adjustment was made for the total number of 
SNPs tested across the chip. These results demonstrate that fine mapping in AAs
is a powerful approach for both narrowing in on the underlying causal variants in
known loci and discovering BMI-related loci.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3791273
PMID: 24094743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 2;33(40):15940-51. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0928-13.2013.

Pea3 transcription factor family members Etv4 and Etv5 mediate retrograde
signaling and axonal growth of DRG sensory neurons in response to NGF.

Fontanet P(1), Irala D, Alsina FC, Paratcha G, Ledda F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Institute of Cellular Biology
and Neuroscience (IBCN), CONICET-UBA, School of Medicine, Buenos Aires 1428,
Argentina, and Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Department of
Neuroscience, Karolinska Institute, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Nerve growth factor (NGF) is a target-derived neurotrophic growth factor that
controls many aspects of sensory and sympathetic neuronal development. The
identification of transcription factors and downstream target genes that mediate 
NGF-dependent neuronal differentiation and target field innervation is currently 
a major challenge. Here, we show that the Pea3 transcription factor family
members Etv4 and Etv5 are expressed by developing TrkA-positive dorsal root
ganglion (DRG) neurons during the period of target innervation. Real-time PCR
assays indicated that Etv4 and Etv5 mRNAs are significantly induced by NGF in
different neuronal cells, suggesting that they could be involved in the
biological responses induced by this neurotrophin. Interestingly, distal axon
application of NGF in compartmentalized cultures of rat DRG sensory neurons was
sufficient to induce a significant increase in Etv4 and Etv5 mRNA expression.
Pharmacological assays also revealed that activation of MEK/ERK (MAPK) pathway is
required for Etv4 and Etv5 gene induction in response to NGF. Downregulation of
Etv4 and Etv5 using small interference RNA knockdown experiments inhibited
NGF-induced neurite outgrowth of rat sensory neurons, while overexpression of
full-length Etv4 or Etv5 potentiated neuronal differentiation in response to this
neurotrophin. Together, these data establish Etv4 and Etv5 as essential molecules
of the transcriptional program linking neurotrophin signaling to sensory neuronal
differentiation, and suggest that they can be involved in NGF-mediated target
innervation.

PMID: 24089499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Hum Hered. 2013;75(2-4):57-79. doi: 10.1159/000353585. Epub 2013 Sep 27.

Functional analysis of seven genes linked to body mass index and adiposity by
genome-wide association studies: a review.

Speakman JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key State Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, PR China;
Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, UK.

Erratum in
    Hum Hered. 2013;76(2):52.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified a total of about 40 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that show significant linkage to body mass index,
a widely utilised surrogate measure of adiposity. However, only 8 of these
associations have been confirmed by follow-up GWAS using more sophisticated
measures of adiposity (computed tomography). Among these 8, there is a SNP close 
to the gene FTO which has been the subject of considerable work to diagnose its
function. The remaining 7 SNPs are adjacent to, or within, the genes NEGR1,
TMEM18, ETV5, FLJ35779, LINGO2, SH2B1 and GIPR, most of which are less well
studied than FTO, particularly in the context of obesity. This article reviews
the available data on the functions of these genes, including information gleaned
from studies in humans and animal models. At present, we have virtually no
information on the putative mechanism associating the genes FLJ35779 and LINGO2
to obesity. All of these genes are expressed in the brain, and for 2 of them
(SH2B1 and GIPR), a direct link to the appetite regulation system is known. SH2B1
is an enhancer of intracellular signalling in the JAK-STAT pathway, and GIPR is
the receptor for an appetite-linked hormone (GIP) produced by the alimentary
tract. NEGR1, ETV5 and SH2B1 all have suggested roles in neurite outgrowth, and
hence SNPs adjacent to these genes may affect development of the energy balance
circuitry. Although the genes have central patterns of gene expression, implying 
a central neuronal connection to energy balance, for at least 4 of them (NEGR1,
TMEM18, SH2B1 and GIPR), there are also significant peripheral functions related 
to adipose tissue biology. These functions may contribute to their effects on the
obese phenotype.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24081222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nutr Diabetes. 2013 Aug 26;3:e85. doi: 10.1038/nutd.2013.26.

Generalization of adiposity genetic loci to US Hispanic women.

Graff M(1), Fernández-Rhodes L, Liu S, Carlson C, Wassertheil-Smoller S,
Neuhouser M, Reiner A, Kooperberg C, Rampersaud E, Manson JE, Kuller LH, Howard
BV, Ochs-Balcom HM, Johnson KC, Vitolins MZ, Sucheston L, Monda K, North KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Obesity is a public health concern. Yet the identification of
adiposity-related genetic variants among United States (US) Hispanics, which is
the largest US minority group, remains largely unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To interrogate an a priori list of 47 (32 overall body mass and 15
central adiposity) index single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously
studied in individuals of European descent among 3494 US Hispanic women in the
Women's Health Initiative SNP Health Association Resource (WHI SHARe).
DESIGN: Cross-sectional analysis of measured body mass index (BMI), waist
circumference (WC) and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) were inverse normally transformed
after adjusting for age, smoking, center and global ancestry. WC and WHR models
were also adjusted for BMI. Genotyping was performed using the Affymetrix 6.0
array. In the absence of an a priori selected SNP, a proxy was selected (r(2)<U+E2F6>0.8
in CEU).
RESULTS: Six BMI loci (TMEM18, NUDT3/HMGA1, FAIM2, FTO, MC4R and KCTD15) and two 
WC/WHR loci (VEGFA and ITPR2-SSPN) were nominally significant (P<0.05) at the
index or proxy SNP in the corresponding BMI and WC/WHR models. To account for
distinct linkage disequilibrium patterns in Hispanics and further assess
generalization of genetic effects at each locus, we interrogated the evidence for
association at the 47 surrounding loci within 1<U+2009>Mb region of the index or proxy
SNP. Three additional BMI loci (FANCL, TFAP2B and ETV5) and five WC/WHR loci
(DNM3-PIGC, GRB14, ADAMTS9, LY86 and MSRA) displayed Bonferroni-corrected
significant associations with BMI and WC/WHR. Conditional analyses of each index 
SNP (or its proxy) and the most significant SNP within the 1<U+2009>Mb region supported 
the possible presence of index-independent signals at each of these eight loci as
well as at KCTD15.
CONCLUSION: This study provides evidence for the generalization of nine BMI and
seven central adiposity loci in Hispanic women. This study expands the current
knowledge of common adiposity-related genetic loci to Hispanic women.

PMCID: PMC3759132
PMID: 23978819  [PubMed]


60. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 8;8(8):e70640. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070640. eCollection 
2013.

Contribution of common genetic variants to obesity and obesity-related traits in 
mexican children and adults.

León-Mimila P(1), Villamil-Ramírez H, Villalobos-Comparán M, Villarreal-Molina T,
Romero-Hidalgo S, López-Contreras B, Gutiérrez-Vidal R, Vega-Badillo J,
Jacobo-Albavera L, Posadas-Romeros C, Canizalez-Román A, Río-Navarro BD,
Campos-Pérez F, Acuña-Alonzo V, Aguilar-Salinas C, Canizales-Quinteros S.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genómica de Poblaciones Aplicada a la Salud, Facultad de Química,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México-UNAM-Instituto Nacional de Medicina
Genómica-INMEGEN, Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have identified multiple obesity-associated loci
mainly in European populations. However, their contribution to obesity in other
ethnicities such as Mexicans is largely unknown. The aim of this study was to
examine 26 obesity-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in a sample
of Mexican mestizos.
METHODS: 9 SNPs in biological candidate genes showing replications (PPARG, ADRB3,
ADRB2, LEPR, GNB3, UCP3, ADIPOQ, UCP2, and NR3C1), and 17 SNPs in or near genes
associated with obesity in first, second and third wave GWAS (INSIG2, FTO, MC4R, 
TMEM18, FAIM2/BCDIN3, BDNF, SH2B1, GNPDA2, NEGR1, KCTD15, SEC16B/RASAL2, NPC1,
SFRF10/ETV5, MAF, PRL, MTCH2, and PTER) were genotyped in 1,156 unrelated
Mexican-Mestizos including 683 cases (441 obese class I/II and 242 obese class
III) and 473 normal-weight controls. In a second stage we selected 12 of the SNPs
showing nominal associations with obesity, to seek associations with quantitative
obesity-related traits in 3 cohorts including 1,218 Mexican Mestizo children, 945
Mexican Mestizo adults, and 543 Indigenous Mexican adults.
RESULTS: After adjusting for age, sex and admixture, significant associations
with obesity were found for 6 genes in the case-control study (ADIPOQ, FTO,
TMEM18, INSIG2, FAIM2/BCDIN3 and BDNF). In addition, SH2B1 was associated only
with class I/II obesity and MC4R only with class III obesity. SNPs located at or 
near FAIM2/BCDIN3, TMEM18, INSIG2, GNPDA2 and SEC16B/RASAL2 were significantly
associated with BMI and/or WC in the combined analysis of Mexican-mestizo
children and adults, and FTO locus was significantly associated with increased
BMI in Indigenous Mexican populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings replicate the association of 8 obesity-related SNPs
with obesity risk in Mexican adults, and confirm the role of some of these SNPs
in BMI in Mexican adults and children.

PMCID: PMC3738539
PMID: 23950976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Neoplasia. 2013 Jul;15(7):720-6.

Novel 5' fusion partners of ETV1 and ETV4 in prostate cancer.

Barros-Silva JD(1), Paulo P, Bakken AC, Cerveira N, Løvf M, Henrique R, Jerónimo 
C, Lothe RA, Skotheim RI, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

Gene fusions involving the erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS)
transcription factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and FLI1 are a common feature of
prostate carcinomas (PCas). The most common upstream fusion partner described is 
the androgen-regulated prostate-specific gene TMPRSS2, most frequently with ERG, 
but additional 5' fusion partners have been described. We performed 5' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends in 18 PCas with ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 outlier expression
to identify the 5' fusion partners. We also evaluated the exon-level expression
profile of these ETS genes in 14 cases. We identified and confirmed by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction the two novel chimeric genes OR51E2-ETV1 and UBTF-ETV4 in two
PCas. OR51E2 encodes a G-protein-coupled receptor that is overexpressed in PCas, 
whereas UBTF is a ubiquitously expressed gene encoding an HMG-box DNA-binding
protein involved in ribosome biogenesis. We additionally describe two novel gene 
fusion combinations of previously described genes, namely, SLC45A3-ETV4 and
HERVK17-ETV4. Finally, we found one PCa with TMPRSS2-ETV1, one with
C15orf21-ETV1, one with EST14-ETV1, and two with 14q133-q21.1-ETV1. In nine PCas 
(eight ETV1 and one ETV5), exhibiting ETS outlier expression and genomic
rearrangement detected by FISH, no 5' fusion partner was found. Our findings
contribute significantly to characterize the heterogeneous group of ETS gene
fusions and indicate that all genes described as 5' fusion partners with one ETS 
gene can most likely be rearranged with any of the other ETS genes involved in
prostate carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3689235
PMID: 23814484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e63835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063835. Print 2013.

Deletion of the prorenin receptor from the ureteric bud causes renal
hypodysplasia.

Song R(1), Preston G, Ichihara A, Yosypiv IV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hypertension and Renal Center of Excellence, Tulane 
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.

The role of the prorenin receptor (PRR) in the regulation of ureteric bud (UB)
branching morphogenesis is unknown. Here, we investigated whether PRR acts
specifically in the UB to regulate UB branching, kidney development and function.
We demonstrate that embryonic (E) day E13.5 mouse metanephroi, isolated intact
E11.5 UBs and cultured UB cells express PRR mRNA. To study its role in UB
development, we conditionally ablated PRR in the developing UB (PRR (UB-/-))
using Hoxb7 (Cre) mice. On E12.5, PRR (UB-/-) mice had decreased UB branching and
increased UB cell apoptosis. These defects were associated with decreased
expression of Ret, Wnt11, Etv4/Etv5, and reduced phosphorylation of Erk1/2 in the
UB. On E18.5, mutants had marked kidney hypoplasia, widespread apoptosis of
medullary collecting duct cells and decreased expression of Foxi1, AE1 and
H(+)-ATPase a4 mRNA. Ultimately, they developed occasional small cysts in
medullary collecting ducts and had decreased nephron number. To test the
functional consequences of these alterations, we determined the ability of PRR
(UB-/-) mice to acidify and concentrate the urine on postnatal (P) day P30. PRR
(UB-/-) mice were polyuric, had lower urine osmolality and a higher urine pH
following 48 hours of acidic loading with NH4Cl. Taken together, these data show 
that PRR present in the UB epithelia performs essential functions during UB
branching morphogenesis and collecting duct development via control of Ret/Wnt11 
pathway gene expression, UB cell survival, activation of Erk1/2, terminal
differentiation and function of collecting duct cells needed for maintaining
adequate water and acid-base homeostasis. We propose that mutations in PRR could 
possibly cause renal hypodysplasia and renal tubular acidosis in humans.

PMCID: PMC3660567
PMID: 23704941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2013 May 13;8(5):e62849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062849. Print 2013.

New insights into FoxE1 functions: identification of direct FoxE1 targets in
thyroid cells.

Fernández LP(1), López-Márquez A, Martínez AM, Gómez-López G, Santisteban P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols", Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid-CSIC-UAM, Madrid,
Spain.

BACKGROUND: FoxE1 is a thyroid-specific forkhead transcription factor essential
for thyroid gland development, as well as for the maintenance of the thyroid
differentiated state in adults. FoxE1 recognizes and binds to a short DNA
sequence present in thyroglobulin (Tg) and thyroperoxidase (Tpo) promoters, but
FoxE1 binding to regulatory regions other than Tg and Tpo promoters remains
almost unexplored. Improving knowledge of the regulatory functions of FoxE1 is
necessary to clarify its role in endocrine syndromes and cancer susceptibility.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDING: In order to further investigate downstream FoxE1
targets, we performed a genome-wide expression screening after knocking-down
FoxE1 and obtained new insights into FoxE1 transcriptional networks in thyroid
follicular cells. After validation, we confirmed Adamts9, Cdh1, Duox2 and S100a4 
as upregulated genes and Casp4, Creld2, Dusp5, Etv5, Hsp5a, Nr4a2 and Tm4sf1 as
downregulated genes when FoxE1 was silenced. In promoter regions of putative
FoxE1-regulated genes and also in the promoters of the classical thyroid genes
Nis, Pax8 and Titf1, we performed an in silico search of the FoxE1 binding motif 
that was in close proximity to the NF1/CTF binding sequence, as previously
described for other forkhead factors. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation we
detected specific in vivo FoxE1 binding to novel regulatory regions in two
relevant thyroid genes, Nis and Duox2. Moreover, we demonstrated simultaneous
binding of FoxE1 and NF1/CTF to the Nis upstream enhancer region, as well as a
clear functional activation of the Nis promoter by both transcription factors.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In search for potential downstream mediators of FoxE1
function in thyroid cells, we identified two novel direct FoxE1 target genes. To 
our knowledge, this is the first evidence regarding the implication of Nis and
Duox2 in executing the transcriptional program triggered by FoxE1. Furthermore,
this study points out the important role of FoxE1 in the regulation of a large
number of genes in thyroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3652843
PMID: 23675434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Am J Transl Res. 2013 Apr 19;5(3):254-68. Print 2013.

Emergence of ETS transcription factors as diagnostic tools and therapeutic
targets in prostate cancer.

Rahim S(1), Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Washington DC.

The discovery of chromosomal translocations in prostate cancer has greatly
enhanced our understanding of prostate cancer biology. Genomic rearrangements
involving the ETS family of transcription factors are estimated to be present in 
50-70% of prostate cancer cases. These rearrangements fuse the ETS factors with
promoters of genes that are androgen regulated. Thus, the expression of ETS
factors, such as ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5, is mediated by androgen. In-vitro and 
in-vivo studies suggest that overexpression of ETS proteins increase cell
proliferation and confer an invasive phenotype to prostate cancer cells.
Epidemiological studies demonstrate that ETS-fusion positive patients exhibit
tumors corresponding to a more advanced disease. The ability of ETS factors to
serve as markers for screening and diagnosing prostate cancer patients is being
investigated, and the results have been largely positive to date. Additionally,
ETS factors present an excellent opportunity as therapeutic targets and several
strategies have been devised to directly target ETS proteins or their binding
partners and downstream effectors.

PMCID: PMC3633969
PMID: 23634237  [PubMed]


65. Pediatr Obes. 2014 Aug;9(4):272-80. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00166.x. Epub
2013 Apr 29.

Genetic risk profiles for a childhood with severe overweight.

González JR(1), Estévez MN, Giralt PS, Cáceres A, Pérez LM, González-Carpio M,
Ballester F, Sunyer J, Rodríguez-López R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), Barcelona, Spain;
Institut Municipal d'Investigació Mèdica, Barcelona, Spain; CIBER Epidemiología y
Salud Pública, Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was the description of a valid genetic
risk score (GRS) to predict individuals with high susceptibility to childhood
overweight by their genetic profiles.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Case-control study including a group of children with
high-risk familial predisposition to morbid obesity. Birth cohort from general
population constituted the validation sample. For the discovery sample, 218
children with non-syndromic obesity and 190 control individuals were included.
The validation sample was 653 children from two birth cohorts belonging to the
INMA (Infancia y Medio Ambiente [Environment and Childhood]<U+2009>)project. 109 SNPs
located in the genes FTO, SEC16B, BDNF, ETV5, SH2B1, GNPDA2, LYPLAL1, MSRA,
TFAP2, KCTD15, MTCH2 and NEGR1, previously reported in association to body mass
index (BMI) were analysed. For the validation sample, association between
genome-wide data and BMI measurements between 3.5 and 5 years of age, were
evaluated.
RESULTS: The GRS includes six SNPs in the genes FTO, TFAP2B, SEC16B, ETV5 and
SH2B1. The score distribution differs among cases and controls (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-14)
) showing a significant linear association with obesity (odds ratio [OR] per
allele<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.69; confidence interval [CI] 95%<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.46-1.97; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.3<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-1) and
area under the receiver operating characteristic curve [AUC]<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.727; CI
95%<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.676-0.778). The results were validated by the INMA cohort (OR per
allele<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.23 CI 95%<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.03-1.48 and AUC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.601 CI 95%<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.522-0.680).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of our proposed genetic score provides useful information to
determine those children who are susceptible to obesity. To improve the
efficiency of clinical prevention and treatment of obesity, it is essential to
design individualized based protocols in advance knowledge of the molecular basis
of inherited susceptibility.

© 2013 The Authors. Pediatric Obesity © 2013 International Association for the
Study of Obesity.

PMID: 23629956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e62357. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062357. Print 2013.

Internalization of Met requires the co-receptor CD44v6 and its link to ERM
proteins.

Hasenauer S(1), Malinger D, Koschut D, Pace G, Matzke A, von Au A, Orian-Rousseau
V.

Author information: 
(1)Karlsruhe Institute of Toxicology, Institute for Toxicology and Genetics,
Karlsruhe, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(9). doi:10.1371/annotation/6e6576eb-77b0-4892-90d4-ab298c00a216.

Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (RTKs) are involved in many cellular processes and play
a major role in the control of cell fate. For these reasons, RTK activation is
maintained under tight control. Met is an essential RTK that induces
proliferation, differentiation, migration, survival and branching morphogenesis. 
Deregulation of Met by overexpression, amplification or lack of effective
degradation leads to cancer and metastasis. We have shown that Met relies on
CD44v6 for its activation and for signaling in several cancer cell lines and also
in primary cells. In this paper, we show that internalization of Met is dependent
on CD44v6 and the binding of Ezrin to the CD44v6 cytoplasmic domain. Both CD44v6 
and Met are co-internalized upon Hepatocyte Growth Factor induction suggesting
that Met-induced signaling from the endosomes relies on its collaboration with
CD44v6 and the link to the cytoskeleton provided by ERM proteins.

PMCID: PMC3633891
PMID: 23626807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nat Immunol. 2013 Jun;14(6):633-43. doi: 10.1038/ni.2587. Epub 2013 Apr 28.

Identification of transcriptional regulators in the mouse immune system.

Jojic V(1), Shay T, Sylvia K, Zuk O, Sun X, Kang J, Regev A, Koller D;
Immunological Genome Project Consortium, Best AJ, Knell J, Goldrath A, Joic V,
Koller D, Shay T, Regev A, Cohen N, Brennan P, Brenner M, Kim F, Rao TN, Wagers
A, Heng T, Ericson J, Rothamel K, Ortiz-Lopez A, Mathis D, Benoist C, Bezman NA, 
Sun JC, Min-Oo G, Kim CC, Lanier LL, Miller J, Brown B, Merad M, Gautier EL,
Jakubzick C, Randolph GJ, Monach P, Blair DA, Dustin ML, Shinton SA, Hardy RR,
Laidlaw D, Collins J, Gazit R, Rossi DJ, Malhotra N, Sylvia K, Kang J, Kreslavsky
T, Fletcher A, Elpek K, Bellemarte-Pelletier A, Malhotra D, Turley S.

Author information: 
(1)Computer Science Department, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Jun;14(6):529-31.

The differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells into cells of the immune system
has been studied extensively in mammals, but the transcriptional circuitry that
controls it is still only partially understood. Here, the Immunological Genome
Project gene-expression profiles across mouse immune lineages allowed us to
systematically analyze these circuits. To analyze this data set we developed
Ontogenet, an algorithm for reconstructing lineage-specific regulation from
gene-expression profiles across lineages. Using Ontogenet, we found
differentiation stage-specific regulators of mouse hematopoiesis and identified
many known hematopoietic regulators and 175 previously unknown candidate
regulators, as well as their target genes and the cell types in which they act.
Among the previously unknown regulators, we emphasize the role of ETV5 in the
differentiation of <U+03B3>d T cells. As the transcriptional programs of human and mouse
cells are highly conserved, it is likely that many lessons learned from the mouse
model apply to humans.

PMCID: PMC3690947
PMID: 23624555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. BJU Int. 2013 May;111(5):836-42. doi: 10.1111/bju.12119.

High-resolution ERG-expression profiling on GeneChip exon 1.0 ST arrays in
primary and castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Smit FP(1), Salagierski M, Jannink S, Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)NovioGendix BV, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether oestrogen-regulated gene (ERG) expression analysis
using GeneChip arrays can predict transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2)-ERG 
fusion. The expression level of the TMPRSS2-ERG gene was studied in various
histological grades of prostate cancer and castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CPRC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: GeneChip Affymetrix exon 1.0 ST arrays were used for
expression profiling of ERG, erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS) variant
gene 1 (ETV1), ETV4 and ETV5 genes in 67 prostate cancer tissue specimens.
Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis and in some cases DNA
sequencing was used to validate the presence and the expression levels of
TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions.
RESULTS: In our series of patients with prostate cancer over expression of the
ERG gene predicted the presence of TMPRSS2-ERG rearrangements in almost all
cases. ETS expression by itself outmatched the diagnostic performance of the ERG 
exons ratioing allowing equal detection of the less frequent ETS gene fusion
transcripts. The gene fusions were expressed at significantly lower levels in
CPRC but occurred more frequently than in primary prostate cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: ERG expression analysis using GeneChip arrays appears to be an
excellent diagnostic tool for identifying gene rearrangements. In coming years,
measuring expression of the ETS gene family by itself might become a clinically
relevant surrogate test to identify patients with fusion-positive prostate
cancer. The variation of gene fusion expression levels, particularly in CPRC,
needs to be taken into account when using quantitative molecular diagnosis of
prostate cancer.

© 2013 BJU International.

PMID: 23578236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Hum Genet. 2013 Jul;132(7):793-801. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1293-4. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

Obesity-related genetic variants, human pigmentation, and risk of melanoma.

Li X(1), Liang L, Zhang M, Song F, Nan H, Wang LE, Wei Q, Lee JE, Amos CI,
Qureshi AA, Han J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.

Previous biological studies showed evidence of a genetic link between obesity and
pigmentation in both animal models and humans. Our study investigated the
individual and joint associations between obesity-related single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and both human pigmentation and risk of melanoma. Eight
obesity-related SNPs in the FTO, MAP2K5, NEGR1, FLJ35779, ETV5, CADM2, and NUDT3 
genes were nominally significantly associated with hair color among 5,876
individuals of European ancestry. The genetic score combining 35 independent
obesity-risk loci was significantly associated with darker hair color
(beta-coefficient per ten alleles = 0.12, P value = 4 × 10(-5)). However, single 
SNPs or genetic scores showed non-significant association with tanning ability.
We further examined the SNPs at the FTO locus for their associations with
pigmentation and risk of melanoma. Among the 783 SNPs in the FTO gene with
imputation R (2) quality metric >0.8 using the 1,000 genome data set, ten and
three independent SNPs were significantly associated with hair color and tanning 
ability respectively. Moreover, five independent FTO SNPs showed nominally
significant association with risk of melanoma in 1,804 cases and 1,026 controls. 
But none of them was associated with obesity or in linkage disequilibrium with
obesity-related variants. FTO locus may confer variation in human pigmentation
and risk of melanoma, which may be independent of its effect on obesity.

PMCID: PMC3683389
PMID: 23539184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 May;41(9):4847-59. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt199. Epub 2013 Mar
26.

The Mediator complex subunit MED25 is targeted by the N-terminal transactivation 
domain of the PEA3 group members.

Verger A(1), Baert JL, Verreman K, Dewitte F, Ferreira E, Lens Z, de Launoit Y,
Villeret V, Monté D.

Author information: 
(1)IRI USR 3078 CNRS, Parc CNRS de la Haute Borne, 50 avenue de Halley, B.P.
70478, 59658 Villeneuve d'Ascq Cedex, France.

PEA3, ERM and ER81 belong to the PEA3 subfamily of Ets transcription factors and 
play important roles in a number of tissue-specific processes. Transcriptional
activation by PEA3 subfamily factors requires their characteristic amino-terminal
acidic transactivation domain (TAD). However, the cellular targets of this domain
remain largely unknown. Using ERM as a prototype, we show that the minimal
N-terminal TAD activates transcription by contacting the activator interacting
domain (ACID)/Prostate tumor overexpressed protein 1 (PTOV) domain of the
Mediator complex subunit MED25. We further show that depletion of MED25 disrupts 
the association of ERM with the Mediator in vitro. Small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of MED25 as well as the overexpression of MED25-ACID and MED25-VWA
domains efficiently inhibit the transcriptional activity of ERM. Moreover,
mutations of amino acid residues that prevent binding of MED25 to ERM strongly
reduce transactivation by ERM. Finally we show that siRNA depletion of MED25
diminishes PEA3-driven expression of MMP-1 and Mediator recruitment. In
conclusion, this study identifies the PEA3 group members as the first human
transcriptional factors that interact with the MED25 ACID/PTOV domain and
establishes MED25 as a crucial transducer of their transactivation potential.

PMCID: PMC3643604
PMID: 23531547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biochem. 2013 Apr;153(4):389-98. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvt005. Epub 2013 Jan 25.

The role of NADRIN, a Rho GTPase-activating protein, in the morphological
differentiation of astrocytes.

Kobayashi Y(1), Harada A, Furuta B, Asou H, Kato U, Umeda M.

Author information: 
(1)The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo Metropolitan
Organization for Medical Research, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

Reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton caused by inactivation of the Rho GTPase
RhoA is critical for the morphological differentiation of astrocytes into
process-bearing stellate cells. The molecular mechanisms underlying the RhoA
inactivation and, in particular, the factors that inactivate RhoA, remain to be
elucidated. We show here that the expression of a GTPase-activating protein (GAP)
for Rho GTPases, neuron-associated developmentally regulated protein (NADRIN)
also known as RICH and ARHGAP17, was significantly increased in stellate
astrocytes and induced expression of NADRIN accelerated the morphological
differentiation of cultured astrocytes into stellate cells. A GAP
activity-negative mutant or truncated forms of NADRIN failed to induce the
stellation. Immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that, in response to inductive 
signals such as dibutyryl cyclic AMP and epidermal growth factor, NADRIN formed a
complex with ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) protein by interacting with ERM-binding
phosphoprotein 50 via its carboxy-terminal PSD95/DlgA/ZO-1-binding motif. We also
showed that NADRIN formed a dimer via the interaction between the amino- and
carboxy-terminal domains, which was disrupted in response to the inductive
signals. These results suggest that the inductive signals cause the structural
change of NADRIN, which allows NADRIN to associate with the ERM protein complex, 
where it inactivates RhoA and leads to the morphological differentiation of
astrocytes.

PMID: 23355722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53897. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053897. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Modelling BMI trajectories in children for genetic association studies.

Warrington NM(1), Wu YY, Pennell CE, Marsh JA, Beilin LJ, Palmer LJ, Lye SJ,
Briollais L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Women's and Infants' Health, The University of Western Australia,
Perth, Western Australia, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The timing of associations between common genetic variants and
changes in growth patterns over childhood may provide insight into the
development of obesity in later life. To address this question, it is important
to define appropriate statistical models to allow for the detection of genetic
effects influencing longitudinal childhood growth.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Children from The Western Australian Pregnancy Cohort
(Raine; n=1,506) Study were genotyped at 17 genetic loci shown to be associated
with childhood obesity (FTO, MC4R, TMEM18, GNPDA2, KCTD15, NEGR1, BDNF, ETV5,
SEC16B, LYPLAL1, TFAP2B, MTCH2, BCDIN3D, NRXN3, SH2B1, MRSA) and an
obesity-risk-allele-score was calculated as the total number of 'risk alleles'
possessed by each individual. To determine the statistical method that fits these
data and has the ability to detect genetic differences in BMI growth profile,
four methods were investigated: linear mixed effects model, linear mixed effects 
model with skew-t random errors, semi-parametric linear mixed models and a
non-linear mixed effects model. Of the four methods, the semi-parametric linear
mixed model method was the most efficient for modelling childhood growth to
detect modest genetic effects in this cohort. Using this method, three of the 17 
loci were significantly associated with BMI intercept or trajectory in females
and four in males. Additionally, the obesity-risk-allele score was associated
with increased average BMI (female: ß=0.0049, P=0.0181; male: ß=0.0071, P=0.0001)
and rate of growth (female: ß=0.0012, P=0.0006; male: ß=0.0008, P=0.0068)
throughout childhood.
CONCLUSIONS: Using statistical models appropriate to detect genetic variants,
variations in adult obesity genes were associated with childhood growth. There
were also differences between males and females. This study provides evidence of 
genetic effects that may identify individuals early in life that are more likely 
to rapidly increase their BMI through childhood, which provides some insight into
the biology of childhood growth.

PMCID: PMC3547961
PMID: 23349760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Chem Neuroanat. 2013 Jan;47:106-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2012.12.007. Epub
2013 Jan 4.

Neurochemical profiling of dopaminergic neurons in the forebrain of a cichlid
fish, Astatotilapia burtoni.

O'Connell LA(1), Fontenot MR, Hofmann HA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78705, USA.

Across vertebrates, the mesolimbic reward system is a highly conserved neural
network that serves to evaluate the salience of environmental stimuli, with
dopamine as the neurotransmitter most relevant to its function. Although brain
regions in the dopaminergic reward system have been well characterized in
mammals, homologizing these brain areas with structures in teleosts has been
controversial, especially for the mesencephalo-diencephalic dopaminergic cell
populations. Here we examine the neurochemical profile of five dopaminergic cell 
groups (Vc, POA, PPr, TPp, pTn) in the model cichlid Astatotilapia burtoni to
better understand putative homology relationships between teleosts and mammals.
We characterized in the adult brain the expression patterns of three genes (etv5,
nr4a2, and pitx3) that either specify dopaminergic cell fate or maintain
dopaminergic cell populations. We then determined whether these genes are
expressed in dopaminergic cells. We find many striking similarities in these gene
expression profiles between dopaminergic cell populations in teleosts and their
putative mammalian homologs. Our results suggest that many of these dopaminergic 
cell groups are indeed evolutionarily ancient and conserved across vertebrates.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23295359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2013;25(8):1149-57. doi: 10.1071/RD12330.

Effects of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor, fibroblast growth factor 
2 and epidermal growth factor on proliferation and the expression of some genes
in buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) spermatogonial cells.

Kadam PH(1), Kala S, Agrawal H, Singh KP, Singh MK, Chauhan MS, Palta P, Singla
SK, Manik RS.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy
Research Institute, Karnal-132001, India.

The present study evaluated the effects of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 2 and epidermal growth factor (EGF)
on proliferation and the expression of some genes in spermatogonial cells.
Spermatogonial cells were isolated from prepubertal buffalo testes and enriched
by double enzyme treatment, filtration through 80- and 60-µm nylon mesh filters, 
differential plating on lectin-coated dishes and Percoll density gradient
centrifugation. Cells were then cultured on a buffalo Sertoli cell feeder layer
and formed colonies within 15-18 days. The colonies were found to predominantly
contain undifferentiated Type A spermatogonia because they bound Dolichos
biflorus agglutinin and did not express c-kit. The colonies expressed alkaline
phosphatase, NANOG, octamer-binding transcription factor (OCT)-4 and tumour
rejection antigen (TRA)-1-60. Cells were subcultured for 15 days, with or without
growth factor supplementation. After 15 days, colony area and the relative mRNA
abundance of PLZF were higher (P<0.05) following supplementation with 40 ng mL<U+207B>¹ 
GDNF + 10 ng mL<U+207B>¹ EGF + 10 ng mL<U+207B>¹ FGF2 than with the same concentrations of GDNF
alone or GDNF plus either EGF or FGF2. Expression of TAF4B was higher (P<0.05) in
the presence of FGF2, whereas the expression of THY1 was not affected by growth
factor supplementation. In the Sertoli cell feeder layer, EGF and FGF2 decreased 
(P<0.05), whereas GDNF increased (P<0.05), the relative mRNA abundance of ETV5
compared with control. In conclusion, an in vitro culture system that
incorporates various growth factors was developed for the short-term culture of
buffalo spermatogonia.

PMID: 23171731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Apr 1;22(7):1136-46. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0369. Epub 2013
Jan 4.

Transforming pluripotency: an exon-level study of malignancy-specific transcripts
in human embryonal carcinoma and embryonic stem cells.

Alagaratnam S(1), Harrison N, Bakken AC, Hoff AM, Jones M, Sveen A, Moore HD,
Andrews PW, Lothe RA, Skotheim RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

To circumvent difficulties of isolating pure populations of cancer stem cells
(CSCs) for the purpose of identifying malignancy-specific gene expression, we
have compared exon-resolution transcriptomic profiles of 5 embryonal carcinoma
(EC) cell lines, a histological subtype of germ cell tumor (GCT), to their
nonmalignant caricature, specifically 6 human embryonic stem (ES) cell lines.
Both cell types are readily accessible, and were purified for undifferentiated
cells only. We identified a set of 28 differentially expressed genes, many of
which had cancer and stemness roles. Overexpression of the recently discovered
pluripotency gene NR5A2 in malignant EC cells revealed an intriguing indication
of how WNT-mediated dysregulation of pluripotency is involved with malignancy.
Expression of these 28 genes was further explored within 2 publically available
data sets of primary EC tumors and normal testis. At the exon-level, alternative 
splicing events were detected in ZNF195, DNMT3B, and PMF1, and alternative
promoters were detected for ASH2L and ETV5. These events were validated by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction-based methods in EC and ES lines,
where the alternative splicing event in the de novo DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B 
may have functional consequences. In conclusion, we have identified
malignancy-specific gene expression differences within a rigorous pluripotent
stem cell context. These findings are of particular interest for both GCT and ES 
cell biology, and, in general, to the concept of CSCs.

PMID: 23137282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48115. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048115. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

Fasudil protects the heart against ischemia-reperfusion injury by attenuating
endoplasmic reticulum stress and modulating SERCA activity: the differential role
for PI3K/Akt and JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathways.

Li Y(1), Zhu W, Tao J, Xin P, Liu M, Li J, Wei M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Shanghai Sixth Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, State Key Discipline Division, Shanghai, People's of Republic
of China.

Disordered calcium homeostasis can lead to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Our
previous data showed that time course activation of ER stress contributes to
time-related increase in ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury. However, it has not
been tested whether PI3K/Akt and JAK2/STAT3 pathways play differential roles in
reducing ER stress to protect the heart. In the present study, using fasudil
which is a specific inhibitor of ROCK, we aimed to investigate whether improved
SERCA expression and activity accounts for reduced ER stress by ROCK inhibition, 
specifically whether PI3K/Akt and JAK2/STAT3 pathways are differentially involved
in modulating SERCA activity to reduce ER stress and hence I/R injury. The
results showed that during the reperfusion period following 45 min of coronary
ligation the infarct size (IS) increased from 3 h of reperfusion (45.4±5.57%) to 
24 h reperfusion (64.21±5.43, P<0.05), which was associated with ER stress
dependent apoptosis signaling activation including CHOP, Caspase-12 and JNK
(P<0.05, respectively).The dynamic ER stress activation was also related to
impaired SERCA activity at 24 h of reperfusion. Administration of fasudil at 10
mg/Kg significantly attenuated ROCK activation during reperfusion and resulted in
an improved SERCA activity which was closely associated with decreases in
temporal activation of ER stress and IS changes. Interestingly, while both
PI3K/Akt and JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathways played equal role in the protection
offered by ROCK inhibition at 3 h of reperfusion, the rescued SERCA expression
and activity at 24 h of reperfusion by fasudil was mainly due to JAK2/STAT3
activation, in which PI3K/Akt signaling shared much less roles.

PMCID: PMC3485283
PMID: 23118936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. G3 (Bethesda). 2012 Oct;2(10):1243-56. doi: 10.1534/g3.112.004002. Epub 2012 Oct 
1.

Overlapping ETS and CRE Motifs ((G/C)CGGAAGTGACGTCA) preferentially bound by
GABPa and CREB proteins.

Chatterjee R(1), Zhao J, He X, Shlyakhtenko A, Mann I, Waterfall JJ, Meltzer P,
Sathyanarayana BK, FitzGerald PC, Vinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Previously, we identified 8-bps long DNA sequences (8-mers) that localize in
human proximal promoters and grouped them into known transcription factor binding
sites (TFBS). We now examine split 8-mers consisting of two 4-mers separated by
1-bp to 30-bps (X(4)-N(1-30)-X(4)) to identify pairs of TFBS that localize in
proximal promoters at a precise distance. These include two overlapping TFBS: the
ETS<U+21D4>ETS motif ((C/G)CCGGAAGCGGAA) and the ETS<U+21D4>CRE motif ((C/G)CGGAAGTGACGTCAC).
The nucleotides in bold are part of both TFBS. Molecular modeling shows that the 
ETS<U+21D4>CRE motif can be bound simultaneously by both the ETS and the B-ZIP domains
without protein-protein clashes. The electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) 
shows that the ETS protein GABPa and the B-ZIP protein CREB preferentially bind
to the ETS<U+21D4>CRE motif only when the two TFBS overlap precisely. In contrast, the
ETS domain of ETV5 and CREB interfere with each other for binding the ETS<U+21D4>CRE.
The 11-mer (CGGAAGTGACG), the conserved part of the ETS<U+21D4>CRE motif, occurs 226
times in the human genome and 83% are in known regulatory regions. In vivo GABPa 
and CREB ChIP-seq peaks identified the ETS<U+21D4>CRE as the most enriched motif
occurring in promoters of genes involved in mRNA processing, cellular catabolic
processes, and stress response, suggesting that a specific class of genes is
regulated by this composite motif.

PMCID: PMC3464117
PMID: 23050235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Neuron. 2012 Sep 20;75(6):1035-50. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.08.031.

MEK Is a Key Regulator of Gliogenesis in the Developing Brain.

Li X(1), Newbern JM, Wu Y, Morgan-Smith M, Zhong J, Charron J, Snider WD.

Author information: 
(1)UNC Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2012 Sep 20;75(6):940-2.

We have defined functions of MEK in regulating gliogenesis in developing cerebral
cortex using loss- and gain-of-function mouse genetics. Radial progenitors
deficient in both Mek1 and Mek2 fail to transition to the gliogenic mode in late 
embryogenesis, and astrocyte and oligodendroglial precursors fail to appear. In
exploring mechanisms, we found that the key cytokine-regulated gliogenic pathway 
is attenuated. Further, the Ets transcription family member Etv5/Erm is strongly 
regulated by MEK and Erm overexpression can rescue the gliogenic potential of
Mek-deleted progenitors. Remarkably, Mek1/2-deleted mice surviving postnatally
exhibit cortices almost devoid of astrocytes and oligodendroglia and exhibit
neurodegeneration. Conversely, expression of constitutively active MEK1 leads to 
a major increase in numbers of astrocytes in the adult brain. We conclude that
MEK is essential for acquisition of gliogenic competence by radial progenitors
and that levels of MEK activity regulate gliogenesis in the developing cortex.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3483643
PMID: 22998872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;927:299-307.

Assessment of spermatogenesis through staging of seminiferous tubules.

Meistrich ML(1), Hess RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. meistrich@mdanderson.org

Male germ cells in all mammals are arranged within the seminiferous epithelium of
the testicular tubules in a set of well-defined cell associations called stages. 
The cellular associations found in these stages and characteristics of the cells 
used to identify the stages have been well described. Here we present a binary
decision key roadmap for identifying stages and present several examples of how
staging tubules can be used to better assess the developmental profile of gene
expression during spermatogenesis and defects in spermatogenesis arising in
pathological conditions resulting from genetic mutations in mice. In particular, 
when one or more cells of a cellular association cannot be clearly identified or 
are missing, the cell types that should be present can be precisely identified by
knowledge of the approximate or exact stage of the tubule cross section.

PMID: 22992924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Orthop Res. 2013 Mar;31(3):493-501. doi: 10.1002/jor.22227. Epub 2012 Sep 11.

ETV5 as a regulator of matrix metalloproteinase 2 in human chondrosarcoma.

Power PF(1), Mak IW, Singh S, Popovic S, Gladdy R, Ghert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science Graduate Studies, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canada.

Chondrosarcoma is a unique type of bone cancer in that it does not respond to
chemotherapy or radiation therapy, and therefore many affected patients die from 
metastatic disease. Metastasis has been correlated with the upregulation of the
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family of proteases, which can degrade
extracellular components. ETV5 is a transcription factor which has shown to be
overexpressed in various types of invasive tumors. We hypothesized that ETV5
regulates MMP2 in human chondrosarcoma with the protease acting as a downstream
effector. Gene knock-down of ETV5 in human chondrosarcoma cells reduces MMP2 mRNA
expression as well as decreased protein production and significantly decreased
MMP2 activity. With plasmid transfected ETV5 upregulation, MMP2 expression is
similarly upregulated at the gene expression and protein levels. Data from our
bone resorption studies revealed that when a matrix metalloproteinase-2 inhibitor
is added to the growth media of chondrosarcoma cells, collagen released from bone
chips incubated with the cells decreased by 27%. This data suggests that ETV5 has
a significant role in regulating MMP2 expression and therefore matrix resorption 
in human chondrosarcoma, and thus may be a targetable upstream effector of the
metastatic cascade in this cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 22968857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Sep 14;53(10):6219-31. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-8853.

Altered expression of the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation enzymes in uveal melanoma and
regulation of PARG gene expression by the transcription factor ERM.

Molloy-Simard V(1), St-Laurent JF, Vigneault F, Gaudreault M, Dargis N, Guérin
MC, Leclerc S, Morcos M, Black D, Molgat Y, Bergeron D, de Launoit Y, Boudreau F,
Desnoyers S, Guérin S.

Author information: 
(1)LOEX/CUO-Recherche, Hôpital du Saint-Sacrement, Centre de recherche du CHA,
Québec, Canada.

PURPOSE: Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is a reversible post-translational modification
that requires the contribution of the enzymes poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1
(PARP-1) and poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG). Our study explores
expression and activity of PARP-1 and PARG in uveal melanoma cell lines with
varying tumorigenic properties.
METHODS: Gene profiling on microarrays was conducted using RNA prepared from the 
uveal melanoma cell lines T97, T98, T108, and T115. The activity of PARP-1 and
PARG was monitored by enzymatic assays, whereas their expression was measured by 
Western blot and PCR. The PARG promoter was analyzed using promoter deletions and
site-specific mutagenesis in transfection analyses. The transcription factors
binding the PARG promoter were studied by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA) analyses. Suppression of PARP-1 and PARG expression was performed in T97
and T115 cells by RNAi, and their tumorigenic properties monitored by injections 
into athymic mice.
RESULTS: Expression of PARP-1 was found to vary considerably between uveal
melanoma cell lines with distinctive tumorigenic properties in vivo. Sp1 and the 
ETS protein ERM were shown to bind to the PARG gene promoter to ensure basal
transcription in uveal melanoma. Importantly, suppression of PARG gene expression
in T97 and T115 cells increased their capacity to form tumors in athymic mice,
whereas suppression of PARP-1 significantly reduced or almost entirely abolished 
tumor formation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that while overexpression of PARP-1 may confer a
proliferative advantage to aggressive uveal melanoma tumors, PARG may, on the
other hand, support a tumor suppressor function in vivo.

PMID: 22915039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Clin Transl Oncol. 2012 Oct;14(10):715-20. doi: 10.1007/s12094-012-0866-3. Epub
2012 Aug 22.

The EMT signaling pathways in endometrial carcinoma.

Colas E(1), Pedrola N, Devis L, Ertekin T, Campoy I, Martínez E, Llauradó M,
Rigau M, Olivan M, Garcia M, Cabrera S, Gil-Moreno A, Xercavins J, Castellvi J,
Garcia A, Ramon y Cajal S, Moreno-Bueno G, Dolcet X, Alameda F, Palacios J, Prat 
J, Doll A, Matias-Guiu X, Abal M, Reventos J.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Unit, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain.

Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecologic malignancy of the female
genital tract and the fourth most common neoplasia in women. In EC, myometrial
invasion is considered one of the most important prognostic factors. For this
process to occur, epithelial tumor cells need to undergo an epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT), either transiently or stably, and to differing
degrees. This process has been extensively described in other types of cancer but
has been poorly studied in EC. In this review, several features of EMT and the
main molecular pathways responsible for triggering this process are investigated 
in relation to EC. The most common hallmarks of EMT have been found in EC, either
at the level of E-cadherin loss or at the induction of its repressors, as well as
other molecular alterations consistent with the mesenchymal phenotype-like L1CAM 
and BMI-1 up-regulation. Pathways including progesterone receptor, TGFß, ETV5 and
microRNAs are deeply related to the EMT process in EC.

PMID: 22911547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Fertil Steril. 2012 Oct;98(4):821. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.06.047. Epub
2012 Jul 19.

ETV5 mutations: revisiting Sertoli cell only syndrome.

Yatsenko AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of OBGYN and Reproductive Science, Magee-Womens Research Institute,
School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment on
    Fertil Steril. 2012 Oct;98(4):827-35.e1-3.

PMCID: PMC4323086
PMID: 22818288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Clin Exp Reprod Med. 2012 Jun;39(2):41-5. doi: 10.5653/cerm.2012.39.2.41. Epub
2012 Jun 30.

Etv5, a transcription factor with versatile functions in male reproduction.

Eo J(1), Song H, Lim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul,
Korea.

Transcription factors govern diverse aspects of cell growth and differentiation
as major switches of gene expression. Etv5, a member of the E26
transformation-specific family of transcription factors, has many stories to
share when it comes to reproduction. Etv5 deficient mice show complex infertility
phenotypes both in males and females. In males, the infertility phenotype
exhibited by Etv5 deficiency is sexually dimorphic, and it involves both somatic 
cells and germ cells. In Etv5(-/-) female mice, the problem is more complicated
by hormonal involvement. This review synthesizes old and new information on this 
versatile transcription factor-from the inadvertent discovery of its role in the 
testes to its newly discovered role in maintaining spermatogonial stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3398115
PMID: 22816068  [PubMed]


85. Fertil Steril. 2012 Oct;98(4):827-35.e1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.06.013.
Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Genetic variants in the ETV5 gene in fertile and infertile men with
nonobstructive azoospermia associated with Sertoli cell-only syndrome.

O'Bryan MK(1), Grealy A, Stahl PJ, Schlegel PN, McLachlan RI, Jamsai D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Nursing, and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Comment in
    Fertil Steril. 2012 Oct;98(4):821.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between genetic variants in the ETV5 gene
with nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA) associated with Sertoli cell-only (SCO)
syndrome.
DESIGN: Genetic association study.
SETTING: University.
PATIENT(S): Australian men (65 SCO, 53 NOA, and 242 fertile men) and American men
(86 SCO and 54 fertile men).
INTERVENTION(S): Paraffin-embedded human testicular tissue was sectioned and
processed for immunofluorescence. Direct DNA sequencing and polymerase chain
reaction-based SNP detection were performed to define genetic variants in the
ETV5 gene.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The localization of ETV5 in the human testis and the
presence of ETV5 genetic variants in fertile and infertile men.
RESULT(S): ETV5 is localized to the cytoplasm and nucleus of Sertoli and germ
cells in adult human testes. We identified six previously reported and six new
genetic variants in the ETV5 gene. Of these, the allele frequency of the
homozygous +48845 G>T (TT allele) variant was significantly higher in the SCO and
NOA Australian men compared with fertile men.
CONCLUSION(S): The homozygous +48845 G>T (TT allele) variant confers a higher
risk for male infertility associated with NOA and SCO in Australian men.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012 Dec;20(12):2420-5. doi: 10.1038/oby.2012.128. Epub 
2012 May 7.

Nutritional state affects the expression of the obesity-associated genes Etv5,
Faim2, Fto, and Negr1.

Boender AJ(1), van Rozen AJ, Adan RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of
Neuroscience, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
a.j.boender@umcutrecht.nl

Obesity is a risk factor for type II diabetes, atherosclerosis, and some forms of
cancer. Variation in common measures of obesity (e.g., BMI, waist/hip ratio) is
largely explained by heritability. The advent of genome-wide association studies 
(GWAS) has made it possible to identify several genetic variants that associate
with measures of obesity, but how exactly these genetic variants contribute to
overweight has remained largely unresolved. One first hint is given by the fact
that many of the associated variants reside in or near genes that act in the
central nervous system, which implicates neuronal signaling in the etiology of
obesity. Although the brain controls both energy intake and expenditure, it has
more capacity to regulate energy intake rather than energy expenditure. In
environments where food is abundant, this renders the body prone to weight
increases. To gain more insight into the neurobiological mechanisms involved, we 
set out to investigate the effect of dietary exposure on the expression levels of
obesity-associated genes in the ventro-medial hypothalamus (VMH)/arcuate nucleus 
(ARC) and the substantia nigra (SN)/ventral tegmental area (VTA), two brain
regions that are implicated in feeding behavior. We show that the expression of
Etv5, Faim2, Fto, Negr1 but not Sh2b1 is affected by nutritional state in these
two areas, thereby providing insight into the relationship between nutritional
state and expression levels of obesity-associated genes in two brain areas
relevant to feeding.

PMID: 22627920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Nov;69(22):3819-34. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1022-5. Epub 
2012 May 23.

What model organisms and interactomics can reveal about the genetics of human
obesity.

Williams MJ(1), Almén MS, Fredriksson R, Schiöth HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Functional Pharmacology, Biomedical Center,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. michael.williams@neuro.uu.se

Genome-wide association studies have identified a number of genes associated with
human body weight. While some of these genes are large fields within obesity
research, such as MC4R, POMC, FTO and BDNF, the majority do not have a clearly
defined functional role explaining why they may affect body weight. Here, we
searched biological databases and discovered 33 additional genes associated with 
human obesity (CADM2, GIPR, GPCR5B, LRP1B, NEGR1, NRXN3, SH2B1, FANCL, GNPDA2,
HMGCR, MAP2K5, NUDT3, PRKD1, QPCTL, TNNI3K, MTCH2, DNAJC27, SLC39A8, MTIF3,
RPL27A, SEC16B, ETV5, HMGA1, TFAP2B, TUB, ZNF608, FAIM2, KCTD15, LINGO2, POC5,
PTBP2, TMEM18, TMEM160). We find that the majority have orthologues in distant
species, such as D. melanogaster and C. elegans, suggesting that they are
important for the biology of most bilateral species. Intriguingly, signalling
cascade genes and transcription factors are enriched among these obesity genes,
and several of the genes show properties that could be useful for potential drug 
discovery. In this review, we demonstrate how information from several distant
model species, interactomics and signalling pathway analysis represents an
important way to better understand the functional diversity of the surprisingly
high number of molecules that seem to be important for human obesity.

PMID: 22618246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Jul;10(7):914-24. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0449. Epub
2012 May 15.

Analysis of gene expression regulated by the ETV5 transcription factor in OV90
ovarian cancer cells identifies FOXM1 overexpression in ovarian cancer.

Llauradó M(1), Majem B, Castellví J, Cabrera S, Gil-Moreno A, Reventós J, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit in Biomedicine and Translational and Pediatrics Oncology,
Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy and the fifth
leading cause of cancer death in women in the Western world. ETS transcription
factors have been implicated in the regulation of gene expression during a
variety of biologic processes including cell growth and differentiation. We
recently examined the role of the ETS transcription factor ETV5 in epithelial
ovarian cancer and described ETV5 as being upregulated in ovarian tumor samples
as compared with ovarian tissue controls. In ovarian cancer cells, we showed that
ETV5 regulated the expression of cell adhesion molecules, enhancing ovarian
cancer cell survival in anchorage-independent conditions and suggesting that it
plays a role in ovarian cancer cell dissemination and metastasis into the
peritoneal cavity. To understand the role of ETV5 transcription factor during
ovarian cancer cell dissemination, we analyzed by gene expression microarray
technology those genes whose expression was altered in an ovarian cancer cell
line with a stable downregulation of ETV5. The analysis of the genes and
signaling pathways under the control of ETV5 in OV90 cells has unraveled new
signaling pathways that interact with ETV5, among them the cell-cycle progression
and the TGFß signaling pathway. In addition, we found that the downregulation of 
ETV5 reduced the expression of the oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1.
Consistently, FOXM1 was overexpressed in ovarian tumor samples, and its
transcriptional levels increased with ETV5 transcription in ovarian tumor
samples. Moreover, FOXM1 expression levels increased with tumor grade, suggesting
a role in the progression of ovarian cancer.

PMID: 22589409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Hum Pathol. 2012 Nov;43(11):1910-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.01.018. Epub 2012
May 7.

Rearrangement of the ETS genes ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 is a clonal event
during prostate cancer progression.

Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Braun M, Nikolov P, Boehm D, Scheble V, Menon R, Fend F,
Kristiansen G, Perner S, Wernert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

ETS gene rearrangements are frequently found in prostate cancer. Several studies 
have assessed the rearrangement status of the most commonly found ETS rearranged 
gene ERG, and the less frequent genes, ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 in primary 
prostate cancer. However, frequency in metastatic disease is not well
investigated. Recently, we have assessed the ERG rearrangement status in both
primary and corresponding lymph node metastases and observed that ERG
rearrangement in primary prostate cancer transfers into lymph node metastases,
suggesting it to be a clonal expansion event during prostate cancer progression. 
As a continuation, we investigated in this study whether this observation is
valid for the less frequent ETS rearranged genes. Using dual-color break-apart
fluorescent in situ hybridization assays, we evaluated the status of all less
frequent ETS gene rearrangements for the first time on tissue microarrays
constructed from a large cohort of 86 patients with prostate cancer and composed 
of primary and corresponding lymph node metastases, as well as in a second cohort
composed of 43 distant metastases. ETV-1, ETV-4, ETV-5, and ELK-4 rearrangements 
were found in 8 (10%) of 81, 5 (6%) of 85, 1 (1%) of 85, and 2 (2%) of 86 of
primary prostate cancer, respectively, and in 6 (8%) of 73, 4 (6%) of 72, 1 (1%) 
of 75, and 1 (1%) of 78 of corresponding lymph node metastases, respectively.
ETV-1 and ETV-5 rearrangements were not found in the distant metastases cases,
whereas ETV-4 and ELK-4 rearrangements were found in 1 (4%) of 25 and 1 (4%) of
24, respectively. Our findings suggest that rearrangement of the less frequent
ETS genes is a clonal event during prostate cancer progression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22569213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2012 Jul 13;11:48. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-11-48.

Expression of fourteen novel obesity-related genes in Zucker diabetic fatty rats.

Schmid PM(1), Heid I, Buechler C, Steege A, Resch M, Birner C, Endemann DH,
Riegger GA, Luchner A.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin II, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany. peterm.schmid@ukr.de

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are useful to reveal an
association between single nucleotide polymorphisms and different measures of
obesity. A multitude of new loci has recently been reported, but the exact
function of most of the according genes is not known. The aim of our study was to
start elucidating the function of some of these genes.
METHODS: We performed an expression analysis of fourteen genes, namely BDNF,
ETV5, FAIM2, FTO, GNPDA2, KCTD15, LYPLAL1, MCR4, MTCH2, NEGR1, NRXN3, TMEM18,
SEC16B and TFAP2B, via real-time RT-PCR in adipose tissue of the kidney capsule, 
the mesenterium and subcutaneum as well as the hypothalamus of obese Zucker
diabetic fatty (ZDF) and Zucker lean (ZL) rats at an age of 22 weeks.
RESULTS: All of our target genes except for SEC16B showed the highest expression 
in the hypothalamus. This suggests a critical role of these obesity-related genes
in the central regulation of energy balance. Interestingly, the expression
pattern in the hypothalamus showed no differences between obese ZDF and lean ZL
rats. However, LYPLAL1, TFAP2B, SEC16B and FAIM2 were significantly lower
expressed in the kidney fat of ZDF than ZL rats. NEGR1 was even lower expressed
in subcutaneous and mesenterial fat, while MTCH2 was higher expressed in the
subcutaneous and mesenterial fat of ZDF rats.
CONCLUSION: The expression pattern of the investigated obesity genes implies for 
most of them a role in the central regulation of energy balance, but for some
also a role in the adipose tissue itself. For the development of the ZDF
phenotype peripheral rather than central mechanisms of the investigated genes
seem to be relevant.

PMCID: PMC3398851
PMID: 22553958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35487. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035487. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Overcoming multidrug resistance via photodestruction of ABCG2-rich extracellular 
vesicles sequestering photosensitive chemotherapeutics.

Goler-Baron V(1), Assaraf YG.

Author information: 
(1)The Fred Wyszkowski Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Biology,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

Multidrug resistance (MDR) remains a dominant impediment to curative cancer
chemotherapy. Efflux transporters of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily
including ABCG2, ABCB1 and ABCC1 mediate MDR to multiple structurally and
functionally distinct antitumor agents. Recently we identified a novel mechanism 
of MDR in which ABCG2-rich extracellular vesicles (EVs) form in between attached 
neighbor breast cancer cells and highly concentrate various chemotherapeutics in 
an ABCG2-dependent manner, thereby sequestering them away from their
intracellular targets. Hence, development of novel strategies to overcome MDR
modalities is a major goal of cancer research. Towards this end, we here
developed a novel approach to selectively target and kill MDR cancer cells. We
show that illumination of EVs that accumulated photosensitive cytotoxic drugs
including imidazoacridinones (IAs) and topotecan resulted in intravesicular
formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and severe damage to the EVs membrane 
that is shared by EVs-forming cells, thereby leading to tumor cell lysis and the 
overcoming of MDR. Furthermore, consistent with the weak base nature of IAs, MDR 
cells that are devoid of EVs but contained an increased number of lysosomes,
highly accumulated IAs in lysosomes and upon photosensitization were efficiently 
killed via ROS-dependent lysosomal rupture. Combining targeted lysis of
IAs-loaded EVs and lysosomes elicited a synergistic cytotoxic effect resulting in
MDR reversal. In contrast, topotecan, a bona fide transport substrate of ABCG2,
accumulated exclusively in EVs of MDR cells but was neither detected in lysosomes
of normal breast epithelial cells nor in non-MDR breast cancer cells. This
exclusive accumulation in EVs enhanced the selectivity of the cytotoxic effect
exerted by photodynamic therapy to MDR cells without harming normal cells.
Moreover, lysosomal alkalinization with bafilomycin A1 abrogated lysosomal
accumulation of IAs, consequently preventing lysosomal photodestruction of normal
breast epithelial cells. Thus, MDR modalities including ABCG2-dependent drug
sequestration within EVs can be rationally converted to a pharmacologically
lethal Trojan horse to selectively eradicate MDR cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3329466
PMID: 22530032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Development. 2012 May;139(10):1734-43. doi: 10.1242/dev.076539. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

FGF2 mediates mouse spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal via upregulation of
Etv5 and Bcl6b through MAP2K1 activation.

Ishii K(1), Kanatsu-Shinohara M, Toyokuni S, Shinohara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
(GDNF) are required to recapitulate spermatogonial stem cell (SSC) self-renewal
in vitro. Although studies have revealed the role of the GDNF signaling pathway
in SSCs, little is known about how FGF2 is involved. In the present study, we
assessed the role of the FGF2 signaling pathway using a mouse germline stem (GS) 
cell culture system that allows in vitro expansion of SSCs. Adding GDNF or FGF2
induced phosphorylation of MAPK1/3, and adding the MAP2K1 inhibitor PD0325091
reduced GS cell proliferation and MAPK1/3 phosphorylation. Moreover, GS cells
transfected with an activated form of Map2k1 not only upregulated Etv5 and Bcl6b 
gene expression, but also proliferated in an FGF2-independent manner, suggesting 
that they act downstream of MAP2K1 signaling to drive SSC self-renewal. Although 
GS cells transfected with Map2k1, Etv5 or Bcl6b showed normal spermatogonial
markers, transplanting GS cells expressing Bcl6b into infertile mouse testes
resulted in the formation of a germ cell tumor, suggesting that excessive
self-renewal signals causes tumorigenic conversion. These results show that FGF2 
depends on MAP2K1 signaling to drive SSC self-renewal via upregulation of the
Etv5 and Bcl6b genes.

PMID: 22491947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2012 Mar 27;66:158-64. doi:
10.5604/17322693.987628.

[The role of the ERM protein family in maintaining cellular polarity, adhesion
and regulation of cell motility].

[Article in Polish]

Halon A(1), Donizy P.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Zaklad Patomorfologii, Akademia Medyczna, ul. Marcinkowskiego 1,
50-368 Wroclaw. ahalon2@gmail.com

Ezrin, radixin and moesin, forming the ERM protein family, act as molecular
crosslinkers between actin filaments and proteins anchored in the cell membrane. 
By participating in a complex intracellular network of signal transduction
pathways, ERM proteins play a key role in the regulation of adhesion and polarity
of normal cells through interactions with membrane molecules, e.g. E-cadherin.
Dynamic cytoskeletal transformations, in which the ERM and Rho GTPases are
involved, lead to the formation of membrane-cytoplasmic structures, such as
filopodia and lamellipodia, which are responsible for cellular motility. The
interactions of ERM proteins with active Akt kinase cause the acquisition of
antiapoptotic cellular features by downregulation of the proapoptotic protein
Bad. ERM protein activity is regulated by phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
reactions and linking phosphatidylinositols. The model of activation based on the
molecular conformation changes by breaking the intramolecular bonds and exposing 
actin binding sites is essential for the proper functioning of the ERM proteins. 
Additionally, the connection types between the ERM and membrane proteins (direct 
or indirect by EBP50 and E3KARP) play an important role in transduction of
signals from the extracellular matrix. Due to the wide range of ezrin, radixin
and moesin cytophysiological features, detailed exploration of the ERM
biochemistry will provide a series of answers to questions about ambiguous
functions in many intracellular signal transduction pathways.

PMID: 22470191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012 May;95(5):1150-6. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.111.027870. Epub 2012
Mar 28.

Adult obesity susceptibility variants are associated with greater childhood
weight gain and a faster tempo of growth: the 1946 British Birth Cohort Study.

Elks CE(1), Loos RJ, Hardy R, Wills AK, Wong A, Wareham NJ, Kuh D, Ong KK.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Longitudinal growth associations with genetic variants identified for
adult BMI may provide insights into the timing of obesity susceptibility.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to explore associations of known BMI loci with
measures of body size from birth to adulthood.
DESIGN: A total of 2537 individuals from a longitudinal British birth cohort were
genotyped for 11 genetic variants robustly associated with adult BMI (in/near
FTO, MC4R, TMEM18, GNPDA2, KCTD15, NEGR1, BDNF, ETV5, SEC16B, SH2B1, and MTCH2). 
We derived an obesity-risk-allele score, comprising the sum of BMI-increasing
alleles in each individual, and examined this for an association with birth
weight and repeated measures of weight, height, and BMI SD scores (SDS) at 11
time points between ages 2 and 53 y.
RESULTS: The obesity-risk-allele score showed borderline significant association 
with birth weight (0.019 SDS/allele; P = 0.05) and was more clearly associated
with higher weight and BMI at all time points between ages 2 and 53 y; the
strongest associations with weight occurred at ages 11 and 20 y (both 0.056
SDS/allele). In longitudinal analyses, the score was positively associated with
weight gain only between birth and 11 y (0.003 SDS/allele per year; 95% CI:
0.001, 0.004; P = 0.001). The risk-allele score was associated with taller height
at 7 y (0.031 SDS/allele; P = 0.002) and greater height gains between 2 and 7 y
(0.007 SDS/allele per year; P < 0.001), but not with adult height (P = 0.5).
CONCLUSIONS: The combined effect of adult obesity susceptibility variants on
weight gain was confined to childhood. These variants conferred a faster tempo of
height growth that was evident before the pubertal years.

PMCID: PMC3325838
PMID: 22456663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochimie. 2012 Oct;94(10):2157-63. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.03.004. Epub 2012 
Mar 15.

Genetics of adiponectin.

Breitfeld J(1), Stumvoll M, Kovacs P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Leipzig, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Anti-inflammatory, anti-atherogenic and anti-diabetic properties of adiponectin
make this adipokine an attractive target in the metabolism research. Given its
biological role, genetic variation in adiponectin affecting its function might
consequently play a role in the pathophysiology of various metabolic disorders.
In this light, genetic aspects of adiponectin including its gene structure,
heritability of serum concentrations and the role of genetic variation have been 
addressed in multiple genetic studies. Here, we provide a brief summary of
adiponectin genetics with focus on gene structure and genetic variation
controlling circulating adiponectin levels. We summarize the main findings from
genome-wide linkage and association studies that have revealed the major genetic 
determinants of serum adiponectin. Beside genetic variants in the adiponectin
gene, several other genes/loci (ARL15, CDH13, KNG1, FER, ETV5) contributing to
the variability in circulating adiponectin have been identified. The majority of 
these variants are significantly associated with metabolic phenotypes relevant to
metabolic diseases (e.g. obesity or type 2 diabetes (T2D)). Considering the
protective properties of adiponectin in diseases such as T2D, comprehensive
analyses of genetic variants including rare as well as frequent polymorphisms
might provide insights on the specific role of adiponectin in the pathophysiology
of metabolic diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22449616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Aug;1826(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2012.02.002.
Epub 2012 Mar 8.

ETV1, 4 and 5: an oncogenic subfamily of ETS transcription factors.

Oh S(1), Shin S, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

The homologous ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 proteins form the PEA3 subfamily of ETS
transcription factors. In Ewing tumors, chromosomal translocations affecting ETV1
or ETV4 are an underlying cause of carcinogenesis. Likewise, chromosomal
rearrangements of the ETV1, ETV4 or ETV5 gene occur in prostate tumors and are
thought to be one of the major driving forces in the genesis of prostate cancer. 
In addition, these three ETS proteins are implicated in melanomas, breast and
other types of cancer. Complex posttranslational modifications govern the
activity of PEA3 factors, which can promote cell proliferation, motility and
invasion. Here, we review evidence for a role of ETV1, 4 and 5 as oncoproteins
and describe modes of their action. Modulation of their activation or interaction
with cofactors as well as inhibiting crucial target gene products may ultimately 
be exploited to treat various cancers that are dependent on the PEA3 group of ETS
transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3362686
PMID: 22425584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Dev Cell. 2012 Feb 14;22(2):459-67. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.12.010.

Opposing functions of the ETS factor family define Shh spatial expression in limb
buds and underlie polydactyly.

Lettice LA(1), Williamson I, Wiltshire JH, Peluso S, Devenney PS, Hill AE, Essafi
A, Hagman J, Mort R, Grimes G, DeAngelis CL, Hill RE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU,
UK.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression during limb development is crucial for specifying
the identity and number of digits. The spatial pattern of Shh expression is
restricted to a region called the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), and this
expression is controlled from a long distance by the cis-regulator ZRS. Here,
members of two groups of ETS transcription factors are shown to act directly at
the ZRS mediating a differential effect on Shh, defining its spatial expression
pattern. Occupancy at multiple GABPa/ETS1 sites regulates the position of the ZPA
boundary, whereas ETV4/ETV5 binding restricts expression outside the ZPA. The ETS
gene family is therefore attributed with specifying the boundaries of the
classical ZPA. Two point mutations within the ZRS change the profile of ETS
binding and activate Shh expression at an ectopic site in the limb bud. These
molecular changes define a pathogenetic mechanism that leads to preaxial
polydactyly (PPD).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3314984
PMID: 22340503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken). 2012 Jul;69(7):496-505. doi: 10.1002/cm.21016. Epub 2012 
Feb 24.

Repulsive axon guidance cues ephrin-A2 and slit3 stop protrusion of the growth
cone leading margin concurrently with inhibition of ADF/cofilin and ERM proteins.

Marsick BM(1), Roche FK, Letourneau PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455, USA.

Axonal growth cones turn away from repulsive guidance cues. This may start with
reduced protrusive motility in the region the growth cone leading margin that is 
closer to the source of repulsive cue. Using explants of E7 chick temporal
retina, we examine the effects of two repulsive guidance cues, ephrin-A2 and
slit3, on retinal ganglion cell growth cone protrusive activity, total F-actin,
free F-actin barbed ends, and the activities (phosphorylation states) of actin
regulatory proteins, ADF/cofilin and ezrin, radixin, moesin (ERM) proteins.
Ephrin-A2 rapidly stops protrusive activity simultaneously with reducing F-actin,
free barbed ends and the activities of ADF/cofilin and ERM proteins. Slit3 also
stops protrusion and reduces the activities of ADF/cofilin and ERM proteins. We
interpret these results as indicating that repulsive guidance cues inhibit actin 
polymerization and actin-membrane linkage to stop protrusive activity. Retrograde
F-actin flow withdraws actin to the C-domain, where F-actin bundles interact with
myosin II to generate contractile forces that can collapse and retract the growth
cone. Our results suggest that common mechanisms are used by repulsive guidance
cue to disable growth cone motility and remodel growing axon terminals.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3380157
PMID: 22328420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncogene. 2012 Nov 8;31(45):4778-88. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.632. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

ETV5 cooperates with LPP as a sensor of extracellular signals and promotes EMT in
endometrial carcinomas.

Colas E(1), Muinelo-Romay L, Alonso-Alconada L, Llaurado M, Monge M, Barbazan J, 
Gonzalez M, Schoumacher M, Pedrola N, Ertekin T, Devis L, Ruiz A, Castellvi J,
Doll A, Gil-Moreno A, Vazquez-Levin M, Lapyckyj L, Lopez-Lopez R, Robine S,
Friederich E, Castro M, Reventos J, Vignjevic D, Abal M.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Unit, Research Institute Vall d'Hebron University
Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.

Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is the most frequent among infiltrating tumors of the 
female genital tract, with myometrial invasion representing an increase in the
rate of recurrences and a decrease in survival. We have previously described ETV5
transcription factor associated with myometrial infiltration in human ECs. In
this work, we further investigated ETV5 orchestrating downstream effects to
confer the tumor the invasive capabilities needed to disseminate in the early
stages of EC dissemination. Molecular profiling evidenced ETV5 having a direct
role on epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In particular, ETV5 modulated
Zeb1 expression and E-Cadherin repression leading to a complete reorganization of
cell-cell and cell-substrate contacts. ETV5-promoted EMT resulted in the
acquisition of migratory and invasive capabilities in endometrial cell lines.
Furthermore, we identified the lipoma-preferred partner protein as a regulatory
partner of ETV5, acting as a sensor for extracellular signals promoting tumor
invasion. All together, we propose ETV5-transcriptional regulation of the EMT
process through a crosstalk with the tumor surrounding microenvironment, as a
principal event initiating EC invasion.

PMID: 22266854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Dec;41(12):3436-42.

The metalloprotease ADAM8 is associated with and regulates the function of the
adhesion receptor PSGL-1 through ERM proteins.

Domínguez-Luis M(1), Lamana A, Vazquez J, García-Navas R, Mollinedo F,
Sánchez-Madrid F, Díaz-González F, Urzainqui A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Reumatología, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, La Laguna, Santa
Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2011 Dec;41(12):3419-22.

The P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) is involved in the initial contact 
of leukocytes with activated endothelium, and its adhesive function is regulated 
through its proteolytic processing. We have found that the metalloprotease ADAM8 
is both associated with PSGL-1 through the ezrinradixinmoesin actin-binding
proteins and able to cause the proteolytic cleavage of this adhesion receptor.
Accordingly, ADAM8 knockdown increases PSGL-1 expression, and functional assays
show that ADAM8 is able to reduce leukocyte rolling on P-selectin and hence on
activated endothelial cells. We conclude that ADAM8 modulates the expression and 
function of PSGL-1.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22229154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Oncogenesis. 2012 Jul 16;1:e20. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2012.20.

Overexpression of ETV4 is oncogenic in prostate cells through promotion of both
cell proliferation and epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Pellecchia A(1), Pescucci C, De Lorenzo E, Luceri C, Passaro N, Sica M, Notaro R,
De Angioletti M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Gene Transfer Laboratory, Core Research Laboratory,
Istituto Toscano Tumori, AOUC, Florence, Italy.

The discovery of translocations that involve one of the genes of the ETS family
(ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5) has been a major advance in understanding the
molecular basis of prostate cancer (PC). Each one of these translocations results
in deregulated expression of one of the ETS proteins. Here, we focus on the
mechanism whereby overexpression of the ETV4 gene mediates oncogenesis in the
prostate. By siRNA technology, we show that ETV4 inhibition in the PC3 cancer
cell line reduces not only cell mobility and anchorage-independent growth, but
also cell proliferation, cell cycle progression and tumor growth in a xenograft
model. Conversely, ETV4 overexpression in the nonmalignant human prostate cell
line (RWPE) increases anchorage-independent growth, cell mobility and cell
proliferation, which is probably mediated by downregulation of p21, producing
accelerated progression through the cell cycle. ETV4 overexpression is associated
with changes in the pattern of E-cadherin and N-cadherin expression; the cells
also become spindle-shaped, and these changes are characteristic of the so-called
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). In RWPE cells overexpressing ETV4 EMT
results from a marked increase in EMT-specific transcription factors such as
TWIST1, SLUG1, ZEB1 and ZEB2. Thus, whereas ETV4 shares with the other ETS
proteins (ERG, ETV5 and ETV1) a major role in invasiveness and cell migration, it
emerges as unique in that it increases at the same time also the rate of
proliferation of PC cells. Considering the wide spectrum in the clinical course
of patients with PC, it may be highly relevant that ETV4 is capable of inducing
most and perhaps all of the features that make a tumor aggressive.

PMCID: PMC3412649
PMID: 23552736  [PubMed]


102. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Dec;41(12):3419-22. doi: 10.1002/eji.201142196.

Regulating inflammation: ADAM8--a new player in the game.

Zarbock A(1), Rossaint J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Münster, Münster, Germany. zarbock@uni-muenster.de

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2011 Dec;41(12):3436-42.

Leukocyte recruitment to sites of inflammation proceeds in a cascade-like
fashion. However, it is less clear how the complex interactions among the
different adhesion molecules involved in this process are coordinately regulated.
A report in this issue of the European Journal of Immunology [Eur. J. Immunol.
2011. 41: 3436-3442] shows that ADAM8 may participate in the control of the
adhesion molecule P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1. This finding suggests a new
role for ADAM8 in the regulation of inflammatory processes.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22125009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Mar;51(3):240-9. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20948. Epub 2011
Nov 12.

FLI1 is a novel ETS transcription factor involved in gene fusions in prostate
cancer.

Paulo P(1), Barros-Silva JD, Ribeiro FR, Ramalho-Carvalho J, Jerónimo C, Henrique
R, Lind GE, Skotheim RI, Lothe RA, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

To characterize the pattern of ETS rearrangements and to uncover novel ETS fusion
genes, we analyzed 200 prostate carcinomas (PCa) with TaqMan low-density arrays
(TLDAs), followed by selective analyses with fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), RT-PCR, and sequencing. Besides confirming the recurrent presence of ERG,
ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 rearrangements, we here report FLI1 as the fifth ETS
transcription factor involved in fusion genes in prostate cancer. Outlier
expression of the FLI1 gene was detected by TLDAs in one PCa that showed relative
overexpression of FLI1 exons 4:5 as compared with FLI1 exons 2:3. A structural
rearrangement was found using FISH probes flanking the FLI1 gene and RT-PCR and
sequencing analyses showed fusion of SLC45A3 exon 1 with FLI1 exon 3.
Interestingly, we found four cases with two different ETS rearrangements in the
index tumor, thus revealing intratumor genetic heterogeneity. Correlation
analysis with clinico-pathological data showed association of ERG rearrangements 
with locally advanced disease (pT3, P = 0.007) and MYC overexpression (P =
0.001), and association of ETV1 rearrangements with PTEN downregulation (P =
0.015). We report that FLI1 is a novel ETS transcription factor involved in gene 
fusions in prostate cancer and that intratumor genetic heterogeneity of ETS
rearrangements can occasionally be found in index primary tumors.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22081504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):439-49. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.023. Epub 2011 
Oct 26.

ETS-dependent regulation of a distal Gata4 cardiac enhancer.

Schachterle W(1), Rojas A, Xu SM, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158-2517, USA.

The developing heart contains an inner tube of specialized endothelium known as
endocardium, which performs multiple essential functions. In spite of the
essential role of the endocardium in heart development and function, the
transcriptional pathways that regulate its development remain largely undefined. 
GATA4 is a zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed in multiple
cardiovascular lineages and is required for endocardial cushion development and
embryonic viability, but the transcriptional pathways upstream of Gata4 in the
endocardium and its derivatives in the endocardial cushions are unknown. Here, we
describe a distal enhancer from the mouse Gata4 gene that is briefly active in
multiple cardiac lineages early in cardiac development but restricts to the
endocardium where it remains active through cardiogenesis. The activity of this
Gata4 cardiac enhancer in transgenic embryos and in cultured aortic endothelial
cells is dependent on four ETS sites. To identify which ETS transcription factors
might be involved in Gata4 regulation via the ETS sites in the enhancer, we
determined the expression profile of 24 distinct ETS factors in embryonic mouse
hearts. Among multiple ETS transcripts present, ETS1, FLI1, ETV1, ETV5, ERG, and 
ETV6 were the most abundant in the early embryonic heart. We found that ETS1,
FLI1, and ERG were strongly expressed in the heart at embryonic day 8.5 and that 
ETS1 and ERG bound to the endogenous Gata4 enhancer in cultured endothelial
cells. Thus, these studies define the ETS expression profile in the early
embryonic heart and identify an ETS-dependent enhancer from the Gata4 locus.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3246565
PMID: 22056786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 15;360(2):310-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.029. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 acts downstream of GDNF/Ret in branching
morphogenesis of the developing mouse kidney.

Willecke R(1), Heuberger J, Grossmann K, Michos O, Schmidt-Ott K, Walentin K,
Costantini F, Birchmeier W.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Robert-Roessle-Strasse 10, 
13125 Berlin, Germany.

The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 acts downstream of various growth factors, hormones
or cytokine receptors. Mutations of the Shp2 gene are associated with several
human diseases. Here we have ablated Shp2 in the developing kidneys of mice,
using the ureteric bud epithelium-specific Hoxb7/Cre. Mutant mice produced a
phenotype that is similar to mutations of the genes of the GDNF/Ret receptor
system, that is: strongly reduced ureteric bud branching and downregulation of
the Ret target genes Etv4 and Etv5. Shp2 mutant embryonic kidneys also displayed 
reduced cell proliferation at the branch tips and branching defects, which could 
not be overcome by GDNF in organ culture. We also examined compound mutants of
Shp2 and Sprouty1, which is an inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in
the kidney. Sprouty1 single mutants produce supernumerary ureteric buds, which
branch excessively. Sprouty1 mutants rescued branching deficits in Ret(-/-) and
GDNF(-/-) kidneys. Sprouty1; Shp2 double mutants showed no rescue of kidney
branching. Our data thus indicate an intricate interplay of Shp2 and Sprouty1 in 
signaling downstream of receptor tyrosine kinases during kidney development.
Apparently, Shp2 mediates not only GDNF/Ret but also signaling by other receptor 
tyrosine kinases in branching morphogenesis of the embryonic kidney.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22015719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e23531. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023531. Epub 2011 Sep 2.

Studies of metabolic phenotypic correlates of 15 obesity associated gene
variants.

Sandholt CH(1), Vestmar MA, Bille DS, Borglykke A, Almind K, Hansen L, Sandbæk A,
Lauritzen T, Witte D, Jørgensen T, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Section of
Metabolic Genetics Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. cila@novonordisk.com

AIMS: Genome-wide association studies have identified novel BMI/obesity
associated susceptibility loci. The purpose of this study is to determine
associations with overweight, obesity, morbid obesity and/or general adiposity in
a Danish population. Moreover, we want to investigate if these loci associate
with type 2 diabetes and to elucidate potential underlying metabolic mechanisms.
METHODS: 15 gene variants in 14 loci including TMEM18 (rs7561317), SH2B1
(rs7498665), KCTD15 (rs29941), NEGR1 (rs2568958), ETV5 (rs7647305), BDNF
(rs4923461, rs925946), SEC16B (rs10913469), FAIM2 (rs7138803), GNPDA2
(rs10938397), MTCH2 (rs10838738), BAT2 (rs2260000), NPC1 (rs1805081), MAF
(rs1424233), and PTER (rs10508503) were genotyped in 18,014 middle-aged Danes.
RESULTS: Five of the 15 gene variants associated with overweight, obesity and/or 
morbid obesity. Per allele ORs ranged from 1.15-1.20 for overweight, 1.10-1.25
for obesity, and 1.41-1.46 for morbid obesity. Five of the 15 variants moreover
associated with increased measures of adiposity. BDNF rs4923461 displayed a
borderline BMI-dependent protective effect on type 2 diabetes (0.87 (0.78-0.96,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.008)), whereas SH2B1 rs7498665 associated with nominally BMI-independent
increased risk of type 2 diabetes (1.16 (1.07-1.27, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.8×10(-4))).
CONCLUSIONS: Associations with overweight and/or obesity and measures of obesity 
were confirmed for seven out of the 15 gene variants. The obesity risk allele of 
BDNF rs4923461 protected against type 2 diabetes, which could suggest neuronal
and peripheral distinctive ways of actions for the protein. SH2B1 rs7498665
associated with type 2 diabetes independently of BMI.

PMCID: PMC3166286
PMID: 21912638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):359-67. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.07.002. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

Angiotensin II stimulates in vitro branching morphogenesis of the isolated
ureteric bud.

Song R(1), Preston G, Yosypiv IV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Hypertension and
Renal Center of Excellence, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Mutations in the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) genes are associated with
congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). As angiotensin
(Ang) II, the principal effector peptide growth factor of the RAS, stimulates
ureteric bud (UB) branching in whole intact embryonic (E) metanephroi, defects in
UB morphogenesis may be causally linked to CAKUT observed under conditions of
disrupted RAS. In the present study, using the isolated intact UB (iUB) assay, we
tested the hypothesis that Ang II stimulates UB morphogenesis by directly acting 
on the UB, identified Ang II target genes in the iUB by microarray and examined
the effect of Ang II on UB cell migration in vitro. We show that isolated E11.5
mouse iUBs express Ang II AT(1) and AT(2) receptor mRNA. Treatment of E11.5 iUBs 
grown in collagen matrix gels with Ang II (10(-5)M) increases the number of iUB
tips after 48h of culture compared to control (4.8±0.4 vs. 2.4±0.2, p<0.01). A
number of genes required for UB branching as well as novel genes whose role in UB
development is currently unknown are targets of Ang II signaling in the iUB. In
addition, Ang II increases UB cell migration (346±5.1 vs. 275±4.4, p<0.01) in
vitro. In summary, Ang II stimulates UB cell migration and directly induces
morphogenetic response in the iUB. We conclude that Ang II-regulated genes in the
iUB may be important mediators of Ang II-induced UB branching. We hypothesize
that Ang II-dependent cell movements play an important role in UB branching
morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3213329
PMID: 21820050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biol Reprod. 2011 Dec;85(6):1114-23. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.091793. Epub
2011 Aug 3.

Spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal requires ETV5-mediated downstream
activation of Brachyury in mice.

Wu X(1), Goodyear SM, Tobias JW, Avarbock MR, Brinster RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Insight regarding mechanisms controlling gene expression in the spermatogonial
stem cell (SSC) will improve our understanding of the processes regulating
spermatogenesis and aid in treating problems associated with male infertility. In
the present study, we explored the global gene expression profiles of the glial
cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)-regulated transcription factors Ets 
(E-twenty-six) variant gene 5 (Etv5); B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL)/lymphoma 6, member B (Bcl6b); and POU domain, class-3 transcription factor 
1 (Pou3f1). We reasoned that these three factors may function as a core set of
transcription factors, regulating genes responsible for maintaining the SSC
population. Using transient siRNA oligonucleotides to individually target Etv5,
Bcl6b, and Pou3f1 within mouse SSC cultures, we examined changes to the global
gene expression profiles associated with these transcription factors. Only modest
overlaps in the target genes regulated by the three factors were noted, but ETV5 
was found to be a critical downstream regulator of GDNF signaling that mediated
the expression of several known SSC self-renewal related genes, including Bcl6b
and LIM homeobox 1 (Lhx1). Notably, ETV5 was identified as a regulator of
Brachyury (T) and CXC chemokine receptor, type 4 (Cxcr4), and we showed that ETV5
binding to the Brachyury (T) gene promoter region is associated with an active
state of transcription. Moreover, in vivo transplantation of SSCs following
silencing of Brachyury (T) significantly reduced the number of donor cell-derived
colonies formed within recipient mouse testes. These results suggest Brachyury is
of biological importance and functions as part of GDNF/ETV5 signaling to promote 
self-renewal of mouse SSCs cultured in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3223249
PMID: 21816850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;776:335-48. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-243-4_19.

Androgen regulation of ETS gene fusion transcripts in prostate cancer.

Gasi D(1), Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University
Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. d.gasi@erasmusmc.cl

Fusion between androgen-regulated TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor gene ERG
is the most frequent genetic alteration that occurs in 40-70% of prostate
cancers. Not only ERG but also other ETS transcription factor genes are involved 
in gene fusions. ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 have all several fusion partners. One
common feature shared by the majority of these partners is androgen-regulated
expression. Despite its high frequency, the biological and molecular effects of
ETS gene fusion in prostate cancer development and progression are unknown. In
this chapter quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) is used for detection
and further studying the incidence and properties of these fusion transcripts.
The focus is on the expression of TMPRSS2-ERG transcripts in clinical prostate
samples. Androgen regulation of TMPRSS2 is measured in commonly used LNCaP
prostate cancer cells grown with and without the synthetic androgen R1881.
Furthermore, combining Q-PCR with 5' RLM-RACE and sequencing are described for
the identification of novel ETS fusion partners.

PMID: 21796535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;56(10):716-9. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.86. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Computed tomography analysis of the association between the SH2B1 rs7498665
single-nucleotide polymorphism and visceral fat area.

Hotta K(1), Kitamoto T, Kitamoto A, Mizusawa S, Matsuo T, Nakata Y, Hyogo H, Ochi
H, Kamohara S, Miyatake N, Kotani K, Komatsu R, Itoh N, Mineo I, Wada J, Yoneda
M, Nakajima A, Funahashi T, Miyazaki S, Tokunaga K, Masuzaki H, Ueno T, Chayama
K, Hamaguchi K, Yamada K, Hanafusa T, Oikawa S, Yoshimatsu H, Sakata T, Tanaka K,
Matsuzawa Y, Nakao K, Sekine A.

Author information: 
(1)EBM Research Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto,
Japan. kikukoh@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Visceral fat accumulation has an important role in increasing morbidity and
mortality rate by increasing the risk of developing several metabolic disorders, 
such as type 2 diabetes, dyslipidemia and hypertension. New genetic loci that
contribute to the development of obesity have been identified by genome-wide
association studies in Caucasian populations. We genotyped 1279 Japanese subjects
(556 men and 723 women), who underwent computed tomography (CT) for measuring
visceral fat area (VFA) and subcutaneous fat area (SFA), for the following
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs): NEGR1 rs2815752, SEC16B rs10913469,
TMEM18 rs6548238, ETV5 rs7647305, GNPDA2 rs10938397, BDNF rs6265 and rs925946,
MTCH2 rs10838738, SH2B1 rs7498665, MAF rs1424233, and KCTD15 rs29941 and
rs11084753. In the additive model, none of the SNPs were significantly associated
with body mass index (BMI). The SH2B1 rs7498665 risk allele was found to be
significantly associated with VFA (P=0.00047) but not with BMI or SFA. When the
analysis was performed in men and women separately, no significant associations
with VFA were observed (P=0.0099 in men and P=0.022 in women). None of the other 
SNPs were significantly associated with SFA. Our results suggest that there is a 
VFA-specific genetic factor and that a polymorphism in the SH2B1 gene influences 
the risk of visceral fat accumulation.

PMID: 21796141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Hum Genet. 2011 Sep;56(9):647-51. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.74. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Association of variations in the FTO, SCG3 and MTMR9 genes with metabolic
syndrome in a Japanese population.

Hotta K(1), Kitamoto T, Kitamoto A, Mizusawa S, Matsuo T, Nakata Y, Kamohara S,
Miyatake N, Kotani K, Komatsu R, Itoh N, Mineo I, Wada J, Yoneda M, Nakajima A,
Funahashi T, Miyazaki S, Tokunaga K, Masuzaki H, Ueno T, Hamaguchi K, Tanaka K,
Yamada K, Hanafusa T, Oikawa S, Yoshimatsu H, Sakata T, Matsuzawa Y, Nakao K,
Sekine A.

Author information: 
(1)EBM Research Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto,
Japan. kikukoh@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Metabolic syndrome is defined as a cluster of multiple risk factors, including
central obesity, dyslipidemia, hypertension and impaired glucose tolerance, that 
increase cardiovascular disease morbidity and mortality. Genetic factors are
important in the development of metabolic syndrome, as are environmental factors.
However, the genetic background of metabolic syndrome is not yet fully clarified.
There is evidence that obesity and obesity-related phenotypes are associated with
variations in several genes, including NEGR1, SEC16B, TMEM18, ETV5, GNPDA2, BDNF,
MTCH2, SH2B1, FTO, MAF, MC4R, KCTD15, SCG3, MTMR9, TFAP2B, MSRA, LYPLAL1, GCKR
and FADS1. To investigate the relationship between metabolic syndrome and
variations in these genes in the Japanese population, we genotyped 33
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 19 genes from 1096 patients with
metabolic syndrome and 581 control individuals who had no risk factors for
metabolic syndrome. Four SNPs in the FTO gene were significantly related to
metabolic syndrome: rs9939609 (P=0.00013), rs8050136 (P=0.00011), rs1558902
(P=6.6 × 10(-5)) and rs1421085 (P=7.4 × 10(-5)). rs3764220 in the SCG3 gene
(P=0.0010) and rs2293855 in the MTMR9 gene (P=0.0015) were also significantly
associated with metabolic syndrome. SNPs in the FTO, SCG3 and MTMR9 genes had no 
SNP × SNP epistatic effects on metabolic syndrome. Our data suggest that genetic 
variations in the FTO, SCG3 and MTMR9 genes independently influence the risk of
metabolic syndrome.

PMID: 21796137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012 Feb;20(2):306-12. doi: 10.1038/oby.2011.236. Epub
2011 Jul 21.

Expression of new loci associated with obesity in diet-induced obese rats: from
genetics to physiology.

Gutierrez-Aguilar R(1), Kim DH, Woods SC, Seeley RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio,
USA.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are a powerful tool for revealing genes
associated with common human obesity. New loci associated with obesity have
recently been reported, but their function and metabolic implications remain to
be elucidated. In order to begin identifying the role of some of these
obesity-related loci, the closest genes to the polymorphism of each locus were
selected and their expression was compared in the hypothalamus, adipose tissue,
liver, soleus muscle, and extensor digitorum longus muscle (EDL) of Long-Evans
rats maintained on chow or a high-fat diet (HFD) for 6 weeks. From a total of 19 
genes analyzed, seven genes (ETV5, FTO, GNPDA2, KCTD15, TMEM18, MC4R, and SH2B1) 
were down-regulated in the hypothalamus of HFD compared to chow-fed rats. In
adipose tissue of rats fed on HFD, the mRNA levels of BCDIN3, KCTD15, and SULT1A1
were down-regulated, whereas those of MTCH2, PTER, and TUFM were up-regulated. In
the liver, three genes were up-regulated (PTER, SULT1A1, and TUFM) in HFD
relative to chow-fed rats, and TMEM18 was down-regulated. Finally, in soleus
muscle of HFD-fed rats, BCDIN3, BDNF, and TMEM18 were down-regulated, and in the 
EDL muscle SH2B1 and TUFM were up-regulated. mRNA levels in the hypothalamus were
compared between fed and fasted states, and only KCTD15 was down-regulated during
fasting when fed a chow diet. In conclusion, novel genes found to be associated
with obesity are regulated by a HFD and the mRNA levels of KCTD15 is dependent on
the nutritional status. These results suggest a potential role of these genes in 
the regulation of energy balance.

PMID: 21779089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Nov;4(11):1852-62. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0186. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

Tamoxifen downregulates ets oncogene family members ETV4 and ETV5 in benign
breast tissue: implications for durable risk reduction.

Euhus D(1), Bu D, Xie XJ, Sarode V, Ashfaq R, Hunt K, Xia W, O'Shaughnessy J,
Grant M, Arun B, Dooley W, Miller A, Flockhart D, Lewis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323
Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390, USA. david.euhus@utsouthwestern.edu

Five years of tamoxifen reduces breast cancer risk by nearly 50% but is
associated with significant side effects and toxicities. A better understanding
of the direct and indirect effects of tamoxifen in benign breast tissue could
elucidate new mechanisms of breast carcinogenesis, suggest novel chemoprevention 
targets, and provide relevant early response biomarkers for phase II prevention
trials. Seventy-three women at increased risk for breast cancer were randomized
to tamoxifen (20 mg daily) or placebo for 3 months. Blood and breast tissue
samples were collected at baseline and posttreatment. Sixty-nine women completed 
all study activities (37 tamoxifen and 32 placebo). The selected biomarkers
focused on estradiol and IGFs in the blood; DNA methylation and cytology in
random periareolar fine-needle aspirates; and tissue morphometry, proliferation, 
apoptosis, and gene expression (microarray and reverse transcriptase PCR) in the 
tissue core samples. Tamoxifen downregulated Ets oncogene transcription factor
family members ETV4 and ETV5 and reduced breast epithelial cell proliferation
independent of CYP2D6 genotypes or effects on estradiol, ESR1, or IGFs. Reduction
in proliferation was correlated with downregulation of ETV4 and DNAJC12.
Tamoxifen reduced the expression of ETV4- and ETV5-regulated genes implicated in 
epithelial-stromal interaction and tissue remodeling. Three months of tamoxifen
did not affect breast tissue composition, cytologic atypia, preneoplasia, or
apoptosis. A plausible mechanism for the chemopreventive effects of tamoxifen is 
restriction of lobular expansion into stroma through downregulation of ETV4 and
ETV5. The human equivalent of murine multipotential progenitor cap cells of
terminal end buds may be the primary target.

PMCID: PMC3208724
PMID: 21778330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Obes. 2011;2011:180729. doi: 10.1155/2011/180729. Epub 2011 May 18.

Mendelian Randomisation Study of Childhood BMI and Early Menarche.

Mumby HS(1), Elks CE, Li S, Sharp SJ, Khaw KT, Luben RN, Wareham NJ, Loos RJ, Ong
KK.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
P.O. Box 285, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.

To infer the causal association between childhood BMI and age at menarche, we
performed a mendelian randomisation analysis using twelve established
"BMI-increasing" genetic variants as an instrumental variable (IV) for higher
BMI. In 8,156 women of European descent from the EPIC-Norfolk cohort, height was 
measured at age 39-77 years; age at menarche was self-recalled, as was body
weight at age 20 years, and BMI at 20 was calculated as a proxy for childhood
BMI. DNA was genotyped for twelve BMI-associated common variants (in/near FTO,
MC4R, TMEM18, GNPDA2, KCTD15, NEGR1, BDNF, ETV5, MTCH2, SEC16B, FAIM2 and SH2B1),
and for each individual a "BMI-increasing-allele-score" was calculated by summing
the number of BMI-increasing alleles across all 12 loci. Using this
BMI-increasing-allele-score as an instrumental variable for BMI, each 1<U+2009>kg/m(2)
increase in childhood BMI was predicted to result in a 6.5% (95% CI: 4.6-8.5%)
higher absolute risk of early menarche (before age 12 years). While mendelian
randomisation analysis is dependent on a number of assumptions, our findings
support a causal effect of BMI on early menarche and suggests that increasing
prevalence of childhood obesity will lead to similar trends in the prevalence of 
early menarche.

PMCID: PMC3136158
PMID: 21773002  [PubMed]


115. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 2;108(31):12740-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109987108. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

MicroRNA-21 regulates the self-renewal of mouse spermatogonial stem cells.

Niu Z(1), Goodyear SM, Rao S, Wu X, Tobias JW, Avarbock MR, Brinster RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, and Penn
Bioinformatics Core, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRs) play a key role in the control of gene expression in a wide
array of tissue systems, where their functions include the regulation of
self-renewal, cellular differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. However,
the functional importance of individual miRs in controlling spermatogonial stem
cell (SSC) homeostasis has not been investigated. Using high-throughput
sequencing, we profiled the expression of miRs in the Thy1(+) testis cell
population, which is highly enriched for SSCs, and the Thy1(-) cell population,
composed primarily of testis somatic cells. In addition, we profiled the global
expression of miRs in cultured germ cells, also enriched for SSCs. Our results
demonstrate that miR-21, along with miR-34c, -182, -183, and -146a, are
preferentially expressed in the Thy1(+) SSC-enriched population, compared with
Thy1(-) somatic cells. Importantly, we demonstrate that transient inhibition of
miR-21 in SSC-enriched germ cell cultures increased the number of germ cells
undergoing apoptosis and significantly reduced the number of donor-derived
colonies of spermatogenesis formed from transplanted treated cells in recipient
mouse testes, indicating that miR-21 is important in maintaining the SSC
population. Moreover, we show that in SSC-enriched germ cell cultures, miR-21 is 
regulated by the transcription factor ETV5, known to be critical for SSC
self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC3150879
PMID: 21768389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Oncogene. 2012 Jan 19;31(3):306-21. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.244. Epub 2011 Jul 4.

Recognition of CD146 as an ERM-binding protein offers novel mechanisms for
melanoma cell migration.

Luo Y(1), Zheng C, Zhang J, Lu D, Zhuang J, Xing S, Feng J, Yang D, Yan X.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Tumor cell migration is a well-orchestrated multistep process that drives cancer 
development and metastasis. Previous data indicated that CD146 expression
correlates with malignant progression and metastatic potential of human melanoma 
cells. However, the exact molecular mechanism of how CD146 promotes melanoma cell
migration still remains poorly understood. Here, we report that CD146 physically 
interacts with actin-linking ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) proteins and recruits ERM
proteins to cell protrusions, promoting the formation and elongation of
microvilli. Moreover, CD146-promoted melanoma cell migration is linked to RhoA
activation and ERM phosphorylation. CD146 recruits Rho guanine nucleotide
dissociation inhibitory factors 1 (RhoGDI1) through ERM proteins and thus
sequesters RhoGDI1 from RhoA, which leads to upregulated RhoA activity and
increased melanoma cell motility. CD146-activated RhoA also promotes further ERM 
phosphorylation and activation through
Rho-phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate-5-kinase-phosphatidylinositol
4,5-biphosphate pathway, which reinforces CD146/ERM association. Thus, our
results provide a mechanistic basis to understand the role of CD146 in regulating
human melanoma cell motility.

PMID: 21725352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Am J Pathol. 2011 Aug;179(2):992-1003. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.04.004. Epub
2011 May 31.

The role of Pea3 group transcription factors in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Yuen HF(1), McCrudden CM, Chan KK, Chan YP, Wong ML, Chan KY, Khoo US, Law S,
Srivastava G, Lappin TR, Chan KW, El-Tanani M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University of Belfast,
Belfast, United Kingdom.

The transcription factors Pea3, Erm, and Er81 can promote cancer initiation and
progression in various types of solid tumors. However, their role in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has not been elucidated. In this study, we found
that the expression levels of Pea3 and Erm, but not that of Er81, were
significantly higher in ESCC compared with nontumor esophageal epithelium. A high
level of Pea3 expression was significantly correlated with a shorter overall
survival in a cohort of 81 patients with ESCC and the subgroup with N1 stage
tumor (Wilcoxon-Gehan test, P = 0.016 and P = 0.001, respectively). Pea3 was
overexpressed in seven ESCC cell lines compared with two immortalized esophageal 
cell lines. Pea3 knockdown reduced cell proliferation and suppressed nonadherent 
growth, migration, and invasion in ESCC cells in vitro. In addition, Pea3
knockdown in ESCC cells resulted in a down-regulation of phospho-Akt and matrix
metalloproteinase 13, whereas a significant positive correlation in the
expression levels was observed between Pea3 and phospho-Akt (r = 0.281, P <
0.013) and between Pea3 and matrix metalloproteinase 13 in the human specimens (r
= 0.462, P < 0.001). Moreover, Pea3 modulated the sensitivity of EC109 cells to
doxorubicin, probably via reduced activity of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-Akt-mammalian target of Rapamycin complex 1 pathway on Pea3 knockdown.
In conclusion, our results suggest that Pea3 plays an important role in the
progression of ESCC.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3157177
PMID: 21689625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Apr;227(4):1701-8. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22894.

Molecular characterization of myosin phosphatase in endothelium.

Kim KM(1), Csortos C, Czikora I, Fulton D, Umapathy NS, Olah G, Verin AD.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Center, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia 
30912, USA.

The phosphorylation status of myosin light chain (MLC) is regulated by both MLC
kinases and type 1 Ser/Thr phosphatase (PPase 1), MLC phosphatase (MLCP)
activities. The activity of the catalytic subunit of MLCP (CS1ß) towards myosin
depends on its associated regulatory subunit, namely myosin PPase targeting
subunit 1 (MYPT1). Our previously published data strongly suggested the
involvement of MLCP in endothelial cell (EC) barrier regulation. In this study,
our new data demonstrate that inhibition of MLCP by either CS1ß or MYPT1
siRNA-based depletion results in significant attenuation of purine nucleotide
(ATP and adenosine)-induced EC barrier enhancement. Consistent with the data,
thrombin-induced EC F-actin stress fiber formation and permeability increase were
attenuated by the ectopic expression of constitutively active (C/A) MYPT1. The
data demonstrated for the first time direct involvement of MLCP in EC barrier
enhancement/protection. Cloning of MYPT1 in human pulmonary artery EC (HPAEC)
revealed the presence of two MYPT1 isoforms, long and variant 2 (V2) lacking 56
amino acids from 553 to 609 of human MYPT1 long, which were previously identified
in HeLa and HEK 293 cells. Our data demonstrated that in Cos-7 cells ectopically 
expressed EC MYPT1 isoforms co-immunoprecipitated with intact CS1ß suggesting the
importance of PPase 1 activity for the formation of functional complex of
MYPT1/CS1ß. Interestingly, MYPT1 V2 shows decreased binding affinity compared to 
MYPT1 long for radixin (novel MLCP substrate and a member of ERM family
proteins). These results suggest functional difference between EC MYPT1 isoforms 
in the regulation of MLCP activity and cytoskeleton.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3695713
PMID: 21678426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nature. 2011 May 15;474(7351):403-6. doi: 10.1038/nature10005.

COP1 is a tumour suppressor that causes degradation of ETS transcription factors.

Vitari AC(1), Leong KG, Newton K, Yee C, O'Rourke K, Liu J, Phu L, Vij R,
Ferrando R, Couto SS, Mohan S, Pandita A, Hongo JA, Arnott D, Wertz IE, Gao WQ,
French DM, Dixit VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Jul;11(7):466.

The proto-oncogenes ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 encode transcription factors in the E26
transformation-specific (ETS) family, which includes the most frequently
rearranged and overexpressed genes in prostate cancer. Despite being critical
regulators of development, little is known about their post-translational
regulation. Here we identify the ubiquitin ligase COP1 (also known as RFWD2) as a
tumour suppressor that negatively regulates ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5. ETV1, which is
mutated in prostate cancer more often, was degraded after being ubiquitinated by 
COP1. Truncated ETV1 encoded by prostate cancer translocation TMPRSS2:ETV1 lacks 
the critical COP1 binding motifs and was 50-fold more stable than wild-type ETV1.
Almost all patient translocations render ETV1 insensitive to COP1, implying that 
this confers a selective advantage to prostate epithelial cells. Indeed, COP1
deficiency in mouse prostate elevated ETV1 and produced increased cell
proliferation, hyperplasia, and early prostate intraepithelial neoplasia.
Combined loss of COP1 and PTEN enhanced the invasiveness of mouse prostate
adenocarcinomas. Finally, rare human prostate cancer samples showed hemizygous
loss of the COP1 gene, loss of COP1 protein, and elevated ETV1 protein while
lacking a translocation event. These findings identify COP1 as a tumour
suppressor whose downregulation promotes prostatic epithelial cell proliferation 
and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 21572435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Aug 1;82(3):287-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.04.009. Epub 
2011 Apr 30.

The effect of sphingomyelin synthase 2 (SMS2) deficiency on the expression of
drug transporters in mouse brain.

Zhang Y(1), Dong J, Zhu X, Wang W, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Handan Road 220, Shanghai 200433,
China. tracyzh130@yahoo.com.cn

Sphingomyelin synthase (SMS), the last enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of
sphingomyelin (SM), plays a critical role in the constitution of cell membrane
and has impact on the expression of membrane proteins. SMS2, one of two SMS
enzymes, is predominantly located in the plasma membrane, and is mainly expressed
in the brain. Therefore, it is conceivable that SMS2 deficiency may have impact
on expression of some membrane proteins, such as membrane-bound drug
transporters. Using SMS2 gene deficient mouse brain tissues, we studied the gene 
and protein expression profiles of drug transporters, ERM proteins
(ezrin/radixin/moesin) and the cytoskeleton protein, ß-actin, in mouse brain by
RT-PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry analysis. We found that the mRNA
expression of Mdr1 rather than the other drug transporters was significantly
decreased in the SMS2 deficient brain. Accordingly, the expression and the
function of Pgp (Mdr1/P-glycoprotein) were significantly downregulated in brain. 
In addition, the substantially downregulated expression of ezrin and ß-actin was 
also observed in the SMS2 deficient brain. The immunohistochemistry analysis
further revealed the suppressed expression of Pgp, ezrin and ß-actin in both
cortex and paraventricular areas of SMS2 knockout mice. Furthermore, both Pgp and
ß-actin were found to be co-immunoprecipitated with ezrin from the total brain
lysate, suggesting the association between Pgp, ezrin and ß-actin in the brain.
These results indicate that SMS2 participates in the expression regulation of
drug transporters, particularly Pgp, and suggest that SMS2 may be a potential
target for enhancing drug access to the brain.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21554861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Int J Obes (Lond). 2012 Jan;36(1):159-63. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2011.86. Epub 2011 Apr
19.

Replication of 13 obesity loci among Singaporean Chinese, Malay and Asian-Indian 
populations.

Dorajoo R(1), Blakemore AI, Sim X, Ong RT, Ng DP, Seielstad M, Wong TY, Saw SM,
Froguel P, Liu J, Tai ES.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
Singapore, Singapore.

OBJECTIVE: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified 38
obesity-associated loci among European populations. However, their contribution
to obesity in other ethnicities is largely unknown.
METHODS: We utilised five GWAS (N=10<U+2009>482) from Chinese (three cohorts, including 
one with type 2 diabetes and another one of children), Malay and Indian ethnic
groups from Singapore. Data sets were analysed individually and subsequently in
combined meta-analysis for Z-score body-mass index (BMI) associations.
RESULTS: Variants at the FTO locus showed the strongest associations with BMI
Z-score after meta-analysis (P-values 1.16 × 10(-7)-7.95 × 10(-7)). We further
detected associations with nine other index obesity variants close to the MC4R,
GNPDA2, TMEM18, QPCTL/GIPR, BDNF, ETV5, MAP2K5/SKOR1, SEC16B and TNKS/MSRA loci
(meta-analysis P-values ranging from 3.58 × 10(-4)-1.44 × 10(-2)). Three other
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from CADM2, PTBP2 and FAIM2 were
associated with BMI (P-value = 0.0418) in at least one dataset. The
neurotrophin/TRK pathway (P-value=0.029) was highlighted by pathway-based
analysis of loci that had statistically significant associations among
Singaporean populations.
CONCLUSION: Our data confirm the role of FTO in obesity predisposition among
Chinese, Malays and Indians, the three major Asian ethnic groups. We additionally
detected associations for 12 obesity-associated SNPs among Singaporeans. Thus, it
is likely that Europeans and Asians share some of the genetic predisposition to
obesity. Furthermore, the neurotrophin/TRK signalling may have a central role for
common obesity among Asians.

PMID: 21544081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Int J Cancer. 2012 Apr 1;130(7):1532-43. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26148. Epub 2011 Aug
12.

ETV5 transcription factor is overexpressed in ovarian cancer and regulates cell
adhesion in ovarian cancer cells.

Llauradó M(1), Abal M, Castellví J, Cabrera S, Gil-Moreno A, Pérez-Benavente A,
Colás E, Doll A, Dolcet X, Matias-Guiu X, Vazquez-Levin M, Reventós J, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit in Biomedicine and Translational and Pediatrics Oncology,
Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy and the
fifth leading cause of cancer deaths in women in the Western world. ETS
transcription factors are known to act as positive or negative regulators of the 
expression of genes that are involved in various biological processes, including 
those that control cellular proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, tissue
remodeling, angiogenesis and transformation. ETV5 belongs to the PEA3 subfamily. 
PEA3 subfamily members are able to activate the transcription of proteases,
matrix metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteases, which is
central to both tumor invasion and angiogenesis. Here, we examined the role of
the ETV5 transcription factor in epithelial ovarian cancer and we found ETV5 was 
upregulated in ovarian tumor samples compared to ovarian tissue controls. The in 
vitro inhibition of ETV5 decreased cell proliferation in serum-deprived
conditions, induced EMT and cell migration and decreased cell adhesion to
extracellular matrix components. ETV5 inhibition also decreased cell-cell
adhesion and induced apoptosis in anchorage-independent conditions. Accordingly, 
upregulation of ETV5 induced the expression of cell adhesion molecules and
enhanced cell survival in a spheroid model. Our findings suggest that the
overexpression of ETV5 detected in ovarian cancer cells may contribute to ovarian
tumor progression through the ability of ETV5 to enhance proliferation of ovarian
cancer cells. In addition, upregulation of ETV5 would play a role in ovarian
cancer cell dissemination and metastasis into the peritoneal cavity by protecting
ovarian cancer cells from apoptosis and by increasing the adhesion of ovarian
cancer cells to the peritoneal wall through the regulation of cell adhesion
molecules.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21520040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Apr 21;9(4):263-72. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2011.03.010.

The Shigella flexneri type three secretion system effector IpgD inhibits T cell
migration by manipulating host phosphoinositide metabolism.

Konradt C(1), Frigimelica E, Nothelfer K, Puhar A, Salgado-Pabon W, di Bartolo V,
Scott-Algara D, Rodrigues CD, Sansonetti PJ, Phalipon A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Pathogénie Microbienne Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Apr 21;9(4):253-4.

Shigella, the Gram-negative enteroinvasive bacterium that causes shigellosis,
relies on its type III secretion system (TTSS) and injected effectors to modulate
host cell functions. However, consequences of the interaction between Shigella
and lymphocytes have not been investigated. We show that Shigella invades
activated human CD4(+) T lymphocytes. Invasion requires a functional TTSS and
results in inhibition of chemokine-induced T cell migration, an effect mediated
by the TTSS effector IpgD, a phosphoinositide 4-phosphatase. Remarkably, IpgD
injection into bystander T cells can occur in the absence of cell invasion. Upon 
IpgD-mediated hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)), the
pool of PIP(2) at the plasma membrane is reduced, leading to dephosphorylation of
the ERM proteins and their inability to relocalize at one T cell pole upon
chemokine stimulus, likely affecting the formation of the polarized edge required
for cell migration. These results reveal a bacterial TTSS effector-mediated
strategy to impair T cell function.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21501826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Cell Sci. 2011 May 1;124(Pt 9):1486-95. doi: 10.1242/jcs.082834. Epub 2011 Apr 
12.

Truncation of monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 by plasmin promotes blood-brain 
barrier disruption.

Yao Y(1), Tsirka SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,
NY 11794-8651, USA.

Previous studies have shown that plasmin cleaves monocyte chemoattractant protein
1 (MCP1; officially known as C-C motif chemokine 2, CCL2) at K104, and this
cleavage enhances its chemotactic potency significantly. Accumulating evidence
reveals that MCP1 also disrupts the integrity of the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
Here, we show that K104Stop-MCP1, truncated at the K104 where plasmin would
normally cleave, is more efficient than the full-length protein (FL-MCP1) in
compromising the integrity of the BBB in in vitro and in vivo models.
K104Stop-MCP1 increases the permeability of BBB in both wild-type mice and mice
deficient for tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), which converts plasminogen into
active plasmin, suggesting that plasmin-mediated truncation of MCP1 plays an
important role in BBB compromise. Furthermore, we show that the mechanisms
underlying MCP1-induced BBB disruption involve redistribution of tight junction
proteins (occludin and ZO-1) and reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton.
Finally, we show that the redistribution of ZO-1 is mediated by phosphorylation
of ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) proteins. These findings identify plasmin as a key 
signaling molecule in the regulation of BBB integrity and suggest that plasmin
inhibitors might be used to modulate diseases accompanied by BBB compromise.

PMCID: PMC3078815
PMID: 21486949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Sep;17(9):568-76. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar021. Epub 2011 Apr 
8.

Complex ovarian defects lead to infertility in Etv5-/- female mice.

Eo J(1), Shin H, Kwon S, Song H, Murphy KM, Lim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, RCTC, IBST, Konkuk
University, 1 Hwayang-dong, Kwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

Etv5 is a member of the Etv4 subfamily of Ets transcription factors. In female
mice, Etv5 was previously shown to be expressed in the mouse ovary. In this work,
we show that Etv5-/- female mice are infertile due to a complex reproductive
phenotype. Defects in the ovarian tissue architecture were noted as early as 2
weeks of age in Etv5-/- mice. Adult Etv5-/- female mice show decreased ovulation 
and no interest in mating even after gonadotrophin treatment. Histological
abnormalities were also noted in Etv5-/- ovaries. Injection of 17ß-estradiol to
gonadotrophin-treated Etv5-/- mice significantly increased ovulation, mating and 
fertilization rates. However, 2-cell embryos of Etv5-/- females show compromised 
development, suggesting a role for Etv5 in the developmental competence of
embryos. Expression of aromatase (CYP11a1), 17a-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase/17,20
desmolase (CYP17a1), side-chain-cleaving enzyme (CYP19a1) and luteinizing
hormone/choriogonadotropin receptor mRNAs was not significantly altered in
Etv5-/- ovaries. Collectively, our results suggest that Etv5 is important for the
developmental competence of germ cells and the regulation of responses to steroid
hormones in female mice.

© The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21478265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 29;408(1):154-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.03.140. Epub 2011 Apr 2.

Identification of NDRG1-regulated genes associated with invasive potential in
cervical and ovarian cancer cells.

Zhao G(1), Chen J, Deng Y, Gao F, Zhu J, Feng Z, Lv X, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China. zhaog69@sjtu.edu.cn

N-myc downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) is an important gene regulating tumor
invasion. In this study, shRNA technology was used to suppress NDRG1 expression
in CaSki (a cervical cancer cell line) and HO-8910PM (an ovarian cancer cell
line). In vitro assays showed that NDRG1 knockdown enhanced tumor cell adhesion, 
migration and invasion activities without affecting cell proliferation. cDNA
microarray analysis revealed 96 deregulated genes with more than 2-fold changes
in both cell lines after NDRG1 knockdown. Ten common upregulated genes (LPXN,
DDR2, COL6A1, IL6, IL8, FYN, PTP4A3, PAPPA, ETV5 and CYGB) and one common
downregulated gene (CLCA2) were considered to enhance tumor cell invasive
activity. BisoGenet network analysis indicated that NDRG1 regulated these
invasion effector genes/proteins in an indirect manner. Moreover, NDRG1 knockdown
also reduced pro-invasion genes expression such as MMP7, TMPRSS4 and CTSK. These 
results suggest that regulation of invasion and metastasis by NDRG1 is a highly
complicated process.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21463610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Genes Cancer. 2011 Jan 1;1(10):1044-1052.

The ETS gene ETV4 is required for anchorage-independent growth and a cell
proliferation gene expression program in PC3 prostate cells.

Hollenhorst PC(1), Paul L, Ferris MW, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, 1001 E 3 St.
Bloomington, Indiana 47405.

Chromosomal abnormalities that give rise to elevated expression levels of the ETS
genes ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, or ERG are prevalent in prostate cancer, but the function
of these transcription factors in carcinogenesis is not clear. Previous work in
cell lines implicates ERG, ETV1, and ETV5 as regulators of invasive growth but
not transformation. Here we show that the PC3 prostate cancer cell line provides 
a model system to study the over-expression of ETV4. Migration assays, anchorage 
independent growth assays, and microarray analysis indicate that high ETV4
expression contributes to both transformation and cellular motility in PC3 cells.
ETV4 directly bound the 5' and 3' MYC enhancers and modulated expression of both 
MYC and other cell proliferation genes, demonstrating a potential role in cell
growth control. Despite this novel role for ETV4 in anchorage independent growth,
ETV4 over-expression in normal prostate-derived RWPE-1 cells showed effects
similar to ETV1 over-expression - increased cellular motility, and an
up-regulation of genes encoding extracellular proteins as well as ones important 
for development, inflammation, and wound healing. Because ETV1 and ETV4 have
similar roles when introduced to the same cellular background, we suggest that
the requirement of high ETV4 expression for maintenance of the
anchorage-independent growth in PC3 cells is due to a specific characteristic of 
this cell line rather than a function of ETV4 that is distinct from the other
oncogenic ETS genes. Thus, the function of ETS genes in prostate cancer may
differ based on other genetic alterations in a tumor.

PMCID: PMC3046414
PMID: 21373373  [PubMed]


128. J Anat. 2011 May;218(5):534-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01352.x. Epub 2011 
Feb 21.

Expression of fibroblast growth factors (Fgfs) in murine tooth development.

Porntaveetus T(1), Otsuka-Tanaka Y, Basson MA, Moon AM, Sharpe PT, Ohazama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, Dental Institute, King's College
London, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

Fgf signalling is known to play critical roles in tooth development. Twenty-two
Fgf ligands have been identified in mammals, but expression of only 10 in molars 
and three in the incisor loop stem cell region have been documented in murine
tooth development. Our understanding of Fgf signalling in tooth development thus 
remains incomplete and we therefore carried out comparative in situ hybridisation
analysis of unexamined Fgf ligands (eight in molars and 15 in cervical loops of
incisors; Fgf11-Fgf14 were excluded from this analysis because they are not
secreted and do not activate Fgf receptors) during tooth development. To identify
where Fgf signalling is activated, we also examined the expression of Etv4 and
Etv5, considered to be transcriptional targets of the Fgf signalling pathway. In 
molar tooth development, the expression of Fgf15 and Fgf20 was restricted to the 
primary enamel knots, whereas Etv4 and Etv5 were expressed in cells surrounding
the primary enamel knots. Fgf20 expression was observed in the secondary enamel
knots, whereas Fgf15 showed localised expression in the adjacent mesenchyme.
Fgf16, Etv4 and Etv5 were strongly expressed in the ameloblasts of molars. In the
incisor cervical loop stem cell region, Fgf17, Fgf18, Etv4 and Etv5 showed a
restricted expression pattern. These molecules thus show dynamic temporo-spatial 
expression in murine tooth development. We also analysed teeth in Fgf15(-/-) and 
Fgf15(-/-) ;Fgf8(+/-) mutant mice. Neither mutant showed significant
abnormalities in tooth development, indicating likely functional redundancy.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy © 2011 Anatomical Society of Great Britain
and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3089749
PMID: 21332717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jun;84(6):1282-91. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.090324. Epub
2011 Feb 10.

Testicular lumicrine factors regulate ERK, STAT, and NFKB pathways in the initial
segment of the rat epididymis to prevent apoptosis.

Xu B(1), Abdel-Fattah R, Yang L, Crenshaw SA, Black MB, Hinton BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, USA.

The initial segment of the epididymis is vital for male fertility; therefore, it 
is important to understand the mechanisms that regulate this important region.
Deprival of testicular luminal fluid factors/lumicrine factors from the
epididymis results in a wave of apoptosis in the initial segment. In this study, 
a combination of protein array and microarray analyses was used to examine the
early changes in downstream signal transduction pathways following loss of
lumicrine factors. We discovered the following cascade of events leading to the
loss of protection and eventual apoptosis: in the first 6 h after loss of
lumicrine factors, down-regulation of the ERK pathway components was observed at 
the mRNA expression and protein activity levels. Microarray analysis revealed
that mRNA levels of several key components of the ERK pathway, Dusp6, Dusp5, and 
Etv5, decreased sharply, while the analysis from the protein array revealed a
decline in the activities of MAP2K1/2 and MAPK1. Immunostaining of
phospho-MAPK3/1 indicated that down-regulation of the ERK pathway was specific to
the epithelial cells of the initial segment. Subsequently, after 12 h of loss of 
lumicrine factors, levels of mRNA expression of STAT and NFKB pathway components 
increased, mRNA levels of several genes encoding cell cycle inhibitors increased,
and levels of protein expression of several proapoptotic phosphatases increased. 
Finally, after 18 h of loss of protection from lumicrine factors, apoptosis was
observed. In conclusion, testicular lumicrine factors protect the cells of the
initial segment by activating the ERK pathway, repressing STAT and NFKB pathways,
and thereby preventing apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3099589
PMID: 21311037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011 Apr;93(4):851-60. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.110.000828. Epub 2011
Jan 19.

Obesity-susceptibility loci have a limited influence on birth weight: a
meta-analysis of up to 28,219 individuals.

Kilpeläinen TO(1), den Hoed M, Ong KK, Grøntved A, Brage S; Early Growth Genetics
Consortium, Jameson K, Cooper C, Khaw KT, Ekelund U, Wareham NJ, Loos RJ.

Collaborators: Freathy RM, Mook-Kanamori DO, Sovio U, Prokopenko I, Timpson NJ,
Berry DJ, Warrington NM, Widen E, Hottenga JJ, Kaakinen M, Lange LA, Bradfield
JP, Kerkhof M, Marsh JA, Mägi R, Chen CM, Lyon HN, Kirin M, Adair LS, Aulchenko
YS, Bennett AJ, Borja JB, Bouatia-Naji N, Charoen P, Coin LJ, Cousminer DL, de
Geus EJ, Deloukas P, Elliott P, Evans DM, Froguel P, Glaser B, Groves CJ,
Hartikainen AL, Hassanali N, Hirschhorn JN, Hofman A, Holly JM, Hyppönen E,
Kanoni S, Knight BA, Laitinen J, Lindgren CM, McArdle WL, O'Reilly PF, Pennell
CE, Postma DS, Pouta A, Ramasamy A, Rayner NW, Ring SM, Rivadeneira F, Shields
BM, Strachan DP, Surakka I, Taanila A, Tiesler C, Uitterlinden AG, van Duijn CM, 
Wijga AH, Willemsen G, Zhang H, Zhao J, Wilson JF, Steegers EA, Hattersley AT,
Eriksson JG, Peltonen L, Mohlke KL, Grant SF, Hakonarson H, Koppelman GH,
Dedoussis GV, Heinrich J, Gillman MW, Palmer LJ, Frayling TM, Boomsma DI, Smith
GD, Power C, Jaddoe VW, Jarvelin MR, McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: High birth weight is associated with adult body mass index (BMI). We 
hypothesized that birth weight and BMI may partly share a common genetic
background.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to examine the associations of 12 established BMI
variants in or near the NEGR1, SEC16B, TMEM18, ETV5, GNPDA2, BDNF, MTCH2,
BCDIN3D, SH2B1, FTO, MC4R, and KCTD15 genes and their additive score with birth
weight.
DESIGN: A meta-analysis was conducted with the use of 1) the European Prospective
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Norfolk, Hertfordshire, Fenland,
and European Youth Heart Study cohorts (n(max) = 14,060); 2) data extracted from 
the Early Growth Genetics Consortium meta-analysis of 6 genome-wide association
studies for birth weight (n(max) = 10,623); and 3) all published data (n(max) =
14,837).
RESULTS: Only the MTCH2 and FTO loci showed a nominally significant association
with birth weight. The BMI-increasing allele of the MTCH2 variant (rs10838738)
was associated with a lower birth weight (ß ± SE: -13 ± 5 g/allele; P = 0.012; n 
= 23,680), and the BMI-increasing allele of the FTO variant (rs1121980) was
associated with a higher birth weight (ß ± SE: 11 ± 4 g/allele; P = 0.013; n =
28,219). These results were not significant after correction for multiple
testing.
CONCLUSIONS: Obesity-susceptibility loci have a small or no effect on weight at
birth. Some evidence of an association was found for the MTCH2 and FTO loci, ie, 
lower and higher birth weight, respectively. These findings may provide new
insights into the underlying mechanisms by which these loci confer an increased
risk of obesity.

PMID: 21248185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Organogenesis. 2010 Oct-Dec;6(4):252-62. doi: 10.4161/org.6.4.12680.

GDNF/Ret signaling and renal branching morphogenesis: From mesenchymal signals to
epithelial cell behaviors.

Costantini F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY, USA. fdc3@columbia.edu

Signaling by GDNF through the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase is required for the
normal growth and morphogenesis of the ureteric bud (UB) during kidney
development.  Recent studies have sought to understand the precise role of Ret
signaling in this process, and the specific responses of UB cells to GDNF. 
Surprisingly, the requirement for Gdnf and Ret was largely relieved by removing
the negative regulator Spry1, revealing unexpected functional overlap between
GDNF and FGF10. However, the kidneys that developed without Gdnf/Ret and Spry1
displayed significant branching abnormalities, suggesting a unique role for GDNF 
in fine-tuning UB branching.  GDNF/Ret signaling alters patterns of gene
expression in UB tip cells, and one critical event is upregulation of the ETS
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5.  Mice lacking Etv4 and Etv5 fail to develop 
kidneys.  Thus, these genes represent key components of a regulatory network
downstream of Ret.  Studies of chimeric embryos in which a subset of cells lack
either Ret, Etv4/5 or Spry1 have revealed an important role for this pathway in
cell movement.  Ret signaling, via Etv4 and Etv5, promotes competitive cell
rearrangements in the nephric duct, in which the cells with the highest level of 
Ret signaling preferentially migrate to form the first ureteric bud tip.

PMCID: PMC3055651
PMID: 21220964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Mar 15;20(6):1143-53. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq558. Epub 2011 Jan 
6.

SOX9 controls epithelial branching by activating RET effector genes during kidney
development.

Reginensi A(1), Clarkson M, Neirijnck Y, Lu B, Ohyama T, Groves AK, Sock E,
Wegner M, Costantini F, Chaboissier MC, Schedl A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U636, F-06108 Nice, France.

Congenital abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract are some of the most
common defects detected in the unborn child. Kidney growth is controlled by the
GDNF/RET signalling pathway, but the molecular events required for the activation
of RET downstream targets are still poorly understood. Here we show that SOX9, a 
gene involved in campomelic dysplasia (CD) in humans, together with its close
homologue SOX8, plays an essential role in RET signalling. Expression of SOX9 can
be found from the earliest stages of renal development within the ureteric tip,
the ureter mesenchyme and in a segment-specific manner during nephrogenesis.
Using a tissue-specific knockout approach, we show that, in the ureteric tip,
SOX8 and SOX9 are required for ureter branching, and double-knockout mutants
exhibit severe kidney defects ranging from hypoplastic kidneys to renal agenesis.
Further genetic analysis shows that SOX8/9 are required downstream of GDNF
signalling for the activation of RET effector genes such as Sprouty1 and Etv5. At
later stages of development, SOX9 is required to maintain ureteric tip identity
and SOX9 ablation induces ectopic nephron formation. Taken together, our study
shows that SOX9 acts at multiple steps during kidney organogenesis and identifies
SOX8 and SOX9 as key factors within the RET signalling pathway. Our results also 
explain the aetiology of kidney hypoplasia found in a proportion of CD patients.

PMCID: PMC3809456
PMID: 21212101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2011 Jan 1;16:1536-50.

The FERM family proteins in cancer invasion and metastasis.

Yu H(1), Zhang Y, Ye L, Jiang WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medicine,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, PR China. yhf23@ccmu.edu.cn

Metastasis is the major cause of death in patients with cancer. Metastatic cancer
cells undergo dramatic molecular and cellular changes by remodeling their
cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion and their actin cytoskeleton, molecular
processes that involve the activity of various signaling networks. The FERM
family proteins can link transmembrane proteins to the cytoskeleton or link
kinase and/or phosphatase enzymatic activity to the plasma membrane. They thus
are involved not only in cell-extracellular matrix interactions and cell-cell
communication but also in apoptosis, carcinogenesis and metastasis. This review
will summarize the role and mechanism of FERM proteins, with particular reference
to the ERM and Ehm2 proteins in cancer metastasis.

PMID: 21196246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 28;404(4):1076-82. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.12.116. Epub 2010 Dec 30.

Sprouty2 controls proliferation of palate mesenchymal cells via fibroblast growth
factor signaling.

Matsumura K(1), Taketomi T, Yoshizaki K, Arai S, Sanui T, Yoshiga D, Yoshimura A,
Nakamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial
Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University,
3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Cleft palate is one of the most common craniofacial deformities. The fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) plays a central role in reciprocal interactions between
adjacent tissues during palatal development, and the FGF signaling pathway has
been shown to be inhibited by members of the Sprouty protein family. In this
study, we report the incidence of cleft palate, possibly caused by failure of
palatal shelf elevation, in Sprouty2-deficient (KO) mice. Sprouty2-deficient
palates fused completely in palatal organ culture. However, palate mesenchymal
cell proliferation estimated by Ki-67 staining was increased in Sprouty2 KO mice 
compared with WT mice. Sprouty2-null palates expressed higher levels of FGF
target genes, such as Msx1, Etv5, and Ptx1 than WT controls. Furthermore,
proliferation and the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) activation in
response to FGF was enhanced in palate mesenchymal cells transfected with
Sprouty2 small interfering RNA. These results suggest that Sprouty2 regulates
palate mesenchymal cell proliferation via FGF signaling and is involved in
palatal shelf elevation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21195053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Blood. 2011 Feb 10;117(6):1899-910. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-311001. Epub 2010 
Dec 6.

Gene profiling of Graffi murine leukemia virus-induced lymphoid leukemias:
identification of leukemia markers and Fmn2 as a potential oncogene.

Charfi C(1), Voisin V, Levros LC Jr, Edouard E, Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, Département des Sciences Biologiques,
Centre BioMed, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.

The Graffi murine leukemia virus induces a large spectrum of leukemias in mice
and thus provides a good model to compare the transcriptome of all types of
leukemias. We analyzed the gene expression profiles of both T and B leukemias
induced by the virus with DNA microarrays. Given that we considered that a 4-fold
change in expression level was significant, 388 probe sets were associated to B, 
to T, or common to both leukemias. Several of them were not yet associated with
lymphoid leukemia. We confirmed specific deregulation of Fmn2, Arntl2, Bfsp2,
Gfra2, Gpm6a, and Gpm6b in B leukemia, of Nln, Fbln1, and Bmp7 in T leukemias,
and of Etv5 in both leukemias. More importantly, we show that the mouse Fmn2
induced an anchorage-independent growth, a drastic modification in cell shape
with a concomitant disruption of the actin cytoskeleton. Interestingly, we found 
that human FMN2 is overexpressed in approximately 95% of pre-B acute
lymphoblastic leukemia with the highest expression levels in patients with a
TEL/AML1 rearrangement. These results, surely related to the role of FMN2 in
meiotic spindle maintenance, suggest its important role in leukemogenesis.
Finally, we propose a new panel of genes potentially involved in T and/or B
leukemias.

PMID: 21135260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biochem J. 2011 Feb 1;433(3):515-25. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101562.

ERK/p90(RSK)/14-3-3 signalling has an impact on expression of PEA3 Ets
transcription factors via the transcriptional repressor capicúa.

Dissanayake K(1), Toth R, Blakey J, Olsson O, Campbell DG, Prescott AR,
MacKintosh C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Dundee, Scotland, UK.

Compounds that inhibit signalling upstream of ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated
kinase) are promising anticancer therapies, motivating research to define how
this pathway promotes cancers. In the present study, we show that human capicúa
represses mRNA expression for PEA3 (polyoma enhancer activator 3) Ets
transcription factors ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 (ETV is Ets translocation variant), and
this repression is relieved by multisite controls of capicúa by ERK, p90(RSK)
(p90 ribosomal S6 kinase) and 14-3-3 proteins. Specifically, 14-3-3 binds to
p90(RSK)-phosphorylated Ser¹7³ of capicúa thereby modulating DNA binding to its
HMG (high-mobility group) box, whereas ERK phosphorylations prevent binding of a 
C-terminal NLS (nuclear localization sequence) to importin a4 (KPNA3). ETV1, ETV4
and ETV5 mRNA levels in melanoma cells are elevated by siRNA (small interfering
RNA) knockdown of capicúa, and decreased by inhibiting ERK and/or expressing a
form of capicúa that cannot bind to 14-3-3 proteins. Capicúa knockdown also
enhances cell migration. The findings of the present study give further
mechanistic insights into why ETV1 is highly expressed in certain cancers,
indicate that loss of capicúa can desensitize cells to the effects of ERK pathway
inhibitors, and highlight interconnections among growth factor signalling,
spinocerebellar ataxias and cancers.

PMCID: PMC3025492
PMID: 21087211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Lab Invest. 2011 Mar;91(3):404-12. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2010.179. Epub 2010 Oct
25.

Testing mutual exclusivity of ETS rearranged prostate cancer.

Svensson MA(1), LaFargue CJ, MacDonald TY, Pflueger D, Kitabayashi N, Santa-Cruz 
AM, Garsha KE, Sathyanarayana UG, Riley JP, Yun CS, Nagy D, Kosmeder JW, Pestano 
GA, Tewari AK, Demichelis F, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Prostate cancer is a clinically heterogeneous and multifocal disease. More than
80% of patients with prostate cancer harbor multiple geographically discrete
cancer foci at the time of diagnosis. Emerging data suggest that these foci are
molecularly distinct consistent with the hypothesis that they arise as
independent clones. One of the strongest arguments is the heterogeneity observed 
in the status of E26 transformation specific (ETS) rearrangements between
discrete tumor foci. The clonal evolution of individual prostate cancer foci
based on recent studies demonstrates intertumoral heterogeneity with intratumoral
homogeneity. The issue of multifocality and interfocal heterogeneity is important
and has not been fully elucidated due to lack of the systematic evaluation of ETS
rearrangements in multiple tumor sites. The current study investigates the
frequency of multiple gene rearrangements within the same focus and between
different cancer foci. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays were
designed to detect the four most common recurrent ETS gene rearrangements. In a
cohort of 88 men with localized prostate cancer, we found ERG, ETV1, and ETV5
rearrangements in 51% (44/86), 6% (5/85), and 1% (1/86), respectively. None of
the cases demonstrated ETV4 rearrangements. Mutual exclusiveness of ETS
rearrangements was observed in the majority of cases; however, in six cases, we
discovered multiple ETS or 5' fusion partner rearrangements within the same tumor
focus. In conclusion, we provide further evidence for prostate cancer tumor
heterogeneity with the identification of multiple concurrent gene rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC3130188
PMID: 20975660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Hum Pathol. 2011 Jan;42(1):57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.01.025. Epub 2010
Oct 20.

Matrix metalloproteinase-2 and matrix metalloproteinase-9 codistribute with
transcription factors RUNX1/AML1 and ETV5/ERM at the invasive front of
endometrial and ovarian carcinoma.

Planagumà J(1), Liljeström M, Alameda F, Bützow R, Virtanen I, Reventós J,
Hukkanen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Anatomy, Biomedicum Helsinki, PO Box 63
(Haartmaninkatu 8), FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are implicated in the degradation of the
epithelial basement membrane (BM), invasiveness, and malignancy of endometrial
and ovarian carcinomas. We have recently proposed a cooperative role for
RUNX1/AML1 and ETV5/ERM in myometrial infiltration during endometrioid
endometrial invasiveness. In the present work, we have characterized the
occurrence, levels of expression, and codistribution of gelatinases MMP-2 and -9,
and the transcription factors RUNX1/AML1 and ETV5/ERM, together with collagen
type IV and laminin chains of the epithelial BM in endometrioid endometrial (EEC)
and ovarian endometrioid carcinoma (OEC). MMP-2 and -9 expression levels were
up-regulated at the invasive front of both carcinomas, and they showed a
relatively high degree of volume codistribution with RUNX1/AML1 and ETV5/ERM. EEC
tissue microarrays showed similar significant expression and correlation for MMPs
and the transcription factors. When the array samples were grouped according to
the carcinoma stages, there was significant correlation in the expression levels 
for both MMP-2 and -9 with ETV5/ERM. Colocalization of MMP-2 and -9 with
epithelial basement membrane component collagen type IV showed close spatial
association for both MMPs and discontinuation of collagen type IV expression at
the invasive front in both EEC and OEC. BM components laminin a1, a2, a3, a5, and
<U+03B3>2 chains, laminin a5 receptor basal cell adhesion molecule (BCAM), and laminin
332 were all detected both in EEC and OEC. Highest expression levels in EEC were 
for laminin a3 and in OEC for laminin a5 chain. Laminin <U+03B3>2 chain and laminin 332 
showed discontinuous immunoreactivity in the epithelial basement membrane
suggestive of proteolytic degradation. These results indicate concurrent
mechanisms in expression of MMP-2 and -9, RUNX1/AML1 and ETV5/ERM, and several of
the basement membrane components, which are likely to associate with the invasive
stage of EEC and OEC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20970160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Exp Zool A Ecol Genet Physiol. 2010 Dec 1;313(10):671-9. doi: 10.1002/jez.639. 
Epub 2010 Sep 13.

Effects of combined administration of low-dose gossypol with steroid hormones on 
the mitotic phase of spermatogenesis of rat.

Chang Q(1), Qian X, Xu Z, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Our previous studies suggested that combined low-dose gossypol with steroid
hormones possesses a reversible antifertility role on adult male rat.
Spermatocyte apoptosis during the meiosis of spermatogenesis is the main reason
for the antifertility. This study evaluates the effects of the regimen on the
mitosis of spermatogenesis. Thirty-two adult male rats were divided into four
groups randomly, Group GH: rats were fed orally with gossypol acetic acid (GA,
12.5 mg/kg d) and desogestrel (DSG, 0.125 mg/kg d)/ethinylestradiol (EE, 0.025
mg/kg d)/testosterone undecanoate (TU, 100 mg/kg d); Group G: a single dose of GA
(12.5 mg/kg d); Group H: the same dosage of DSG/EE/TU as in Group GH; Group C:
rats were treated with vehicle (1% methyl cellulose) as control. Testes were
removed at the 8th week after treatment to assess the weight, volumes, diameter, 
and degenerated rate of seminiferous tubule, spermatogonia is quantitated by
stereological assay. TUNEL assay and proliferating cell nuclear antigen
immunohistochemistry were used to determine the germ cell apoptosis and
proliferation. The changes of gene expression of glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and Ets variant gene 5 (Etv5) were analyzed. The
results manifested that the spermatogenesis was suppressed, the type A and
intermediate spermatogonia reduced, and spermatocyte and spermatid apoptosis
increased both in Group GH and Group H. The expressions of GDNF protein in these 
two groups were downregulated, but no change was observed in Etv5 expression.
However, the numbers of spermatogonia, germ cell apoptosis and proliferation, and
the expressions of GDNF and Etv5 were unchanged in Group G compared with Group C.
Above all, we concluded that the mitotic phase of spermatogenesis is suppressed
by the combination regimen, it might be the steroid hormones in the regimen that 
caused the reduction of spermatogonia through the downregulation of GDNF.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc., A Wiley Company.

PMID: 20839281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Development. 2010 Oct;137(20):3417-26. doi: 10.1242/dev.051789. Epub 2010 Sep 8.

Preaxial polydactyly: interactions among ETV, TWIST1 and HAND2 control
anterior-posterior patterning of the limb.

Zhang Z(1), Sui P, Dong A, Hassell J, Cserjesi P, Chen YT, Behringer RR, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Preaxial polydactyly (PPD) is a common limb-associated birth defect characterized
by extra digit(s) in the anterior autopod. It often results from ectopic sonic
hedgehog (Shh) expression in the anterior limb bud. Although several
transcription factors are known to restrict Shh expression to the posterior limb 
bud, how they function together remains unclear. Here we provide evidence from
mouse conditional knockout limb buds that the bHLH family transcription factor
gene Twist1 is required to inhibit Shh expression in the anterior limb bud
mesenchyme. More importantly, we uncovered genetic synergism between Twist1 and
the ETS family transcription factor genes Etv4 and Etv5 (collectively Etv), which
also inhibit Shh expression. Biochemical data suggest that this genetic
interaction is a result of direct association between TWIST1 and ETV proteins.
Previous studies have shown that TWIST1 functions by forming homodimers or
heterodimers with other bHLH factors including HAND2, a key positive regulator of
Shh expression. We found that the PPD phenotype observed in Etv mutants is
suppressed by a mutation in Hand2, indicative of genetic antagonism. Furthermore,
overexpression of ETV proteins influences the dimerization of these bHLH factors.
Together, our data suggest that through biochemical interactions, the Shh
expression regulators ETV, TWIST1 and HAND2 attain a precise balance to establish
anterior-posterior patterning of the limb.

PMCID: PMC2947755
PMID: 20826535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Stem Cells. 2010 Oct;28(10):1882-92. doi: 10.1002/stem.508.

ETV5 regulates sertoli cell chemokines involved in mouse stem/progenitor
spermatogonia maintenance.

Simon L(1), Ekman GC, Garcia T, Carnes K, Zhang Z, Murphy T, Murphy KM, Hess RA, 
Cooke PS, Hofmann MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois
61802, USA.

Spermatogonial stem cells are the only stem cells in the body that transmit
genetic information to offspring. Although growth factors responsible for
self-renewal of these cells are known, the factors and mechanisms that attract
and physically maintain these cells within their microenvironment are poorly
understood. Mice with targeted disruption of Ets variant gene 5 (Etv5) show total
loss of stem/progenitor spermatogonia following the first wave of
spermatogenesis, resulting in a Sertoli cell-only phenotype and aspermia.
Microarray analysis of primary Sertoli cells from Etv5 knockout (Etv5(-/-))
versus wild-type (WT) mice revealed significant decreases in expression of
several chemokines. Chemotaxis assays demonstrated that migration of
stem/progenitor spermatogonia toward Etv5(-/-) Sertoli cells was significantly
decreased compared to migration toward WT Sertoli cells. Interestingly,
differentiating spermatogonia, spermatocytes, and round spermatids were not
chemoattracted by WT Sertoli cells, whereas stem/progenitor spermatogonia showed 
a high and significant chemotactic index. Rescue assays using recombinant
chemokines indicated that C-C-motif ligand 9 (CCL9) facilitates Sertoli cell
chemoattraction of stem/progenitor spermatogonia, which express C-C-receptor type
1 (CCR1). In addition, there is protein-DNA interaction between ETV5 and Ccl9,
suggesting that ETV5 might be a direct regulator of Ccl9 expression. Taken
together, our data show for the first time that Sertoli cells are chemoattractive
for stem/progenitor spermatogonia, and that production of specific chemokines is 
regulated by ETV5. Therefore, changes in chemokine production and consequent
decreases in chemoattraction by Etv5(-/-) Sertoli cells helps to explain
stem/progenitor spermatogonia loss in Etv5(-/-) mice.

PMCID: PMC3109872
PMID: 20799334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Nov;299(5):E772-85. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00199.2010. Epub 2010 Aug 24.

Glucose-induced ERM protein activation and translocation regulates insulin
secretion.

Lopez JP(1), Turner JR, Philipson LH.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine, The Univ. of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

A key step in regulating insulin secretion is insulin granule trafficking to the 
plasma membrane. Using live-cell time-lapse confocal microscopy, we observed a
dynamic association of insulin granules with filamentous actin and PIP2-enriched 
structures. We found that the scaffolding protein family ERM, comprising ezrin,
radixin, and moesin, are expressed in ß-cells and target both F-actin and PIP2.
Furthermore, ERM proteins are activated via phosphorylation in a glucose- and
calcium-dependent manner. This activation leads to a translocation of the ERM
proteins to sites on the cell periphery enriched in insulin granules, the exocyst
complex docking protein Exo70, and lipid rafts. ERM scaffolding proteins also
participate in insulin granule trafficking and docking to the plasma membrane.
Overexpression of a truncated dominant-negative ezrin construct that lacks the
ERM F-actin binding domain leads to a reduction in insulin granules near the
plasma membrane and impaired secretion. Conversely, overexpression of a
constitutively active ezrin results in more granules near the cell periphery and 
an enhancement of insulin secretion. Diabetic mouse islets contain less active
ERM, suggestive of a novel mechanism whereby impairment of insulin granule
trafficking to the membrane through a complex containing F-actin, PIP2, Exo70,
and ERM proteins contributes to defective insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC2980361
PMID: 20739507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mod Pathol. 2010 Nov;23(11):1492-8. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.149. Epub 2010
Aug 6.

ETS family-associated gene fusions in Japanese prostate cancer: analysis of 194
radical prostatectomy samples.

Miyagi Y(1), Sasaki T, Fujinami K, Sano J, Senga Y, Miura T, Kameda Y, Sakuma Y, 
Nakamura Y, Harada M, Tsuchiya E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology and Genetics Division, Kanagawa Cancer Center Research
Institute, Yokohama, Japan. miyagi@gancen.asahi.yokohama.jp

The incidence and clinical significance of the TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion in
prostate cancer has been investigated with contradictory results. It is now
common knowledge that significant variability in gene alterations exists
according to ethnic background in various kinds of cancer. In this study, we
evaluated gene fusions involving the ETS gene family in Japanese prostate cancer.
Total RNA from 194 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded prostate cancer samples
obtained by radical prostatectomy was subjected to reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction to detect the common TMPRSS2:ERG T1-E4 and T1-E5 fusion
transcripts and five other non-TMPRSS2:ERG fusion transcripts. We identified 54
TMPRSS2:ERG-positive cases (54/194, 28%) and two HNRPA2B1:ETV1-positive cases
(2/194, 1%). The SLC45A3-ELK4 transcript, a fusion transcript without structural 
gene rearrangement, was detectable in five cases (5/194, 3%). The frequencies of 
both TMPRSS2:ERG- and non-TMPRSS2:ERG-positive cases were lower than those
reported for European, North American or Brazilian patients. Internodular
heterogeneity of TMPRSS2:ERG was observed in 5 out of 11 multifocal cases (45%); 
a frequency similar to that found in European and North American cases. We found 
a positive correlation between the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion and a Gleason score of =7
and patient age, but found no relationship with pT stage or plasma
prostate-specific antigen concentration. To exclude the possibility that Japanese
prostate cancer displays novel TMPRSS2:ERG transcript variants or has unique 5'
fusion partners for the ETS genes, we performed 5' RACE using fresh-frozen
prostate cancer samples. We identified only the normal 5' cDNA ends for ERG, ETV1
and ETV5 in fusion-negative cases. Because we identified a relatively low
frequency of TMPRSS2:ERG and other fusions, further evaluation is required before
this promising molecular marker should be introduced into the management of
Japanese prostate cancer patients.

PMID: 20693979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Aug 13;399(1):104-10. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.049. Epub 2010 Jul 18.

Solution structure of the N-terminal transactivation domain of ERM modified by
SUMO-1.

Lens Z(1), Dewitte F, Monté D, Baert JL, Bompard C, Sénéchal M, Van Lint C, de
Launoit Y, Villeret V, Verger A.

Author information: 
(1)IRI USR CNRS, Parc CNRS de la Haute Borne, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

ERM is a member of the PEA3 group of the Ets transcription factor family that
plays important roles in development and tumorigenesis. The PEA3s share an
N-terminal transactivation domain (TADn) whose activity is inhibited by small
ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO). However, the consequences of sumoylation and its 
underlying molecular mechanism remain unclear. The domain structure of ERM TADn
alone or modified by SUMO-1 was analyzed using small-angle X-ray scattering
(SAXS). Low resolution shapes determined ab initio from the scattering data
indicated an elongated shape and an unstructured conformation of TADn in
solution. Covalent attachment of SUMO-1 does not perturb the structure of TADn as
indicated by the linear arrangement of the SUMO moiety with respect to TADn.
Thus, ERM belongs to the growing family of proteins that contain intrinsically
unstructured regions. The flexible nature of TADn may be instrumental for ERM
recognition and binding to diverse molecular partners.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20647002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Neurosci. 2010 Jul 7;30(27):9224-7. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1977-10.2010.

Expression of dopamine pathway genes in the midbrain is independent of known ETS 
transcription factor activity.

Wang S(1), Turner EE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, Washington 98101, USA.

In nematodes, the ETS-family transcription factor ast-1 regulates multiple genes 
comprising the dopamine (DA) neuron phenotype, including biosynthetic enzymes and
transporters. ETS transcription factors are hypothesized to play a similar role
in vertebrates, and based on its expression in the adult mouse midbrain, Etv5/ERM
has been proposed as a regulator of DA gene expression in the substantia nigra
(SN) and ventral tegmental area (VTA). Here we show that Etv5 expression is not
detectable until postnatal stages in the midbrain, well after development of the 
DA system, and that Etv5 knock-out and control mice show comparable tyrosine
hydroxylase and dopamine transporter expression in the embryonic and adult
midbrain. Other known members of the ETS family do not have expression patterns
that are consistent with a role in DA gene regulation in the SN/VTA. These
findings suggest that the ETS factors, while required for the generation of the
DA phenotype in nematodes, do not play such a role in the mouse midbrain.

PMCID: PMC2910254
PMID: 20610757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS Med. 2010 May 25;7(5):e1000284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000284.

Genetic markers of adult obesity risk are associated with greater early infancy
weight gain and growth.

Elks CE(1), Loos RJ, Sharp SJ, Langenberg C, Ring SM, Timpson NJ, Ness AR, Davey 
Smith G, Dunger DB, Wareham NJ, Ong KK.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Epidemiology Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide studies have identified several common genetic variants
that are robustly associated with adult obesity risk. Exploration of these
genotype associations in children may provide insights into the timing of weight 
changes leading to adult obesity.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Children from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and
Children (ALSPAC) birth cohort were genotyped for ten genetic variants previously
associated with adult BMI. Eight variants that showed individual associations
with childhood BMI (in/near: FTO, MC4R, TMEM18, GNPDA2, KCTD15, NEGR1, BDNF, and 
ETV5) were used to derive an "obesity-risk-allele score" comprising the total
number of risk alleles (range: 2-15 alleles) in each child with complete genotype
data (n = 7,146). Repeated measurements of weight, length/height, and body mass
index from birth to age 11 years were expressed as standard deviation scores
(SDS). Early infancy was defined as birth to age 6 weeks, and early infancy
failure to thrive was defined as weight gain between below the 5th centile,
adjusted for birth weight. The obesity-risk-allele score showed little
association with birth weight (regression coefficient: 0.01 SDS per allele; 95%
CI 0.00-0.02), but had an apparently much larger positive effect on early infancy
weight gain (0.119 SDS/allele/year; 0.023-0.216) than on subsequent childhood
weight gain (0.004 SDS/allele/year; 0.004-0.005). The obesity-risk-allele score
was also positively associated with early infancy length gain (0.158
SDS/allele/year; 0.032-0.284) and with reduced risk of early infancy failure to
thrive (odds ratio = 0.92 per allele; 0.86-0.98; p = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of robust genetic markers identified greater early infancy
gains in weight and length as being on the pathway to adult obesity risk in a
contemporary birth cohort.

PMCID: PMC2876048
PMID: 20520848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Lipid Res. 2010 Sep;51(9):2775-84. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M008490. Epub 2010 Jun 2.

The small molecule phenamil is a modulator of adipocyte differentiation and
PPARgamma expression.

Park KW(1), Waki H, Choi SP, Park KM, Tontonoz P.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California at Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.

We previously described the use of a cell-based screening approach to identify
small molecules that regulate adipocyte differentiation. Here we identify the
amiloride derivative phenamil as an adipogenic compound. Phenamil acutely induces
expression of the key transcription factor of adipogenesis, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and, consequently, promotes the
differentiation of multiple preadipocyte cell lines, including 3T3-L1 and F442A. 
Interestingly, the adipogenic action of phenamil is distinct from and additive
with both PPARgamma ligands and the previously identified adipogenic small
molecule harmine. To identify signaling pathways mediating phenamil's effects, we
performed transcriptional profiling of 3T3-F442A preadipocytes. ETS variant 4
(ETV4) was identified as a gene rapidly induced by phenamil but not by other
adipogenic small molecules or PPARgamma agonists. Transient expression of ETV4 in
preadipocytes enhances the expression of PPARgamma. Stable overexpression of ETV4
promotes expression of PPARgamma and its downstream target genes and enhances
morphological differentiation. Finally, knockdown of PPARgamma expression by
shRNA blocks the effects of phenamil on adipocyte differentiation and gene
expression, but it does not block phenamil induction of ETV4, which suggests that
ETV4 acts upstream of PPARgamma in differentiation processes. These results
identify a phenamil as new small molecule tool for the probing of adipocyte
differentiation that acts, at least in part, through induction of ETV4
expression.

PMCID: PMC2918460
PMID: 20519739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Proteome Res. 2010 Aug 6;9(8):3799-811. doi: 10.1021/pr901096u.

Proteome analysis reveals new mechanisms of Bcl11b-loss driven apoptosis.

Karanam NK(1), Grabarczyk P, Hammer E, Scharf C, Venz S, Gesell-Salazar M,
Barthlen W, Przybylski GK, Schmidt CA, Völker U.

Author information: 
(1)Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung,
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universität Greifswald, Germany.

The Bcl11b protein was shown to be important for a variety of functions such as T
cell differentiation, normal development of central nervous system, and DNA
damage response. Malignant T cells undergo apoptotic cell death upon BCL11B
down-regulation, however, the detailed mechanism of cell death is not fully
understood yet. Here we employed two-dimensional difference in-gel
electrophoresis (2D-DIGE), mass spectrometry and cell biological experiments to
investigate the role of Bcl11b in malignant T cell lines such as Jurkat and
huT78. We provide evidence for the involvement of the mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway and observed cleavage and fragments of known caspase targets such as
myosin, spectrin, and vimentin. Our findings suggest an involvement of ERM
proteins, which were up-regulated and phosphorylated upon Bcl11b down-regulation.
Moreover, the levels of several proteins implicated in cell cycle entry,
including DUT-N, CDK6, MCM4, MCM6, and MAT1 were elevated. Thus, the proteome
data presented here confirm previous findings concerning the consequences of
BCL11B knock-down and provide new insight into the mechanisms of cell death and
cell cycle disturbances induced by Bcl11b depletion.

PMID: 20513151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Development. 2010 Jun;137(12):1975-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.051656. Epub 2010 May 12.

The transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 mediate formation of the ureteric bud tip
domain during kidney development.

Kuure S(1), Chi X, Lu B, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Signaling by the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase promotes cell movements in the
Wolffian duct that give rise to the first ureteric bud tip, initiating kidney
development. Although the ETS transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 are known to be
required for mouse kidney development and to act downstream of Ret, their
specific functions are unclear. Here, we examine their role by analyzing the
ability of Etv4 Etv5 compound mutant cells to contribute to chimeric kidneys.
Etv4(-/-);Etv5(+/-) cells show a limited distribution in the caudal Wolffian duct
and ureteric bud, similar to Ret(-/-) cells, revealing a cell-autonomous role for
Etv4 and Etv5 in the cell rearrangements promoted by Ret. By contrast,
Etv4(-/-);Etv5(-/-) cells display more severe developmental limitations,
suggesting a broad role for Etv4 and Etv5 downstream of multiple signals, which
are together important for Wolffian duct and ureteric bud morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2875840
PMID: 20463033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Gene Expr Patterns. 2010 Jun;10(4-5):193-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2010.03.004. Epub 
2010 Mar 27.

Expression of Fgf signalling pathway related genes during palatal rugae
development in the mouse.

Porntaveetus T(1), Oommen S, Sharpe PT, Ohazama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, Dental Institute, King's College
London, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Fgf signalling plays critical roles in the development of many ectodermal organs.
Palatal rugae are ectodermal corrugated structures of the hard palate and in
common with other ectodermal appendages, their development is initiated as
epithelial thickenings that form placodes as the underlying mesenchymal cells
condense. The placode regions then bulge towards to oral cavity to form an
overall corrugated appearance. We carried out comparative in situ hybridization
analysis of 18 Fgf ligands (Fgf1-Fgf10, Fgf15-Fgf18, Fgf20-Fgf23), four Fgf
receptors (Fgfr1-Fgfr4) and four other Fgf signalling related molecules (Spry1,
Spry2, Spry4 and Etv5) during murine palatal rugae development. Fgfr1 and Etv5
showed restricted expression in the interplacode epithelium whereas Fgf18
expression was localized to mesenchyme underneath the interplacode epithelium.
The expression of Fgf9 was restricted to epithelial ruga placodes whereas Spry4
expression was observed in mesenchyme underneath the placodes. The localized
expression of Fgf2, Fgf8, Fgf16, Fgfr4 and Spry1 were found in bulge mesenchyme. 
Fgf3, Fgf6, Fgfr2 and Spry2 showed expression in the entire epithelium whereas
Fgf10 was expressed throughout the mesenchyme. Fgf signalling thus shows dynamic 
temporo-spatial expression in murine palatal rugae development.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20348033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Dev Biol. 2010 Jun 1;342(1):11-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.03.011. Epub 2010
Mar 24.

Overlapping functions of Pea3 ETS transcription factors in FGF signaling during
zebrafish development.

Znosko WA(1), Yu S, Thomas K, Molina GA, Li C, Tsang W, Dawid IB, Moon AM, Tsang 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 3501 Fifth Avenue,
BST3-5062, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are secreted molecules that activate the
RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. In zebrafish
development, FGF signaling is responsible for establishing dorsal polarity,
maintaining the isthmic organizer, and cardiac ventricle formation. Because
several ETS factors are known transcriptional mediators of MAPK signaling, we
hypothesized that these factors function to mediate FGF signaling processes. In
zebrafish, the simultaneous knock-down of three Pea3 ETS proteins, Etv5, Erm, and
Pea3, produced phenotypes reminiscent of embryos deficient in FGF signaling.
Morphant embryos displayed both cardiac and left/right patterning defects as well
as disruption of the isthmic organizer. Furthermore, the expression of FGF target
genes was abolished in Pea3 ETS depleted embryos. To understand how FGF signaling
and ETS factors control gene expression, transcriptional regulation of dusp6 was 
studied in mouse and zebrafish. Conserved Pea3 ETS binding sites were identified 
within the Dusp6 promoter, and reporter assays showed that one of these sites is 
required for dusp6 induction by FGFs. We further demonstrated the interaction of 
Pea3 ETS factors with the Dusp6 promoter both in vitro and in vivo. These results
revealed the requirement of ETS factors in transducing FGF signals in
developmental processes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2866755
PMID: 20346941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Apr;34(4):478-85. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181d6827b.

ETS gene aberrations in atypical cribriform lesions of the prostate: Implications
for the distinction between intraductal carcinoma of the prostate and cribriform 
high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

Han B(1), Suleman K, Wang L, Siddiqui J, Sercia L, Magi-Galluzzi C, Palanisamy N,
Chinnaiyan AM, Zhou M, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, USA.

BACKGROUND: Atypical cribriform lesions (ACLs) of the prostate consist of
cribriform glands lined with cytologically malignant cells with partial or
complete basal cell lining. It may represent cribriform "high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia" (HGPIN) or "intraductal carcinoma of the prostate"
(IDC-P), which is almost always associated with clinically aggressive prostate
carcinoma (PCa). Distinction between these 2 lesions has profound clinical
significance, especially on needle biopsies. However, there are lesions that do
not fully satisfy the criteria for IDC-P yet are worse than typical HGPIN and are
difficult to distinguish based on morphologic criteria alone.
METHODS: To better understand the biologic and molecular basis of distinction
between cribriform HGPIN and IDC, we used break-apart fluorescence in-situ
hybridization assay to assess ETS gene aberrations, a specific and commonest
molecular alteration involving PCa, in a cohort of 16 isolated ACL, presumed to
be an isolated cribriform HGPIN, and 45 carcinoma-associated ACL (ACL-PCa) on
radical prostatectomy specimens, presumed to be spectrum of IDC-P. The latter was
further divided into 2 groups: group A with marked nuclear atypia (nuclear size
6xnormal or larger) and/or comedonecrosis (n=21) and group B that did not fulfill
these criteria (n=24).
RESULTS: Overall, ERG rearrangement was absent (0 of 16) in isolated cribriform
HGPIN, whereas present in 75% (36 of 48) of IDC-P, of which 65% (23 of 36) were
through deletion and 35% (13 of 36) through insertion. Notably, 17% (6 of 36) of 
the IDC-P showed duplication of ERG rearrangement in combination with deletion of
5'-ERG. Hundred percent (34 of 34) of the IDC-P showed concordance of ERG
rearrangement status with adjacent invasive carcinoma. There was no difference
between the 2 groups of IDC-P lesions regarding prevalence of ERG rearrangement
(group A 79% vs. group B 74%) and EDel2+ (20% vs. 15%). No case with ETV1, ETV4, 
or ETV5 rearrangement was identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our molecular data suggest that isolated cribriform HGPIN and IDC-P 
are biologically distinct lesions. Majority of ACL-PCa most likely represent
intraductal spread of PCa. There is a significant overlap between IDC-P and HGPIN
at the lower grade morphologic spectrum. ERG break-apart fluorescence in-situ
hybridization assay provides insight into understanding the molecular basis of
cribriform HGPIN and IDC-P and has potential clinical implications in their
distinction on needle biopsies.

PMID: 20220513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 May;95(5):2418-25. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2077. Epub 
2010 Mar 9.

Implication of genetic variants near NEGR1, SEC16B, TMEM18, ETV5/DGKG, GNPDA2,
LIN7C/BDNF, MTCH2, BCDIN3D/FAIM2, SH2B1, FTO, MC4R, and KCTD15 with obesity and
type 2 diabetes in 7705 Chinese.

Ng MC(1), Tam CH, So WY, Ho JS, Chan AW, Lee HM, Wang Y, Lam VK, Chan JC, Ma RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China.

OBJECTIVE: Recent genome-wide association studies have identified multiple novel 
loci associated with obesity in Europeans. We hypothesized that these genetic
variants may be associated with obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Chinese.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We examined 14 associated single-nucleotide
polymorphisms at 12 loci (NEGR1, SEC16B, TMEM18, ETV5/DGKG, GNPDA2, LIN7C/BDNF,
MTCH2, BCDIN3D/FAIM2, SH2B1, FTO, MC4R, and KCTD15) in 605 healthy adults, 1087
healthy adolescents and 6013 T2D patients from Hong Kong.
RESULTS: The European at-risk alleles at five loci including GNPDA2,
BCDIN3D/FAIM2, SH2B1, FTO, and KCTD15 were significantly associated with
increased body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (4.5 x 10(-8) < P < 0.024), 
and/or obesity risk (odds ratio 1.14-1.22, 2.0 x 10(-5) < P < 0.002) in our
Chinese populations. The former four loci as well as LIN7C/BDNF were also
modestly associated with T2D risk (odds ratio 1.09-1.22, 0.008 < P < 0.041), but 
the associations were lost after adjustment for BMI, suggesting their roles in
T2D risk are mediated through modulation of adiposity. Joint effect analyses of
the five adiposity loci revealed an increase of about 0.29 kg/m(2) in BMI with
each additional copy of at-risk allele (P(trend) = 4.2 x 10(-12)).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the important contribution of GNPDA2,
BCDIN3D/FAIM2, SH2B1, FTO, and KCTD15 in the regulation of adiposity, which in
turn affects T2D risk in Chinese.

PMID: 20215397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 22;5(1):e8854. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008854.

Pea3 transcription factors and wnt1-induced mouse mammary neoplasia.

Baker R(1), Kent CV, Silbermann RA, Hassell JA, Young LJ, Howe LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, New York, USA.

The role of the PEA3 subfamily of Ets transcription factors in breast neoplasia
is controversial. Although overexpression of PEA3 (E1AF/ETV4), and of the related
factors ERM (ETV5) and ER81 (ETV1), have been observed in human and mouse breast 
tumors, PEA3 factors have also been ascribed a tumor suppressor function. Here,
we utilized the MMTV/Wnt1 mouse strain to further interrogate the role of PEA3
transcription factors in mammary tumorigenesis based on our previous observation 
that Pea3 is highly expressed in MMTV/Wnt1 mammary tumors. Pea3 expression in
mouse mammary tissues was visualized using a Pea3(NLSlacZ) reporter strain. In
normal mammary glands, Pea3 expression is predominantly confined to myoepithelial
cells. Wnt1 transgene expression induced marked amplification of this cell
compartment in nontumorous mammary glands, accompanied by an apparent increase in
Pea3 expression. The pattern of Pea3 expression in MMTV/Wnt1 mammary glands
recapitulated the cellular profile of activated beta-catenin/TCF signaling, which
was visualized using both beta-catenin immunohistochemistry and the
beta-catenin/TCF-responsive reporter Axin2(NLSlacZ). To test the requirement for 
PEA3 factors in Wnt1-induced tumorigenesis, we employed a mammary-targeted
dominant negative PEA3 transgene, DeltaNPEA3En. Expression of DeltaNPEA3En
delayed early-onset tumor formation in MMTV/Wnt1 virgin females (P = 0.03),
suggesting a requirement for PEA3 factor function for Wnt1-driven tumor
formation. Consistent with this observation, expression of the DeltaNPEA3En
transgene was profoundly reduced in mammary tumors compared to nontumorous
mammary glands from bigenic MMTV/Wnt1, MMTV/DeltaNPEA3En mice (P = 0.01). Our
data provide the first description of Wnt1-mediated expansion of the
Pea3-expressing myoepithelial compartment in nontumorous mammary glands.
Consistent with this observation, mammary myoepithelium was selectively
responsive to Wnt1. Together these data suggest the MMTV/Wnt1 strain as a
potential model of basal breast cancer. Furthermore, this study provides evidence
for a protumorigenic role of PEA3 factors in breast neoplasia, and supports
targeting the PEA3 transcription factor family in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2809747
PMID: 20107508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Verh K Acad Geneeskd Belg. 2009;71(3):115-39.

[Genetics and male infertility].

[Article in Dutch]

Stouffs K(1), Vandermaelen D, Tournaye H, Liebaers I, Van Steirteghem A, Lissens 
W.

Author information: 
(1)Departement voor Embryologie en Genetica, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel.

Infertility is a problem affecting many couples with a child wish. In about half 
of these couples a male factor is (co-) responsible for the fertility concern.
For part of these patients a genetic factor will be the underlying cause of the
problems. This paper gives an overview of the studies performed in the Department
of Embryology and Genetics of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel and the Centre for
Medical Genetics of UZ Brussel in order to gain more insight into the genetic
causes of male infertility. The studies, focusing on men with fertility problems,
can be subdivided into three groups: studies on deletions on the long arm of the 
Y chromosome, studies on X-linked genes and studies on autosomal genes. It is
obvious that Yq microdeletions should be considered as a cause of male
infertility. Only for patients with a complete AZFc deletion, a small number of
spermatozoa can be retrieved. However, even for these patients assisted
reproductive technologies are necessary. Complete AZF deletions are found in 4.6%
of the patients visiting the centres for Reproductive Medicine and Medical
Genetics of the UZ Brussel and for whom no other cause of the fertility problems 
have been detected. Taken into consideration this low prevalence of Yq
microdeletions, it is obvious that also other factors, including genetic factors,
must be causing fertility problems. Potentially, gr/gr deletions (partial
deletions of the AZFc region) might influence the fertility status of the
patients. It remains, however, unclear which of the genes located in the deleted 
regions are important for the progression of spermatogenesis, in case of partial 
or complete AZF deletions. In our studies we have also investigated mutations in 
genes located on the X chromosome. In analogy to the Y chromosome, the X
chromosome is interesting in view of studying male infertility since men only
have a single copy of the sex chromosomes. As a consequence, mutations in genes
crucial for spermatogenesis will have an immediate impact on the sperm
production. The genes NXF2, USP26 and TAF7L were investigated for the presence of
mutations. All observed single nucleotide changes were also present in control
samples, questioning their relationship with male infertility. We also studied
five autosomal genes: SYCP3, MSH4, DNMT3L, STRA8 and ETV5. Only for the genes
STRA8 and ETV5, changes were detected that were absent in a control population
existing of men with normozoospermia. Functional analysis of the changes in ETV5 
and the localization of the change observed in STRA8 showed that also these
alterations were probably not the cause of the fertility problems in these men.
It can be concluded that mutations are rarely detected in men with fertility
problems. This low frequency of mutations has also been confirmed in several
published studies. Therefore, further research is necessary to determine the
impact of genetic causes on male infertility.

PMID: 20088251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jan 15;6(1):e1000809. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000809.

Kidney development in the absence of Gdnf and Spry1 requires Fgf10.

Michos O(1), Cebrian C, Hyink D, Grieshammer U, Williams L, D'Agati V, Licht JD, 
Martin GR, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA.

GDNF signaling through the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) is required for
ureteric bud (UB) branching morphogenesis during kidney development in mice and
humans. Furthermore, many other mutant genes that cause renal agenesis exert
their effects via the GDNF/RET pathway. Therefore, RET signaling is believed to
play a central role in renal organogenesis. Here, we re-examine the extent to
which the functions of Gdnf and Ret are unique, by seeking conditions in which a 
kidney can develop in their absence. We find that in the absence of the negative 
regulator Spry1, Gdnf, and Ret are no longer required for extensive kidney
development. Gdnf-/-;Spry1-/- or Ret-/-;Spry1-/- double mutants develop large
kidneys with normal ureters, highly branched collecting ducts, extensive
nephrogenesis, and normal histoarchitecture. However, despite extensive
branching, the UB displays alterations in branch spacing, angle, and frequency.
UB branching in the absence of Gdnf and Spry1 requires Fgf10 (which normally
plays a minor role), as removal of even one copy of Fgf10 in Gdnf-/-;Spry1-/-
mutants causes a complete failure of ureter and kidney development. In contrast
to Gdnf or Ret mutations, renal agenesis caused by concomitant lack of the
transcription factors ETV4 and ETV5 is not rescued by removing Spry1, consistent 
with their role downstream of both RET and FGFRs. This shows that, for many
aspects of renal development, the balance between positive signaling by RTKs and 
negative regulation of this signaling by SPRY1 is more critical than the specific
role of GDNF. Other signals, including FGF10, can perform many of the functions
of GDNF, when SPRY1 is absent. But GDNF/RET signaling has an apparently unique
function in determining normal branching pattern. In contrast to GDNF or FGF10,
Etv4 and Etv5 represent a critical node in the RTK signaling network that cannot 
by bypassed by reducing the negative regulation of upstream signals.

PMCID: PMC2797609
PMID: 20084103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Mar;95(3):1395-403. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-1465. Epub
2010 Jan 8.

Obesity susceptibility genetic variants identified from recent genome-wide
association studies: implications in a chinese population.

Cheung CY(1), Tso AW, Cheung BM, Xu A, Ong KL, Fong CH, Wat NM, Janus ED, Sham
PC, Lam KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, 102 Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong.

CONTEXT: Recent large-scale genome-wide association studies identified novel
genetic variants associated with obesity and body mass index (BMI) in addition to
the well-described FTO and MC4R genetic variants.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine 13 previously reported obesity and/or
BMI-associated loci for associations with obesity in Chinese.
DESIGN AND STUDY PARTICIPANTS: This was a cross-sectional case-control study in
470 obese cases (BMI > or =27.5 kg/m(2)) and 700 normal-weight controls (18.5 <
or = BMI < or = 23.0 kg/m(2)).
RESULTS: A significant association with obesity could be replicated (one tailed P
< 0.05) in seven of the 13 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
case-control study. These included GNPDA2 rs10938397 (P = 7.3 x 10(-4)); FTO
rs8050136 (P = 8 x 10(-4)); MC4R rs17782313 (P = 1.2 x 10(-3)); KCTD15 rs29941 (P
= 8 x 10(-3)); SFRS10-ETV5-DGKG rs7647305 (P = 0.023); SEC16B-RASAL2 rs10913469
(P = 0.041); and NEGR1 rs3101336 (P = 0.046). Combined genetic risk scores were
calculated, and we observed ORs ranging from 1.17 to 1.23 for each unit increase 
in the genetic risk scores. Associations with obesity-related quantitative traits
were analyzed separately for cases and controls. KCTD15 SNP rs29941 (P = 1 x
10(-3)) was significantly associated with fasting glucose in the control group,
whereas only the FTO SNP rs8050136 was associated with BMI (P = 3.5 x 10(-3)) in 
the obese group. However, in an extension study of 1938 subjects from the
population-based Hong Kong Cardiovascular Risk Factors Prevalence Study,
rs8050136, rs10938397, and rs17782313 showed significant associations with BMI.
CONCLUSION: We have succeeded in replicating, in a Chinese population, the
associations with obesity in seven SNPs reported in recent genome-wide
association studies. Further functional and fine-mapping studies to elucidate the
roles of these putative obesity-related genes and genetic variants are warranted.

PMID: 20061430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Nat Genet. 2009 Dec;41(12):1295-302. doi: 10.1038/ng.476. Epub 2009 Nov 8.

Etv4 and Etv5 are required downstream of GDNF and Ret for kidney branching
morphogenesis.

Lu BC(1), Cebrian C, Chi X, Kuure S, Kuo R, Bates CM, Arber S, Hassell J, MacNeil
L, Hoshi M, Jain S, Asai N, Takahashi M, Schmidt-Ott KM, Barasch J, D'Agati V,
Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Apr;42(4):361.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor signaling through the Ret receptor
tyrosine kinase is crucial for ureteric bud branching morphogenesis during kidney
development, yet few of the downstream genes are known. Here we show that the ETS
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 are positively regulated by Ret signaling in 
the ureteric bud tips. Mice lacking both Etv4 alleles and one Etv5 allele show
either renal agenesis or severe hypodysplasia, whereas kidney development fails
completely in double homozygotes. We identified several genes whose expression in
the ureteric bud depends on Etv4 and Etv5, including Cxcr4, Myb, Met and Mmp14.
Thus, Etv4 and Etv5 are key components of a gene network downstream of Ret that
promotes and controls renal branching morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2787691
PMID: 19898483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;54(12):727-31. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.106. Epub 2009 Oct 23.

Association between obesity and polymorphisms in SEC16B, TMEM18, GNPDA2, BDNF,
FAIM2 and MC4R in a Japanese population.

Hotta K(1), Nakamura M, Nakamura T, Matsuo T, Nakata Y, Kamohara S, Miyatake N,
Kotani K, Komatsu R, Itoh N, Mineo I, Wada J, Masuzaki H, Yoneda M, Nakajima A,
Funahashi T, Miyazaki S, Tokunaga K, Kawamoto M, Ueno T, Hamaguchi K, Tanaka K,
Yamada K, Hanafusa T, Oikawa S, Yoshimatsu H, Nakao K, Sakata T, Matsuzawa Y,
Kamatani N, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Endocrinology and Metabolism, Center for Genomic Medicine,
RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. kikuko@src.riken.jp

There is evidence that the obesity phenotype in the Caucasian populations is
associated with variations in several genes, including neuronal growth regulator 
1 (NEGR1), SEC16 homolog B (SCE16B), transmembrane protein 18 (TMEM18), ets
variant 5 (ETV5), glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase 2 (GNPDA2), prolactin (PRL), 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), mitochondrial carrier homolog 2
(MTCH2), Fas apoptotic inhibitory molecule 2 (FAIM2), SH2B adaptor protein 1
(SH2B1), v-maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog (MAF),
Niemann-Pick disease, type C1 (NPC1), melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) and
potassium channel tetramerisation domain containing 15 (KCTD15). To investigate
the relationship between obesity and these genes in the Japanese population, we
genotyped 27 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 14 genes from obese
subjects (n=1129, body mass index (BMI) > or =30 kg m(-2)) and normal-weight
control subjects (n=1736, BMI <25 kg m(-2)). The SNP rs10913469 in SEC16B
(P=0.000012) and four SNPs (rs2867125, rs6548238, rs4854344 and rs7561317) in the
TMEM18 gene (P=0.00015), all of which were in almost absolute linkage
disequilibrium, were significantly associated with obesity in the Japanese
population. SNPs in GNPDA2, BDNF, FAIM2 and MC4R genes were marginally associated
with obesity (P<0.05). Our data suggest that some SNPs identified by genome-wide 
association studies in the Caucasians also confer susceptibility to obesity in
Japanese subjects.

PMID: 19851340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Nov;297(5):F1208-19. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00262.2009. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Deletion of Frs2alpha from the ureteric epithelium causes renal hypoplasia.

Sims-Lucas S(1), Cullen-McEwen L, Eswarakumar VP, Hains D, Kish K, Becknell B,
Zhang J, Bertram JF, Wang F, Bates CM.

Author information: 
(1)Rangos Research Center, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh,
PA 15201, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (Fgfr2) signaling is critical in maintaining 
ureteric branching architecture and mesenchymal stromal morphogenesis in the
kidney. Fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2alpha (Frs2alpha) is a major
docking protein for Fgfr2 with downstream targets including Ets variant (Etv) 4
and Etv5 in other systems. Furthermore, global deletion of Frs2alpha causes early
embryonic lethality. The purpose of the study was to determine the role of
Frs2alpha in mediating Fgfr2 signaling in the ureteric epithelium. To that end,
we generated mice with conditional deletion of Frs2alpha in the ureteric
epithelium (Frs2alpha(UB-/-)) and mice with point mutations in the Frs2alpha
binding site of Fgfr2 (Fgfr2(LR/LR)). Frs2alpha(UB-/-) mice developed mild renal 
hypoplasia characterized by decreased ureteric branching morphogenesis but
maintained normal overall branching architecture and had normal mesenchymal
stromal development. Reduced nephron endowment in postnatal mutant mice was
observed, corresponding with the reduction in branching morphogenesis.
Furthermore, there were no apparent renal abnormalities in Fgfr2(LR/LR) mice.
Interestingly, Etv4 and Etv5 expression was unaltered in Frs2alpha(UB-/-) mice,
as was Sprouty1, an antagonist of Frs2alpha signaling. However, Ret and Wnt11
(molecules critical for ureteric branching morphogenesis) mRNA levels were lower 
in mutants vs. controls. Taken together, these findings suggest that Fgfr2
signals through adapter molecules other than Frs2alpha in the ureteric
epithelium. Furthermore, Frs2alpha may transmit signals through other receptor
kinases present in ureteric epithelium. Finally, the renal hypoplasia observed in
Frs2alpha(UB-/-) mice is likely secondary to decreased Ret and Wnt11 expression.

PMCID: PMC2781346
PMID: 19741018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nat Rev Urol. 2009 Aug;6(8):429-39. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2009.127.

ETS gene fusions in prostate cancer.

Clark JP(1), Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Male Urological Cancer Research Centre, Sutton, UK. jeremy.clark@icr.ac.uk

Chromosomal rearrangements that result in high level expression of ETS gene
family members are common events in human prostate cancer. Most frequently, the
androgen-activated gene TMPRSS2 is found fused to the ERG gene. Fusions involving
ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 occur less frequently but exhibit greater variability in
fusion structure with 12 unique 5' fusion partners identified so far. ETS gene
rearrangement seems to be a key event in driving prostate neoplastic development:
the rearrangement occurs as an early event and continues to be expressed in
metastatic and castration-resistant disease. However, ETS alterations seem
insufficient on their own to induce cancer formation. No consistent associations 
are seen between the presence of ETS alteration and clinical outcome, with the
possible exception that duplication of rearranged ERG, reflecting aneuploidy, is 
associated with poor outcome. Thus, factors other than ERG gene status may be the
major determinants of poor clinical outcome. Expression signatures of prostate
cancers containing the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion suggest involvement of beta-estradiol
signaling, and reveal higher levels of expression of HDAC1 and ion channel genes 
when compared to cancers that lack the rearrangement. These observations suggest 
new therapeutic possibilities for patients harboring ETS gene fusions.

PMID: 19657377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cell Immunol. 2009;259(1):100-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2009.06.001. Epub 2009
Jun 6.

Age-related changes in lck-Vav signaling pathways in mouse CD4 T cells.

Garcia GG(1), Miller RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48105, USA. gonzola@umich.edu

Activation of lck-fyn kinases during T cell receptor signaling leads to Vav
phosphorylation, activation of downstream targets including Rac1, and a transient
decline in ezrin and moesin phosphorylation. We have shown that age increases
Rac1 activity and lowers ezrin and moesin phosphorylation in resting mouse CD4
cells, changes that could be the results of alterations in lck-Vav signaling.
Analysis of Vav in CD4 cells from old mice shows increases in the phosphorylation
of two key regulatory residues, Tyr160 and Tyr174, suggesting enhancement of Vav 
GTPase activity. In addition, analysis of lck status also shows age-related
increases in phosphorylation of two key residues, Tyr394 and Tyr505, which have
opposite effects on lck function. These changes in lck-Vav signals in resting CD4
cells may contribute in turn to age-related increases in Rac1 activity and
declines in phosphorylation of cytoskeletal proteins including Ezrin and Moesin.

PMCID: PMC2728147
PMID: 19577230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biol Reprod. 2009 Nov;81(5):871-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.077040. Epub 2009 
Jul 1.

Claudin 5 expression in mouse seminiferous epithelium is dependent upon the
transcription factor ets variant 5 and contributes to blood-testis barrier
function.

Morrow CM(1), Tyagi G, Simon L, Carnes K, Murphy KM, Cooke PS, Hofmann MC, Hess
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61802, USA.

The blood-testis barrier (BTB) is formed by tight junctions between Sertoli
cells. Results of previous studies suggested that the barrier is deficient in ets
variant 5 (ETV5) gene-deleted mice; therefore, microarray data were examined for 
changes in tight junction-associated genes. The tight junctional protein claudin 
5 (CLDN5) was decreased in testes of 8-day-old Etv5(-/-) pups. The study reported
herein examined the expression of CLDN5 in wild-type (WT) and Etv5(-/-) mice and 
evaluated its contribution to BTB function. CLDN5 protein expression was
evaluated in 8-day-old WT and Etv5(-/-) and adult WT, Etv5(-/-), and W/W(v)
testes by immunohistochemistry and in 8-day-old WT Sertoli cell-enriched and germ
cell-enriched fractions by immunocytochemistry. Cldn5 mRNA expression was
evaluated in 0- to 20-day-old and adult WT mice and in 8-day-old and adult
Etv5(-/-) mice via quantitative PCR. Tracer studies were performed in adult WT,
Etv5(-/-), and W/W(v) mice. The results indicate the following: 1) CLDN5 was
expressed in Sertoli cells, spermatogonia, and preleptotene spermatocytes. 2)
Seminiferous epithelial CLDN5 expression depended upon both the presence of germ 
cells and ETV5. 3) CLDN5 expression in testicular vascular endothelium and rete
testis epithelium was ETV5 independent. 4) Cldn5 mRNA expression increased in the
testes of juvenile mice at the time of BTB formation. 5) Testes of Etv5(-/-) and 
W/W(v) mice, which are both deficient in seminiferous epithelial CLDN5
expression, had biotin tracer leakage from the interstitial space into the
seminiferous tubule lumen. In conclusion, CLDN5 is expressed in the seminiferous 
epithelium, appears to be regulated by multiple influences, and contributes to
BTB function.

PMCID: PMC2770019
PMID: 19571261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jun 22;9:197. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-197.

The Ets dominant repressor En/Erm enhances intestinal epithelial tumorigenesis in
ApcMin mice.

Jedlicka P(1), Sui X, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora CO, USA.
paul.jedlicka@ucdenver.edu

BACKGROUND: Ets transcription factors have been widely implicated in the control 
of tumorigenesis, with most studies suggesting tumor-promoting roles. However,
few studies have examined Ets tumorigenesis-modifying functions in vivo using
model genetic systems.
METHODS: Using mice expressing a previously characterized Ets dominant repressor 
transgene in the intestinal epithelium (Villin-En/Erm), we examined the
consequences of blocking endogenous Ets-mediated transcriptional activation on
tumorigenesis in the ApcMin model of intestinal carcinoma.
RESULTS: En/Erm expression in the intestine, at levels not associated with overt 
crypt-villus dysmorphogenesis, results in a marked increase in tumor number in
ApcMin animals. Moreover, when examined histologically, tumors from
En/Erm-expressing animals show a trend toward greater stromal invasiveness.
Detailed analysis of crypt-villus homeostasis in these En/Erm transgenic animals 
suggests increased epithelial turnover as one possible mechanism for the enhanced
tumorigenesis.
CONCLUSION: Our findings provide in vivo evidence for a tumor-restricting
function of endogenous Ets factors in the intestinal epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2714157
PMID: 19545444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):2080-92. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

The Werner syndrome protein affects the expression of genes involved in
adipogenesis and inflammation in addition to cell cycle and DNA damage responses.

Turaga RV(1), Paquet ER, Sild M, Vignard J, Garand C, Johnson FB, Masson JY,
Lebel M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu 
de Québec, Québec City, QC, CA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2009 Aug;8(15):2323.

Werner syndrome (WS) is characterized by the premature onset of several
age-associated pathologies. The protein deficient in WS (WRN) is a RecQ-type DNA 
helicase involved in DNA repair, replication, telomere maintenance and
transcription. However, precisely how WRN deficiency leads to the numerous WS
pathologies is still unknown. Here we use short-term siRNA-based inhibition of
WRN to test the direct consequences of its loss on gene expression. Importantly, 
this short-term knock down of WRN protein level was sufficient to trigger an
expression profile resembling fibroblasts established from old donor patients. In
addition, this treatment altered sets of genes involved in 14 distinct biological
pathways. Besides the already known impact of WRN on DNA replication, DNA repair,
the p21/p53 pathway, and cell cycle, gene set enrichment analyses of our
microarray data also uncover significant impact on the MYC, E2F, cellular E2A and
ETV5 transcription factor pathways as well as adipocyte differentiation, HIF1,
NFkappaB and IL-6 pathways. Finally, short-term siRNA-based inhibition of mouse
Wrn expression in the pre-adipocyte cell line 3T3-L1 confirmed the impact of WRN 
on adipogenesis. These results are consistent with the pro-inflammatory status
and lipid abnormalities observed in WS patients. This approach thus identified
new effectors of WRN activity that might contribute to the WS phenotype.

PMID: 19502800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):2110-21. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

c-Jun N-terminal kinase mediates disassembly of apical junctions in model
intestinal epithelia.

Naydenov NG(1), Hopkins AM, Ivanov AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Dynamic remodeling of intercellular junctions is a critical determinant of
epithelial barrier function in both physiological and pathophysiological states. 
While the disassembly of epithelial tight junctions (TJ) and adherens junctions
(AJ) has been well-described in response to pathogens and other external
stressors, the role of stress-related signaling in TJ/AJ regulation remains
poorly understood. The aim of this study was to define the role of
stress-activated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in disruption of intercellular
junctions in model intestinal epithelia. We show that rapid AJ/TJ disassembly
triggered by extracellular calcium depletion of T84 and SK-CO15 cell monolayers
was accompanied by activation (phosphorylation) of JNK, and prevented by
pharmacological inhibitors of JNK. The opposite process, TJ/AJ reassembly, was
accelerated by JNK inhibition and suppressed by the JNK activator anisomycin.
JNK1 but not JNK2 was found to colocalize with intercellular junctions, and
siRNA-mediated downregulation of JNK1 attenuated the TJ/AJ disruption caused by
calcium depletion. JNK inhibition also blocked formation of characteristic
contractile F-actin rings in calcium-depleted epithelial cells, suggesting that
JNK regulates junctions by remodeling the actin cytoskeleton. In this role JNK
acts downstream of the actin-reorganizing Rho-dependent kinase (ROCK), since ROCK
inhibition abrogated JNK phosphorylation and TJ/AJ disassembly after calcium
depletion. Furthermore, JNK acts upstream of F-actin-membrane linker proteins of 
the ERM (ezrin-radixin-moesin) family, but in a complex relationship yet to be
fully elucidated. Taken together, our findings suggest a novel role for JNK in
the signaling pathway that links ROCK and F-actin remodeling during disassembly
of epithelial junctions.

PMID: 19502798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mod Pathol. 2009 Sep;22(9):1176-85. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.79. Epub 2009 May
22.

Characterization of ETS gene aberrations in select histologic variants of
prostate carcinoma.

Han B(1), Mehra R, Suleman K, Tomlins SA, Wang L, Singhal N, Linetzky KA,
Palanisamy N, Zhou M, Chinnaiyan AM, Shah RB.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Histologic variants of prostate carcinoma account for 5-10% of the disease and
are typically seen in association with conventional acinar carcinoma. These
variants often differ from the latter in clinical, immunophenotypic, and biologic
potential. Recently, recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene
TMPRSS2 and the ETS transcription factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 have been
identified in a majority of conventional prostate carcinomas. However, the
frequency and significance of this critical molecular event is unknown in the
histologic variants of prostate carcinoma. Here, we used break-apart fluorescence
in situ hybridization to assess TMPRSS2 and ETS aberrations in a series of select
histologic variants: foamy gland carcinoma (N=17), ductal adenocarcinoma (N=18), 
mucinous carcinoma (N=18), and small cell carcinoma (N=7). A histologic variation
of acinar adenocarcinoma, demonstrating glomeruloid morphology (N=9), was also
investigated. Overall, 55% of histologic variant or variation morphologies
demonstrated ETS aberrations (ERG in 54% and ETV1 in 1%). TMPRSS2:ERG fusion was 
identified in 83% (15/18), 71% (5/7), 50% (9/18), 33% (3/9), and 29% (5/17) of
mucinous, small cell, ductal, glomeruloid, and foamy gland prostate carcinomas,
respectively. Previously, we reported that 100% of androgen-independent
metastatic prostate carcinomas harboring TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion were associated 
with interstitial deletion (Edel). Interestingly, ERG rearrangement in small cell
carcinomas occurred exclusively through Edel, supporting the notion that
TMPRSS2:ERG with Edel is an aggressive molecular subtype. SPINK1, a biomarker
expressed exclusively in a subset of ETS negative prostate carcinomas, was
expressed in 6% of ETS negative histologic variants, specifically in ductal
adenocarcinoma. Notably, 88% (43/49) variant morphologies in this cohort showed
concordance of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion with associated conventional acinar type,
suggesting that variant morphology is clonally related to the latter. Overall,
our data provide insight into the origin, molecular mechanism, and phenotypic
association of ETS fusions in histologic variants of prostate carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2760291
PMID: 19465903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Aug;30(8):1288-97. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp119. Epub 2009 May
14.

Proteomic approach to ETV5 during endometrial carcinoma invasion reveals a link
to oxidative stress.

Monge M(1), Colas E, Doll A, Gil-Moreno A, Castellvi J, Diaz B, Gonzalez M,
Lopez-Lopez R, Xercavins J, Carreras R, Alameda F, Canals F, Gabrielli F,
Reventos J, Abal M.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Unit, Research Institute, Vall d'Hebron University
Hospital, Barcelona 08035, Spain.

Endometrial cancer, the most common gynecological malignancy in western
countries, is characterized by a favorable prognosis. Nonetheless, deep
myometrial invasion correlates with more undifferentiated tumors, lymph-vascular 
invasion, node involvement and decreased global survival. We have described
previously the Ets family member ERM/ETV5 specifically upregulated in endometrial
endometrioid carcinoma (EEC) associated with myometrial infiltration. To
understand the role of this transcription factor during myometrial infiltration, 
we analyzed by two-dimension differential gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE)
technology those proteins whose expression was altered in endometrial cell lines 
stably overexpressing ERM/ETV5. Pathway analysis pointed to actin regulation and 
transforming growth factor beta and progesterone signaling as processes regulated
by ERM/ETV5. In addition, we characterized the specific upregulation of the
nuclear dehydrogenase/reductase Hep27 as well as its ERM/ETV5-dependent
mitochondrial localization. Further functional studies demonstrated a protective 
role of Hep 27 against apoptosis induced by oxidative stress. Overall, the
ETV5-related proteomic approach performed in the Hec-1A cell line reinforces a
role of this transcription factor in the regulation of the migratory and invasive
tumor behavior and points to a modulated response to oxidative stress associated 
with the promotion of invasion in endometrial cancer. Unraveling the molecular
events in EEC associated with the initiation of tumor invasion would represent an
obvious improvement in the pursuit of rational targets for the onset of
metastasis. This knowledge would also be a valuable tool for the molecular
stratification of patients since myometrial affectation determines an increase in
the rate of recurrence after a first surgical treatment and a decrease in 5 year 
survival.

PMID: 19443906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5385. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005385. Epub 2009 Apr 29.

Genetic determinants of facial clefting: analysis of 357 candidate genes using
two national cleft studies from Scandinavia.

Jugessur A(1), Shi M, Gjessing HK, Lie RT, Wilcox AJ, Weinberg CR, Christensen K,
Boyles AL, Daack-Hirsch S, Trung TN, Bille C, Lidral AC, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial Development, Musculoskeletal Disorders, Murdoch Childrens
Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Facial clefts are common birth defects with a strong genetic
component. To identify fetal genetic risk factors for clefting, 1536 SNPs in 357 
candidate genes were genotyped in two population-based samples from Scandinavia
(Norway: 562 case-parent and 592 control-parent triads; Denmark: 235 case-parent 
triads).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used two complementary statistical methods,
TRIMM and HAPLIN, to look for associations across these two national samples.
TRIMM tests for association in each gene by using multi-SNP genotypes from
case-parent triads directly without the need to infer haplotypes. HAPLIN on the
other hand estimates the full haplotype distribution over a set of SNPs and
estimates relative risks associated with each haplotype. For isolated cleft lip
with or without cleft palate (I-CL/P), TRIMM and HAPLIN both identified
significant associations with IRF6 and ADH1C in both populations, but only HAPLIN
found an association with FGF12. For isolated cleft palate (I-CP), TRIMM found
associations with ALX3, MKX, and PDGFC in both populations, but only the
association with PDGFC was identified by HAPLIN. In addition, HAPLIN identified
an association with ETV5 that was not detected by TRIMM.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Strong associations with seven genes were replicated in 
the Scandinavian samples and our approach effectively replicated the strongest
previously known association in clefting--with IRF6. Based on two national cleft 
cohorts of similar ancestry, two robust statistical methods and a large panel of 
SNPs in the most promising cleft candidate genes to date, this study identified a
previously unknown association with clefting for ADH1C and provides additional
candidates and analytic approaches to advance the field.

PMCID: PMC2671138
PMID: 19401770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Dev Cell. 2009 Apr;16(4):607-13. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.02.008.

FGF-regulated Etv genes are essential for repressing Shh expression in mouse limb
buds.

Zhang Z(1), Verheyden JM, Hassell JA, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Anterior-posterior (A-P) patterning of the vertebrate limb is controlled by sonic
hedgehog (SHH) signaling, and the precise restriction of Shh expression to the
posterior limb bud is essential for its polarizing effect. Fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) signaling, a key control of proximal-distal (P-D) limb outgrowth, is
known to promote Shh expression in the posterior limb bud. Here, we show that
conditional knockout of the FGF-activated transcription factor genes Etv4 and
Etv5 in mouse led to ectopic Shh expression in the anterior limb bud and a
preaxial polydactyly (PPD) skeletal phenotype. These unexpected results suggest
that ETV4 and ETV5 act downstream of FGF signaling to inhibit Shh expression in
the anterior limb bud. This finding elucidates a novel aspect of the mechanism
coordinating limb development along the A-P and P-D axes.

PMCID: PMC3541528
PMID: 19386269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Dev Cell. 2009 Apr;16(4):600-6. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.02.005.

Fgf-dependent Etv4/5 activity is required for posterior restriction of Sonic
Hedgehog and promoting outgrowth of the vertebrate limb.

Mao J(1), McGlinn E, Huang P, Tabin CJ, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Crosstalk between the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)
pathways is critical for proper patterning and growth of the developing limb bud.
Here, we show that FGF-dependent activation of the ETS transcription factors Etv4
and Etv5 contributes to proximal-distal limb outgrowth. Surprisingly, blockage of
Etv activity in early distal mesenchyme also resulted in ectopic, anterior
expansion of Shh, leading to a polydactylous phenotype. These data indicate an
unexpected function for an FGF/Etv pathway in anterior-posterior patterning. FGF 
activity in the limb is not only responsible for maintaining posterior-specific
Shh expression, but it also acts via Etvs to prevent inappropriate anterior
expansion of Shh. This study identifies another level of genetic interaction
between the orthogonal axes during limb development.

PMCID: PMC3164484
PMID: 19386268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biol Reprod. 2009 Aug;81(2):258-66. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.075200. Epub 2009
Apr 15.

Loss of Etv5 decreases proliferation and RET levels in neonatal mouse testicular 
germ cells and causes an abnormal first wave of spermatogenesis.

Tyagi G(1), Carnes K, Morrow C, Kostereva NV, Ekman GC, Meling DD, Hostetler C,
Griswold M, Murphy KM, Hess RA, Hofmann MC, Cooke PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences and Pathobiology, Institute for Genomic
Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA.

Mice that are ets variant gene 5 (ETV5) null (Etv5(-/-)) undergo the first wave
of spermatogenesis but lose all spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) during this
time. The SSC loss in Etv5(-/-) mice begins during the neonatal period,
suggesting a role for ETV5 in SSC self-renewal during this period. Herein, we
show that Etv5 mRNA was present in perinatal mouse testis and that ETV5 was
expressed in fetal Sertoli cells and by germ cells and Sertoli cells during the
neonatal period. Transplantation of Etv5(-/-) germ cells failed to establish
spermatogenesis in W/W(v) mice testes, indicating that germ cell ETV5 has a key
role in establishment or self-renewal of transplanted SSCs. The SSC self-renewal 
is stimulated by glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) acting through the
RET/GDNF family receptor alpha 1 (GFRA1) receptor complex in SSCs.
Immunohistochemistry, quantitative PCR, and laser capture microdissection
revealed decreased RET mRNA and protein expression in spermatogonia of neonatal
Etv5(-/-) mice by Postnatal Days 4-8, indicating that disrupted GDNF/RET/GFRA1
signaling may occur before initial spermatogonial stem/progenitor cell decrease. 
Etv5(-/-) spermatogonia had reduced proliferation in vivo and in vitro. Decreased
cell proliferation may cause the observed decreases in the number of type A
spermatogonia (Postnatal Day 17) and daily sperm production (Postnatal Day 30) in
Etv5(-/-) mice, indicating quantitative impairments in the first wave of
spermatogenesis. In conclusion, ETV5 is expressed beginning in fetal Sertoli
cells and can potentially have effects on neonatal Sertoli cells and germ cells. 
In addition, ETV5 has critical effects on neonatal spermatogonial proliferation, 
which may involve impaired signaling through the RET receptor.

PMCID: PMC2849825
PMID: 19369650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jul;81(1):56-66. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.075358. Epub 2009 
Apr 1.

Identification of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor-regulated genes
important for spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal in the rat.

Schmidt JA(1), Avarbock MR, Tobias JW, Brinster RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) provide the foundation for spermatogenesis
throughout the life of a male. Because SSCs of many species can colonize the
mouse testis, and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is
responsible for stimulating SSC self-renewal in rodents, we reasoned that
molecular mechanisms of SSC self-renewal are similar across species.
GDNF-regulated genes have been identified in mouse SSCs; however, downstream
targets of GDNF are unknown in other species. The objective of this work was to
identify GDNF-regulated genes in rat SSCs and to define the biological
significance of these genes for rat SSC self-renewal. We conducted microarray
analysis on cultured rat germ cells enriched for SSCs in the presence and absence
of GDNF. Many GDNF-regulated genes were identified, most notably, Bcl6b and Etv5,
which are important for mouse SSC self-renewal. Bcl6b was the most highly
regulated gene in both the rat and mouse. Additionally, we identified three novel
GDNF-regulated genes in rat SSCs: Bhlhe40, Hoxc4, and Tec. Small interfering RNA 
treatment for Bcl6b, Etv5, Bhlhe40, Hoxc4, and Tec resulted in a decrease in SSC 
number, as determined by transplantation, without a change in total cell number
within the culture. These data indicate that, like in the mouse SSC, Bcl6b and
Etv5 are important for rat SSC self-renewal, suggesting that these genes may be
important for SSCs in all mammals. Furthermore, identification of three novel
GDNF-regulated genes in the rat SSC extends our knowledge of SSC activity and
broadens the foundation for understanding this process in higher species,
including humans.

PMCID: PMC3093986
PMID: 19339709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Jul;220(1):245-56. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21759.

FGF2 stimulates SDF-1 expression through the Erm transcription factor in Sertoli 
cells.

Yoon KA(1), Chae YM, Cho JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, South Korea.

Ets-related molecule (Erm) is a member of the Ets transcription factor family.
Erm is known to be an important factor for the self-renewal of Spermatogonial
stem cells (SSCs) and the maintenance of spermatogenesis. We investigated the
molecular mechanism of Erm regulation on SDF-1 in TM4 Sertoli cells. Erm and
Sdf-1 levels were up-regulated after FGF2 treatment in TM4 cells, whereas these
levels were significantly decreased by FGF2 in ST2 bone marrow stromal cells.
Knockdown of Erm by siRNA in the presence of FGF2 decreased the Sdf-1 levels in
TM4 cells. The expression levels of Erm were similar and Erm overexpression
increased the Sdf-1 in both TM4 and ST2 cells. FGFR subtype analysis revealed
that FGFR4 was expressed in TM4 cells but not in ST2 cells. A blocking experiment
also confirmed that FGFR4 is partly responsible for the up-regulation of Erm and 
SDF-1 induced by FGF2 stimulation in TM4 cells. FGF2 and ERM increased the
activity of Sdf-1 gene promoter region in a dose-dependent manner. EMSA revealed 
that ERM strongly binds to the -846 to -851 nucleotide region of the potential
Ets binding site (EBS) in the Sdf-1 promoter. In addition, CXCR4, the SDF-1
receptor, was expressed in spermatogonia and Sertoli cells in the seminiferous
tubules of the mouse testis. Our results indicate that ERM directly regulates
Sdf-1 gene expression by interacting with its cis-acting element in response to
FGF2 stimulation in TM4 cells.

PMID: 19301256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Oncogene. 2009 Apr 9;28(14):1725-35. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.20. Epub 2009 Feb 23.

Phosphorylated ezrin is associated with EBV latent membrane protein 1 in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and induces cell migration.

Endo K(1), Kondo S, Shackleford J, Horikawa T, Kitagawa N, Yoshizaki T, Furukawa 
M, Zen Y, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.

Tumor metastasis is a complex phenomenon that is the culmination of effects of
numerous cellular factors. We have shown that the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
oncoprotein, latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1), is capable of inducing a wide
range of such factors in cell culture, expression of which is also elevated in
the LMP1-expressing tumor, nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), a highly invasive
neoplasm. Recently, the membrane crosslinker protein, ezrin, has been implicated 
in tumor cell metastasis and malignant progression. In this study, we evaluated
the possible role of LMP1 and ezrin in the pathophysiology of NPC. We show that
C-terminal phosphorylation of ezrin is increased by the expression of LMP1 in
nasopharyngeal (NP) cells through a protein kinase C (PKC) pathway. LMP1 enhances
the organization of a ternary complex of CD44, ezrin and F-actin, which is a
prerequisite for ezrin phosphorylation. In NPC tissues, the expression of
phosphoezrin and LMP1 is directly correlated. Silencing of endogenously expressed
ezrin suppresses LMP1-induced cell motility and invasiveness. Moreover, the
inhibition of ezrin phosphorylation by PKC inhibitor suppresses migration and
invasion of NP cells. These data show that the phosphorylation of ezrin and its
recruitment to the cell membrane linked to F-actin and CD44 is a process required
for LMP1-stimulated cell motility and invasion of NP cells.

PMCID: PMC3422673
PMID: 19234486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Genes Cells. 2009 Mar;14(3):407-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01281.x. Epub
2009 Feb 17.

Identification of mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-transcription factors by microarray
and knockdown analyses, and signature molecule-marked MSC in bone marrow by
immunohistochemistry.

Kubo H(1), Shimizu M, Taya Y, Kawamoto T, Michida M, Kaneko E, Igarashi A,
Nishimura M, Segoshi K, Shimazu Y, Tsuji K, Aoba T, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Although ex vivo expanded mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have been used in numerous
studies, the molecular signature and in vivo distribution status of MSC remain
unknown. To address this matter, we identified numerous human MSC-characteristic 
genes--including nine transcription factor genes--using DNA microarray and
real-time RT-PCR analyses: Most of the MSC-characteristic genes were
down-regulated 24 h after incubation with osteogenesis-, chondrogenesis- or
adipogenesis-induction medium, or 48-72 h after knockdown of the nine
transcription factors. Furthermore, knockdowns of ETV1, ETV5, FOXP1, GATA6,
HMGA2, SIM2 or SOX11 suppressed the self-renewal capacity of MSC, whereas those
of FOXP1, SOX11, ETV1, SIM2 or PRDM16 reduced the osteogenic- and/or adipogenic
potential. In addition, immunohistochemistry using antibodies for the MSC
characteristic molecules--including GATA6, TRPC4, FLG and TGM2--revealed that
MSC-like cells were present near the endosteum and in the interior of bone marrow
of adult mice. These findings indicate that MSC synthesize a set of MSC markers
in vitro and in vivo, and that MSC-characteristic transcription factors are
involved in MSC stemness regulation.

PMID: 19228201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 1;325(1):106-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.09.033. Epub 2008
Oct 18.

The Pea3 Ets transcription factor regulates differentiation of multipotent
progenitor cells during mammary gland development.

Kurpios NA(1), MacNeil L, Shepherd TG, Gludish DW, Giacomelli AO, Hassell JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Centre for Functional
Genomics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The Pea3 Ets transcription factor is overexpressed in breast tumors suggesting
that it plays a role in mammary oncogenesis. However, the normal biological
function of Pea3 in the mammary gland is not known. Here we report that Pea3 was 
expressed in the epithelium of the mouse mammary anlagen commensurate with their 
genesis, and at later times in the nipple and mammary ducts of female embryos. In
adult mice Pea3 transcripts peaked at the onset of puberty and early pregnancy,
times of active epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation. Pea3 was
expressed in all progenitor cap cells and rare body cells of terminal end buds,
and in the myoepithelial cells of ducts and alveoli. Analyses of the mammary
glands of Pea3-null mice during puberty revealed an increased number of terminal 
end buds and an increased fraction of proliferating progenitor cells within these
structures compared to their wild type littermates. Tissue transplant experiments
demonstrated that these phenotypes were intrinsic to the Pea3-null mammary
epithelium. During pregnancy, mammary glands isolated from Pea3-null females had 
impaired alveolar development as revealed by a decreased fraction of alveolar
structures. We performed in vitro colony forming assays of mammary epithelial
cells and discovered that loss of Pea3 altered the distribution of specific
multipotent progenitor cells. Double-immunofluorescence confirmed that
multipotential progenitors co-expressing markers of the myoepithelial and luminal
epithelial lineage were amplified in the mammary glands of Pea3-null mice by
comparison to their wild type counterparts. We propose that Pea3 functions in
multipotential progenitors to regulate their lineage-specific differentiation
potential.

PMID: 18977342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Cell Sci. 2008 Oct 15;121(Pt 20):3393-402. doi: 10.1242/jcs.027201. Epub 2008
Sep 30.

Reduced tumorigenesis in mouse mammary cancer cells following inhibition of Pea3-
or Erm-dependent transcription.

Firlej V(1), Ladam F, Brysbaert G, Dumont P, Fuks F, de Launoit Y, Benecke A,
Chotteau-Lelievre A.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, CNRS Universités de Lille 1 and 2,
Institut Pasteur de Lille, IFR 142, BP 447, 1 rue Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex,
France.

Pea3 and Erm are transcription factors expressed in normal developing branching
organs such as the mammary gland. Deregulation of their expression is generally
associated with tumorigenesis and particularly breast cancer. By using RNA
interference (RNAi) to downregulate the expression of Pea3 and/or Erm in a
mammary cancer cell line, we present evidence for a role of these factors in
proliferation, migration and invasion capacity of cancer cells. We have used
different small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting pea3 and erm transcripts in
transiently or stably transfected cells, and assessed the physiological behavior 
of these cells in in vitro assays. We also identified an in vivo alteration of
tumor progression after injection of cells that overexpress pea3 and/or erm short
hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) in immunodeficient mice. Using transcriptome profiling in
Pea3- or Erm-targeted cells, two largely independent gene expression programs
were identified on the basis of their shared phenotypic modifications. A
statistically highly significant part of both sets of target genes had previously
been already associated with the cellular signaling pathways of the
;proliferation, migration, invasion' class. These data provide the first
evidence, by using endogenous knockdown, for pivotal and complementary roles of
Pea3 and Erm transcription factors in events crucial to mammary tumorigenesis,
and identify sets of downstream target genes whose expression during
tumorigenesis is regulated by these transcription factors.

PMID: 18827017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;68(18):7629-37. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2014.

A fluorescence in situ hybridization screen for E26 transformation-specific
aberrations: identification of DDX5-ETV4 fusion protein in prostate cancer.

Han B(1), Mehra R, Dhanasekaran SM, Yu J, Menon A, Lonigro RJ, Wang X, Gong Y,
Wang L, Shankar S, Laxman B, Shah RB, Varambally S, Palanisamy N, Tomlins SA,
Kumar-Sinha C, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions involving E26 transformation-specific (ETS) transcription 
factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 have been identified in 40% to 70% of prostate
cancers. Here, we used a comprehensive fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
split probe strategy interrogating all 27 ETS family members and their five known
5' fusion partners in a cohort of 110 clinically localized prostate cancer
patients. Gene rearrangements were only identified in ETS genes that were
previously implicated in prostate cancer gene fusions including ERG, ETV1, and
ETV4 (43%, 5%, and 5%, respectively), suggesting that a substantial fraction of
prostate cancers (estimated at 30-60%) cannot be attributed to an ETS gene
fusion. Among the known 5' gene fusion partners, TMPRSS2 was rearranged in 47% of
cases followed by SLC45A3, HNRPA2B1, and C15ORF21 in 2%, 1%, and 1% of cases,
respectively. Based on this comprehensive FISH screen, we have made four
noteworthy observations. First, by screening the entire ETS transcription factor 
family for rearrangements, we found that a large fraction of prostate cancers
(44%) cannot be ascribed to an ETS gene fusion, an observation which will
stimulate research into identifying recurrent non-ETS aberrations in prostate
cancers. Second, we identified SLC45A3 as a novel 5' fusion partner of ERG;
previously, TMPRSS2 was the only described 5' partner of ERG. Third, we
identified two prostate-specific, androgen-induced genes, FLJ35294 and CANT1, as 
5' partners to ETV1 and ETV4. Fourth, we identified a ubiquitously expressed,
androgen-insensitive gene, DDX5, fused in frame with ETV4, leading to the
expression of a DDX5-ETV4 fusion protein.

PMCID: PMC2760292
PMID: 18794152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Immunother. 2008 Oct;31(8):723-30. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e318183af26.

A polyvalent cellular vaccine induces T-cell responses against specific
self-antigens overexpressed in chronic lymphocytic B-cell leukemia.

Kronenberger K(1), Nössner E, Frankenberger B, Wahl U, Dreyling M, Hallek M,
Mocikat R.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und
Umwelt, Institut für Molekulare Immunologie München, Germany.

B cell-derived chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is an incurable disease that
requires innovative therapeutic regimens. Experimental approaches of
immunotherapy aiming at induction of systemic T-cell responses have been
developed. Trioma cells provide a potent vaccine derived from malignant B cells
that allows multiple antigens (Ags) from the parental tumor to be ingested by
Ag-presenting cells. Like other strategies using modified whole tumor cells, this
approach induces polyvalent responses. Using trioma cell-pulsed dendritic cells
(DCs) for T-cell activation in vitro, we asked whether specific Ags overexpressed
by CLL can be identified as target structures of such responses and what is the
nature of these Ags. Expression levels of several genes in CLL samples were
quantitated by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. T lymphocytes
were polyvalently stimulated by trioma-pulsed DCs and specificities were tested
by determining cytokine secretion in the presence of target cells transfected
with RNA coding for those Ags that were found to be overexpressed. We demonstrate
that DCs pulsed with the modified tumor cells efficiently activate T lymphocytes 
against CLL and that overexpressed Ags related to leukemogenesis, such as BCL-2, 
MDM2, and ETV5, serve as targets for those T cells. Immune escape by Ag loss or
mutation is less likely to occur if immunity is directed against altered
self-proteins that are involved in malignant transformation. Therefore, vaccines 
based on modified tumor cells such as triomas hold promise for immunotherapy of
CLL and other malignancies. Polyvalent vaccines originally designed as
individualized therapeutics may be more broadly applicable, at least in patients 
showing similar Ag patterns.

PMID: 18779747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Dec;84(6):1472-82. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0208082. Epub 2008 Aug
25.

Human dendritic cells differentiated in hypoxia down-modulate antigen uptake and 
change their chemokine expression profile.

Elia AR(1), Cappello P, Puppo M, Fraone T, Vanni C, Eva A, Musso T, Novelli F,
Varesio L, Giovarelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Experimental Research and Medical Studies, San Giovanni Battista
Hospital, Torino, Italy.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are the most potent antigen-presenting cells and fine-tune 
the immune response. We have investigated hypoxia's effects on the
differentiation and maturation of DCs from human monocytes in vitro, and have
shown that it affects DC functions. Hypoxic immature DCs (H-iDCs) significantly
fail to capture antigens through down-modulation of the RhoA/Ezrin-Radixin-Moesin
pathway and the expression of CD206. Moreover, H-iDCs released higher levels of
CXCL1, VEGF, CCL20, CXCL8, and CXCL10 but decreased levels of CCL2 and CCL18,
which predict a different ability to recruit neutrophils rather than monocytes
and create a proinflammatory and proangiogenic environment. By contrast, hypoxia 
has no effect on DC maturation. Hypoxic mature DCs display a mature phenotype and
activate both allogeneic and specific T cells like normoxic mDCs. This study
provides the first demonstration that hypoxia inhibits antigen uptake by DCs and 
profoundly changes the DC chemokine expression profile and may have a critical
role in DC differentiation, adaptation, and activation in inflamed tissues.

PMID: 18725395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Oct 1;510(4):351-66. doi: 10.1002/cne.21799.

ERM proteins regulate growth cone responses to Sema3A.

Mintz CD(1), Carcea I, McNickle DG, Dickson TC, Ge Y, Salton SR, Benson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10029, USA.

Axonal growth cones initiate and sustain directed growth in response to cues in
their environment. A variety of events such as receptor internalization, kinase
activation, and actin rearrangement can be stimulated by guidance cues and are
essential for mediating targeted growth cone behavior. Surprisingly little is
known about how such disparate actions are coordinated. Our data suggest that
ezrin, radixin, and moesin (ERMs), a family of highly homologous, multifunctional
proteins may be able to coordinate growth cone responses to the guidance cue
Semaphorin 3A (Sema3A). We show that active ERMs concentrate asymmetrically in
neocortical growth cones, are rapidly and transiently inactivated by Sema3A, and 
are required for Sema3A-mediated growth cone collapse and guidance. The FERM
domain of active ERMs regulates internalization of the Sema3A receptor, Npn1, and
its coreceptor, L1CAM, while the ERM C-terminal domain binds and caps F-actin.
Our data support a model in which ERMs can coordinate membrane and actin dynamics
in response to Sema3A.

PMCID: PMC2691689
PMID: 18651636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2008;24:263-86. doi:
10.1146/annurev.cellbio.24.110707.175355.

Regulation of spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal in mammals.

Oatley JM(1), Brinster RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Center for Reproductive Biology and Health,
College of Agricultural Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA. jmo15@psu.edu

Mammalian spermatogenesis is a classic adult stem cell-dependent process,
supported by self-renewal and differentiation of spermatogonial stem cells
(SSCs). Studying SSCs provides a model to better understand adult stem cell
biology, and deciphering the mechanisms that control SSC functions may lead to
treatment of male infertility and an understanding of the etiology of testicular 
germ cell tumor formation. Self-renewal of rodent SSCs is greatly influenced by
the niche factor glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF). In mouse
SSCs, GDNF activation upregulates expression of the transcription factor-encoding
genes bcl6b, etv5, and lhx1, which influence SSC self-renewal. Additionally, the 
non-GDNF-stimulated transcription factors Plzf and Taf4b have been implicated in 
regulating SSC functions. Together, these molecules are part of a robust gene
network controlling SSC fate decisions that may parallel the regulatory networks 
in other adult stem cell populations.

PMCID: PMC4066667
PMID: 18588486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Oncogene. 2008 Sep 11;27(40):5348-53. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.183. Epub 2008 Jun 9.

TMPRSS2-ERG fusion, a common genomic alteration in prostate cancer activates
C-MYC and abrogates prostate epithelial differentiation.

Sun C(1), Dobi A, Mohamed A, Li H, Thangapazham RL, Furusato B, Shaheduzzaman S, 
Tan SH, Vaidyanathan G, Whitman E, Hawksworth DJ, Chen Y, Nau M, Patel V, Vahey
M, Gutkind JS, Sreenath T, Petrovics G, Sesterhenn IA, McLeod DG, Srivastava S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Center for Prostate Disease Research, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

The high prevalence of TMPRSS2-ERG rearrangements ( approximately 60%) in
prostate cancer (CaP) leads to androgenic induction of the ETS-related gene (ERG)
expression. However, the biological functions of ERG overexpression in CaP remain
to be understood. ERG knockdown in TMPRSS2-ERG expressing CaP cells induced
striking morphological changes and inhibited cell growth both in cell culture and
SCID mice. Evaluation of the transcriptome and specific gene promoters in ERG
siRNA-treated cells and investigation of gene expression signatures of human
prostate tumors revealed ERG-mediated activation of C-MYC oncogene and the
repression of prostate epithelial differentiation genes (PSA and
SLC45A3/Prostein). Taken together, these data combining cell culture and animal
models and human prostate tumors reveal that ERG overexpression in prostate tumor
cells may contribute to the neoplastic process by activating C-MYC and by
abrogating prostate epithelial differentiation as indicated by prostate
epithelial specific markers.

PMID: 18542058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Endocrinol. 2008 Aug;198(2):281-90. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0142. Epub 2008 May 20.

Etv5, an ETS transcription factor, is expressed in granulosa and cumulus cells
and serves as a transcriptional regulator of the cyclooxygenase-2.

Eo J(1), Han K, M Murphy K, Song H, Lim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, RCTC, IBST, Konkuk
University, 1 Hwayang-Dong, Kwangjin-Gu, Seoul 143-701, South Korea.

Etv4, Etv1, and Etv5 are members of Etv4 subfamily of E26 transformation-specific
(Ets) transcription factors that are known to influence a host of biological
processes. We previously showed that Etv5, expressed in Sertoli cells, plays a
crucial role in maintaining spermatogonial stem cell niche in the mouse testis.
However, it is not yet known whether Etv4 family members are expressed in the
ovary or play any role in ovarian functions. Here, we show that Etv5 and Etv4 are
expressed in mouse ovaries in granulosa and cumulus cells during
folliculogenesis. Both Etv5 and Etv4 mRNAs are also detected in cumulus-oocyte
complexes (COCs) and denuded oocytes. Notably, Etv4 is highly expressed in the
cumulus cells of ovulated COCs at 16-h post-human chorionic gonadotropin.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (PTGS2), a rate-limiting enzyme for prostaglandin synthesis, is 
critical for oocyte maturation and ovulation. Since several putative Ets-binding 
sites are present in the PTGS2 promoter, we examined whether Etv5 influences
Ptgs2 transcriptional activity. Indeed, we found that addition of Etv5 increases 
the transcriptional activity of the 3.2-kb mouse Ptgs2 promoter by 2.5-fold in
luciferase reporter assays. Collectively, the results show that Etv4 and Etv5 are
expressed in granulosa and cumulus cells during folliculogenesis and ovulation,
suggesting that they influence cellular events in the ovary by regulating
downstream genes such as Ptgs2.

PMID: 18492810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Mar;1779(3):183-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2008.01.002.
Epub 2008 Jan 17.

ERM transcription factor contains an inhibitory domain which functions in
sumoylation-dependent manner.

Degerny C(1), de Launoit Y, Baert JL.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 59021 Lille Cedex, France.

ERM, PEA3 and ETV1 belong to the PEA3 group of ETS transcription factors. They
are involved in many developmental processes and are transcriptional regulators
in metastasis. The PEA3 group members share an N-terminal transactivation domain 
(TAD) whose activity is inhibited by a flanking domain named the negative
regulatory domain (NRD). The mechanism of this inhibition is still unknown. Here 
we show that the NRD maps to residues 73 to 298 in ERM and contains three of the 
five SUMO sites previously identified in the protein. We demonstrate that these
three SUMO sites are responsible for NRD's inhibitory function in the Gal4
system. Although the presence of the three sites is required to obtain maximal
inhibition, only one SUMO site is sufficient to repress transcription whatever
its localization within the NRD. We also show that NRD is a SUMO-dependent
repression domain that can act in cis and in trans to downregulate the powerful
TAD of the VP16 viral protein. In addition, we find that the SUMO sites outside
the NRD also play a role in the negative regulation of full-length ERM activity. 
We thus postulate that each SUMO site in ERM may function as an inhibitory motif.

PMID: 18243147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Biol. 2008 Feb 1;314(1):224-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.12.003. Epub 2007
Dec 14.

Role for mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 alpha in lung epithelial branching 
morphogenesis.

Liu Y(1), Martinez L, Ebine K, Abe MK.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

In the early stages of lung development, the endoderm undergoes extensive and
stereotypic branching morphogenesis. During this process, a simple epithelial bud
develops into a complex tree-like system of tubes specialized for the transport
and exchange of gas with blood. The endodermal cells in the distal tips of the
developing lung express a special set of genes, have a higher proliferation rate 
than proximal part, undergo shape change and initiate branching morphogenesis. In
this study, we found that of the four p38 genes, only p38 alpha mRNA is localized
specifically to the distal endoderm suggesting a role in the regulation of
budding morphogenesis. Chemical inhibitors specific for the p38 alpha and p38
beta isoforms suppress budding of embryonic mouse lung explants and isolated
endoderm in vitro. Specific knockdown of p38 alpha in cultured lung endoderm
using shRNA also inhibited budding morphogenesis, consistent with the chemical
inhibition of the p38 signaling pathway. Disruption of p38 alpha did not affect
proliferation or expression of the distal cell markers, Sox9 and Erm. However,
the amount of E-cadherin protein increased significantly and ectopic expression
of E-cadherin also impaired budding of endoderm in vitro. These results suggest
that p38 alpha modulates epithelial cell-cell interactions and possibly cell
rearrangement during branching morphogenesis. This study provides the first
evidence that p38 alpha is involved in the morphogenesis of an epithelial organ.

PMCID: PMC2292818
PMID: 18177852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 1;68(1):73-80. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5352.

Characterization of TMPRSS2:ETV5 and SLC45A3:ETV5 gene fusions in prostate
cancer.

Helgeson BE(1), Tomlins SA, Shah N, Laxman B, Cao Q, Prensner JR, Cao X, Singla
N, Montie JE, Varambally S, Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0602, USA.

Recurrent gene fusions involving oncogenic ETS transcription factors (including
ERG, ETV1, and ETV4) have been identified in a large fraction of prostate
cancers. The most common fusions contain the 5' untranslated region of TMPRSS2
fused to ERG. Recently, we identified additional 5' partners in ETV1 fusions,
including TMPRSS2, SLC45A3, HERV-K_22q11.23, C15ORF21, and HNRPA2B1. Here, we
identify ETV5 as the fourth ETS family member involved in recurrent gene
rearrangements in prostate cancer. Characterization of two cases with ETV5
outlier expression by RNA ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA ends
identified one case with a TMPRSS2:ETV5 fusion and one case with a SLC45A3:ETV5
fusion. We confirmed the presence of these fusions by quantitative PCR and
fluorescence in situ hybridization. In vitro recapitulation of ETV5
overexpression induced invasion in RWPE cells, a benign immortalized prostatic
epithelial cell line. Expression profiling and an integrative molecular concepts 
analysis of RWPE-ETV5 cells also revealed the induction of an invasive
transcriptional program, consistent with ERG and ETV1 overexpression in RWPE
cells, emphasizing the functional redundancy of ETS rearrangements. Together, our
results suggest that the family of 5' partners previously identified in ETV1 gene
fusions can fuse with other ETS family members, suggesting numerous rare gene
fusion permutations in prostate cancer.

PMID: 18172298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Feb;108(3-5):221-9. Epub 2007 Sep 15.

Novel molecular profiles of endometrial cancer-new light through old windows.

Doll A(1), Abal M, Rigau M, Monge M, Gonzalez M, Demajo S, Colás E, Llauradó M,
Alazzouzi H, Planagumá J, Lohmann MA, Garcia J, Castellvi S, Ramon y Cajal J,
Gil-Moreno A, Xercavins J, Alameda F, Reventós J.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Recerca Biomedica, Research Institute Vall d'Hebron University
Hospital, Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129, Barcelona, Spain.

Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is the most common gynecological malignancy in the
western world. A widely accepted dualistic model, which has been established on a
morphological basis, differentiates EC into two broad categories: Type I
oestrogen-dependent adenocarcinoma with an endometrioid morphology and Type II
non-oestrogen-dependent EC with a serous papillary or clear cell morphology.
Molecular genetic evidence indicates that endometrial carcinoma, as described in 
other malignancies, likely develops as the result of a stepwise accumulation of
alterations in cellular regulatory pathways, such as oncogene activation and
tumor suppressor gene inactivation, which lead to dysfunctional cell growth.
These molecular alterations appear to be specific in Type I and Type II cancers. 
In type I endometrioid endometrial cancer, PTEN gene silencing in conjunction
with defects in DNA mismatch repair genes, as evidenced by the microsatellite
instability phenotype, or mutations in the K-ras and/or beta-catenin genes, are
recognized major alterations, which define the progression of the normal
endometrium to hyperplasia, to endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia, and then on
to carcinoma. In contrast, Type II cancers show mutations of TP53 and Her-2/neu
and seem to arise from a background of atrophic endometrium. Nevertheless,
despite the great effort made to establish a molecularly-based histological
classification, the following issues must still be clarified: what triggers the
tumor cells to invade the myometrium and what causes vascular or lymphatic
dissemination, finally culminating in metastasis? RUNX1, a transcription factor, 
was recently identified as one of the most highly over-expressed genes in a
microarray study of invasive endometrial carcinoma. Another candidate gene, which
may be associated with an initial switch to myometrial infiltration, is the
transcription factor ETV5/ERM. These studies, as well as those conducted for
other genes possibly involved in the mitotic checkpoint as a major mechanism of
carcinogenesis in non-endometrioid endometrial cancer, could help in
understanding the differences in the biology and the clinical outcome among
histological types.

PMID: 18061438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biol Reprod. 2008 Mar;78(3):483-9. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

Effects of ETV5 (ets variant gene 5) on testis and body growth, time course of
spermatogonial stem cell loss, and fertility in mice.

Schlesser HN(1), Simon L, Hofmann MC, Murphy KM, Murphy T, Hess RA, Cooke PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802, USA.

The transcription factor ets variant gene 5 (ETV5; also known as ERM) is
essential for self-renewal of spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs). Mice with
targeted disruption of Etv5 (Etv5(-/-)) undergo the first wave of
spermatogenesis, but all SSCs are lost during this time, causing a Sertoli
cell-only phenotype. This study examined body and testis growth and the time
course of SSC loss in Etv5(-/-) mice to understand how loss of ETV5 impacts
testicular and somatic development. Body weights were reduced in postnatal
Etv5(-/-) males, indicating a role of ETV5 in growth. Testis weights and
histology in Etv5(-/-) and wild-type (WT) males were similar at Postnatal Day 4, 
but testis weights were reduced at d8 and subsequently, indicating that ETV5
impacts postnatal testis growth. SSC density (SSCs per mum(2) of seminiferous
tubule), estimated using an antibody against GFRA1, was similar in 4d WT and
Etv5(-/-) mice. By 8 and 12d, GFRA1-positive cell density in Etv5(-/-) mice was
decreased 17% and 32%, respectively, vs. WT. By 28d, GFRA1-positive cell density 
in Etv5(-/-) was reduced 95%, and GFRA1-positive cells were absent in 36d
Etv5(-/-) males. In contrast to WT, 35- to 56-day-old Etv5(-/-) mice were
infertile as assessed by natural breeding, artificial insemination, and in vitro 
fertilization, although motile sperm were present in epididymides of Etv5(-/-)
mice during this time. In summary, initial testis development is normal in
Etv5(-/-) mice despite decreased body weight, but SSC loss begins between 4 and
8d of age, indicating that ETV5 has effects beginning in the early neonatal
period. Etv5(-/-) mice are infertile even when sperm is produced, indicating that
ETV5 loss has other effects besides lack of SSC self-renewal that impair
fertility.

PMCID: PMC2911230
PMID: 18032421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Neurochem. 2008 Feb;104(3):731-44. Epub 2007 Nov 6.

CHL1 promotes Sema3A-induced growth cone collapse and neurite elaboration through
a motif required for recruitment of ERM proteins to the plasma membrane.

Schlatter MC(1), Buhusi M, Wright AG, Maness PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7260, USA.

Close homolog of L1 (CHL1) is a transmembrane cell adhesion molecule with unique 
developmental functions in cortical neuronal positioning and dendritic projection
within the L1 family, as well as shared functions in promotion of
integrin-dependent neurite outgrowth and semaphorin3A (Sema3A)-mediated axon
repulsion. The molecular mechanisms by which CHL1 mediates these diverse
functions are obscure. Here it is demonstrated using a cytofluorescence assay
that CHL1 is able to recruit ezrin, a member of the ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM)
family of filamentous actin binding proteins to the plasma membrane, and that
this requires a membrane-proximal motif (RGGKYSV) in the CHL1 cytoplasmic domain.
This sequence in CHL1 is shown to have novel functions necessary for
Sema3A-induced growth cone collapse and CHL1-dependent neurite outgrowth and
branching in cortical embryonic neurons. In addition, stimulation of haptotactic 
cell migration and cellular adhesion to fibronectin by CHL1 depends on the
CHL1/ERM recruitment motif. These findings suggest that a direct or indirect
interaction between CHL1 and ERM proteins mediates Sema3A-induced growth cone
collapse as well as neurite outgrowth and branching, which are essential
determinants of axon guidance and connectivity in cortical development.

PMID: 17995939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Dec;1120:144-51. Epub 2007 Oct 2.

ETV5 is required for continuous spermatogenesis in adult mice and may mediate
blood testes barrier function and testicular immune privilege.

Morrow CM(1), Hostetler CE, Griswold MD, Hofmann MC, Murphy KM, Cooke PS, Hess
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Bioscience, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA.

The transcription factor Ets-variant gene 5 (ETV5) is essential for
spermatogonial stem cell (SSC) self-renewal, as the targeted deletion of the Etv5
gene in mice (Etv5(-/-)) results in only the first wave of spermatogenesis.
Reciprocal transplants of neonatal germ cells from wild-type (WT) and Etv5(-/-)
testes were performed to determine the role of ETV5 in Sertoli cells and germ
cells. ETV5 appears to be needed in both cell types for normal spermatogenesis.
In addition, Etv5(-/-) recipients displayed increased interstitial inflammation
and tubular involution after transplantation. Preliminary studies suggest that
the blood-testis barrier (Sertoli-Sertoli tight junctional complex) is abnormal
in the Etv5(-/-) mouse.

PMCID: PMC2733827
PMID: 17911411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Dev Dyn. 2007 Nov;236(11):3100-10.

ETS-family genes in pancreatic development.

Kobberup S(1), Nyeng P, Juhl K, Hutton J, Jensen J.

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado, Denver,
Colorado 80045, USA.

ETS-family factors play major roles in development and cancer, notably as
critical targets for extra-cellular signaling pathways, including MAPK-signaling.
Given the presently limited knowledge on the role of ETS-factors in pancreatic
development, we here sought to characterize all 26 individual members of the
ETS-family in relation to pancreatic development using a combination of genomics,
RT-PCR, and histological techniques. This analysis uncovers 22 ETS family genes
displaying select spatial and temporal expression patterns in the developing
pancreas. Highly specific expression of ETS-family components is observed in
pancreatic progenitor cells or the associated embryonic mesenchyme. Other members
are linked to the differentiation of more mature pancreatic cells, including
exocrine and endocrine cell types. We find that two members of the Etv subfamily,
Etv4 and Etv5, are expressed in cells proximal to pancreatic mesenchyme, and,
furthermore, induced in FGF10-arrested pancreatic progenitors suggesting that
these factors mediate mesenchymal-to-epithelial signaling.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17907201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Oct;48(10):4509-18.

Functions of MUC16 in corneal epithelial cells.

Blalock TD(1), Spurr-Michaud SJ, Tisdale AS, Heimer SR, Gilmore MS, Ramesh V,
Gipson IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Schepens Eye Research Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

PURPOSE: The membrane-associated mucin MUC16, a heavily O-glycosylated
transmembrane protein, is expressed by the ocular surface epithelia and localized
on the tips of the surface microplicae. Although its functions in the ocular
surface glycocalyx are unknown, it is thought that MUC16 provides a disadhesive
barrier to the epithelial membrane. Two other membrane-associated mucins
expressed by ocular surface epithelia, MUC1 and MUC4, are multifunctional and
have signaling capabilities through their cytoplasmic tails and EGF-like domains,
respectively. The MUC16 cytoplasmic tail has not been characterized, but, because
it contains a polybasic amino acid sequence, it potentially interacts with the
actin cytoskeleton through ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) actin-binding proteins.
METHODS: The interaction of MUC16 with the actin cytoskeleton through ERMs was
investigated using cytoplasmic tail peptides and ERM pull-down experiments. MUC16
functions were determined using RNA interference in immortalized human
corneal-limbal epithelial (HCLE) cells. The effect of MUC16 knockdown on
microplicae structure in HCLE cells was determined using scanning and
immunoelectron microscopy. HCLE cells were incubated with rose bengal dye to
measure the role of MUC16 in ocular surface barrier function. Binding of
fluorescently labeled Staphylococcus aureus to HCLE cells was measured to
determine the role of MUC16 in the protection of pathogen adherence on the ocular
surface epithelium.
RESULTS: MUC16 cytoplasmic tail peptides bound the N-terminus of ERMs, with no
detectable binding of MUC1 and MUC4 peptides. No effect on surface membrane
projections could be detected in HCLE cells after MUC16 suppression; however,
HCLE cells incubated with rose bengal showed that exclusion of the dye was
significantly reduced in cells with MUC16 suppression. In addition, S. aureus
binding to HCLE cells was significantly increased with MUC16 suppression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that MUC16 is a multifunctional molecule
linked to the actin cytoskeleton. The expression of MUC16 in the ocular surface
glycocalyx helps provide a disadhesive protective barrier for the epithelial
surface.

PMID: 17898272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Neuron. 2007 Sep 6;55(5):726-40.

ETS transcription factor Erm controls subsynaptic gene expression in skeletal
muscles.

Hippenmeyer S(1), Huber RM, Ladle DR, Murphy K, Arber S.

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, Department of Cell Biology, University of Basel,
Klingelbergstrasse 70, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Accumulation of specific proteins at synaptic structures is essential for synapse
assembly and function, but mechanisms regulating local protein enrichment remain 
poorly understood. At the neuromuscular junction (NMJ), subsynaptic nuclei
underlie motor axon terminals within extrafusal muscle fibers and are
transcriptionally distinct from neighboring nuclei. In this study, we show that
expression of the ETS transcription factor Erm is highly concentrated at
subsynaptic nuclei, and its mutation in mice leads to severe downregulation of
many genes with normally enriched subsynaptic expression. Erm mutant mice display
an expansion of the muscle central domain in which acetylcholine receptor (AChR) 
clusters accumulate, show gradual fragmentation of AChR clusters, and exhibit
symptoms of muscle weakness mimicking congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS).
Together, our findings define Erm as an upstream regulator of a transcriptional
program selective to subsynaptic nuclei at the NMJ and underscore the importance 
of transcriptional control of local synaptic protein accumulation.

PMID: 17785180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Neurosci. 2007 Aug 15;27(33):8866-76.

Interaction between telencephalin and ERM family proteins mediates dendritic
filopodia formation.

Furutani Y(1), Matsuno H, Kawasaki M, Sasaki T, Mori K, Yoshihara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neurobiology of Synapse, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Saitama, Japan.

Dendritic filopodia are long, thin, actin-rich, and dynamic protrusions that are 
thought to play a critical role as a precursor of spines during neural
development. We reported previously that a telencephalon-specific cell adhesion
molecule, telencephalin (TLCN) [intercellular adhesion molecule-5 (ICAM-5)], is
highly expressed in dendritic filopodia, facilitates the filopodia formation, and
slows spine maturation. Here we demonstrate that TLCN cytoplasmic region binds
ERM (ezrin/radixin/moesin) family proteins that link membrane proteins to actin
cytoskeleton. In cultured hippocampal neurons, phosphorylated active forms of ERM
proteins are colocalized with TLCN in dendritic filopodia, whereas alpha-actinin,
another binding partner of TLCN, is colocalized with TLCN at surface membranes of
soma and dendritic shafts. Expression of constitutively active ezrin induces
dendritic filopodia formation, whereas small interference RNA-mediated knockdown 
of ERM proteins decreases filopodia density and accelerates spine maturation.
These results indicate the important role of TLCN-ERM interaction in the
formation of dendritic filopodia, which leads to subsequent synaptogenesis and
establishment of functional neural circuitry in the developing brain.

PMID: 17699668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mech Dev. 2007 Sep-Oct;124(9-10):746-61. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

A dosage-dependent role for Spry2 in growth and patterning during palate
development.

Welsh IC(1), Hagge-Greenberg A, O'Brien TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

The formation of the palate involves the coordinated outgrowth, elevation and
midline fusion of bilateral shelves leading to the separation of the oral and
nasal cavities. Reciprocal signaling between adjacent fields of epithelial and
mesenchymal cells directs palatal shelf growth and morphogenesis. Loss of
function mutations in genes encoding FGF ligands and receptors have demonstrated 
a critical role for FGF signaling in mediating these epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions. The Sprouty family of genes encode modulators of FGF signaling. We 
have established that mice carrying a deletion that removes the FGF signaling
antagonist Spry2 have cleft palate. We show that excessive cell proliferation in 
the Spry2-deficient palate is accompanied by the abnormal progression of shape
changes and movements required for medially directed shelf outgrowth and midline 
contact. Expression of the FGF responsive transcription factors Etv5, Msx1, and
Barx1, as well as the morphogen Shh, is restricted to specific regions of the
developing palate. We detected elevated and ectopic expression of these
transcription factors and disorganized Shh expression in the Spry2-deficient
palate. Mice carrying a targeted disruption of Spry2 fail to complement the
craniofacial phenotype characterized in Spry2 deletion mice. Furthermore, a
Spry2-BAC transgene rescues the palate defect. However, the BAC transgenic mouse 
lines express reduced levels of Spry2. The resulting hypomorphic phenotype
demonstrates that palate development is Spry2 dosage sensitive. Our results
demonstrate the importance of proper FGF signaling thresholds in regulation of
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions and cellular responses necessary for
coordinated morphogenesis of the face and palate.

PMCID: PMC2043129
PMID: 17693063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 15;67(14):6753-9.

ERM/ETV5 up-regulation plays a role during myometrial infiltration through matrix
metalloproteinase-2 activation in endometrial cancer.

Monge M(1), Colas E, Doll A, Gonzalez M, Gil-Moreno A, Planaguma J, Quiles M,
Arbos MA, Garcia A, Castellvi J, Llaurado M, Rigau M, Alazzouzi H, Xercavins J,
Alameda F, Reventos J, Abal M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Department of
Gynecological Oncology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Passeig Vall d'Hebron 
119-129, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.

We have described recently the Ets family transcription factor, ERM/ETV5,
specifically up-regulated in endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC) and
associated with myometrial infiltration. Ets family members have been correlated 
to tumor progression by up-regulating the expression of matrix-degrading
proteases. In the present study, we investigated the possibility that in EEC,
ERM/ETV5 may act by inducing the expression of genes involved in extracellular
matrix remodeling. Unraveling the molecular events associated with the initiation
of tumor invasion would represent an obvious improvement for EEC patients. The
overexpression of ERM/ETV5 induced scattering in the endometrial cancer cell line
Hec-1A, correlating to increased matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) gelatinase
activity. Both chromatin immunoprecipitation and reversion experiments with RNA
interference and specific MMP-2 inhibitor showed a functional link between
ERM/ETV5 overexpression and MMP-2 activation. The increased MMP-2 activity
associated with overexpressed ERM/ETV5 in a mouse model conferred invasive
capacity to endometrial tumors. Orthotopically implanted overexpressing ERM/ETV5 
tumors presented a more aggressive and infiltrative pattern of myometrial
invasion. Finally, the specific localization of ERM/ETV5 and MMP-2 at the
invasive front of myometrial infiltrating human endometrial carcinomas further
reinforced the hypothesis of a role for ERM/ETV5 in the early steps of
endometrial dissemination. Taken together, these results lead us to propose that 
in EEC, ERM/ETV5 acts through MMP-2 gelatinolytic activity to confer invasive
capabilities, associated with an initial switch to myometrial infiltration. They 
also postulate ERM/ETV5 as a valuable marker for patient stratification and a
transcription pathway that should be evaluated for therapies specifically
targeting the initial steps of EEC dissemination.

PMID: 17638886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 31;282(35):25842-51. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor regulation of genes essential for
self-renewal of mouse spermatogonial stem cells is dependent on Src family kinase
signaling.

Oatley JM(1), Avarbock MR, Brinster RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Self-renewal and differentiation by spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) is the
foundation for continual spermatogenesis. SSC self-renewal is dependent on glial 
cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF); however, intracellular mechanisms
stimulated by GDNF in SSCs are unknown. To investigate these mechanisms we
utilized a culture system that maintains a mouse undifferentiated germ cell
population enriched for self-renewing SSCs. In these cultures mRNA for the
transcription factors Bcl6b, Erm, and Lhx1 are up-regulated by GDNF and decreased
in its absence. The expression of all three molecules was further identified in
undifferentiated spermatogonia in vivo. Using small interfering RNA to reduce
expression and transplantation to quantify stem cell numbers, Bcl6b, Erm, and
Lhx1 were shown to be important for SSC maintenance in vitro. Next, GDNF was
shown to activate both Akt and Src family kinase (SFK) signaling in SSCs, and
culture of SSCs with inhibitors to Akt or SFKs followed by transplantation
analysis showed significant impairment of SSC maintenance in vitro. Apoptosis
analysis revealed a significant increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells
when Akt, but not SFK, signaling was impaired, indicating that multiple signaling
pathways are responsible for SSC self-renewal and survival. Biochemical and gene 
expression experiments revealed that GDNF up-regulated expression of Bcl6b, Erm, 
and Lhx1 transcripts is dependent on SFK signaling. Overall, these data
demonstrate that GDNF up-regulation of Bcl6b, Erm, and Lhx1 expression through
SFK signaling is a key component of the intracellular mechanism for SSC
self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC4083858
PMID: 17597063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Aug 15;313(14):3090-9. Epub 2007 May 10.

Common and distinct factors regulate expression of mRNA for ETV5 and GDNF,
Sertoli cell proteins essential for spermatogonial stem cell maintenance.

Simon L(1), Ekman GC, Tyagi G, Hess RA, Murphy KM, Cooke PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 2001 S. Lincoln Ave, Urbana, IL 61802, USA.

Ets variant gene 5 (ETV5) and glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) are
produced in Sertoli cells and required for maintenance and self-renewal of
spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) in mice. Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) have
been reported to stimulate Etv5 mRNA expression, and FSH was shown to stimulate
Gdnf mRNA in Sertoli cell cultures, but there is no other information on factors 
that regulate these key Sertoli cell proteins necessary for stem cell
maintenance. In this study, we investigated regulation of ETV5 and GDNF using the
TM4 murine Sertoli cell line. FGF2 stimulated a time- and dose-dependent increase
in Etv5 mRNA expression, with a maximal 8.3-fold increase at 6 h following 25
ng/ml FGF2 treatment. This FGF2 dose also stimulated Gdnf mRNA at 48 h. FGF2
effects on Etv5 and Gdnf mRNA were partially mediated through mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-signaling
cascades. Specific inhibitors of MAPK (PD98059) and PI3K (wortmannin) pathways
reduced Etv5 and Gdnf mRNA expression in FGF2-treated cells. Epidermal growth
factor (EGF) stimulated Etv5 mRNA but not Gdnf mRNA. TNFalpha and IL-1beta
stimulated Gdnf mRNA, but had no effect on Etv5 mRNA. Other hormonal regulators
of Sertoli cells such as testosterone, triiodothyronine and activin A did not
affect Etv5 or Gdnf mRNA expression. Results with primary Sertoli cell cultures
confirmed findings obtained with the TM4 cell line, validating the use of the TM4
model to examine regulation of Etv5 and Gdnf mRNA expression. In conclusion, we
have identified common and unique pathways that regulate Etv5 and Gdnf mRNA in
Sertoli cells, and FGFs are emerging as key regulators of the Sertoli cell
proteins that control SSCs.

PMID: 17574550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. FEBS J. 2007 Mar;274(6):1434-48.

The C-terminal region of CHD3/ZFH interacts with the CIDD region of the Ets
transcription factor ERM and represses transcription of the human presenilin 1
gene.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107,
USA.

Presenilins are required for the function of gamma-secretase: a multiprotein
complex implicated in the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We analyzed
expression of the presenilin 1 (PS1) gene. We show that ERM recognizes avian
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog (Ets) motifs on the PS1 promoter
located at -10, +90, +129 and +165, and activates PS1 transcription with promoter
fragments containing or not the -10 Ets site. Using yeast two-hybrid selection we
identified interactions between the chromatin remodeling factor CHD3/ZFH and the 
C-terminal 415 amino acids of ERM used as bait. Clones contained the C-terminal
region of CHD3 starting from amino acid 1676. This C-terminal fragment (amino
acids 1676-2000) repressed transcription of the PS1 gene in transfection assays
and PS1 protein expression from the endogenous gene in SH-SY5Y cells. In cells
transfected with both CHD3 and ERM, activation of PS1 transcription by ERM was
eliminated with increasing levels of CHD3. Progressive N-terminal deletions of
CHD3 fragment (amino acids 1676-2000) indicated that sequences crucial for
repression of PS1 and interactions with ERM in yeast two-hybrid assays are
located between amino acids 1862 and 1877. This was correlated by the effect of
progressive C-terminal deletions of CHD3, which indicated that sequences required
for repression of PS1 lie between amino acids 1955 and 1877. Similarly, deletion 
to amino acid 1889 eliminated binding in yeast two-hybrid assays. Testing various
shorter fragments of ERM as bait indicated that the region essential for binding 
CHD3/ZFH is within the amino acid region 96-349, which contains the central
inhibitory DNA-binding domain (CIDD) of ERM. N-Terminal deletions of ERM showed
that residues between amino acids 200 and 343 are required for binding to CHD3
(1676-2000) and C-terminal deletions of ERM indicated that amino acids 279-299
are also required. Furthermore, data from chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
indicate that CHD3/ZFH interacts with the PS1 promoter in vivo.

PMID: 17489097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(7-8):1523-38. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

DNA methylation profiling of transcription factor genes in normal lymphocyte
development and lymphomas.

Ivascu C(1), Wasserkort R, Lesche R, Dong J, Stein H, Thiel A, Eckhardt F.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics AG, Kleine Präsidentenstrasse 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany.

Transcription factors play a crucial role during hematopoiesis by orchestrating
lineage commitment and determining cellular fate. Although tight regulation of
transcription factor expression appears to be essential, little is known about
the epigenetic mechanisms involved in transcription factor gene regulation. We
have analyzed DNA methylation profiles of 13 key transcription factor genes in
primary cells of the hematopoietic cascade, lymphoma cell lines and lymph node
biopsies of diffuse large B-cell- and T-cell-non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients.
Several of the transcription factor genes (SPI1, GATA3, TCF-7, Etv5, c-maf and
TBX21) are differentially methylated in specific cell lineages and stages of the 
hematopoietic cascade. For some genes, such as SPI1, Etv5 and Eomes, we found an 
inverse correlation between the methylation of the 5' untranslated region and
expression of the associated gene suggesting that these genes are regulated by
DNA methylation. Differential methylation is not limited to cells of the healthy 
hematopoietic cascade, as we observed aberrant methylation of c-maf, TCF7, Eomes 
and SPI1 in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Our results suggest that epigenetic
remodelling of transcription factor genes is a frequent mechanism during
hematopoietic development. Aberrant methylation of transcription factor genes is 
frequently observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and might have a functional
role during tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17433759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Sep 1;102(1):13-27.

ERM is expressed by alveolar epithelial cells in adult mouse lung and regulates
caveolin-1 transcription in mouse lung epithelial cell lines.

Kathuria H(1), Cao Y, Hinds A, Ramirez MI, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA. hasmeena.kathuria@bmc.org

We previously identified an Ets cis-element in the mouse caveolin-1 promoter that
is selectively activated in lung epithelial (E10), but not lung endothelial
murine lung endothelial cell line (MFLM-4), cell lines and therefore appears
important for differential, cell-specific caveolin-1 transcription. In the
present study, we demonstrate that immunostaining of adult mouse lung detects the
ETS protein Ets-related molecule (ERM PEA3) in distal lung epithelium in alveolar
type I and II cells, but not in bronchial epithelium or lung endothelial cells.
We tested ERM and polyomavirus enhancer activator 3 (PEA3) for their ability to
increase endogenous caveolin-1 transcripts and to activate caveolin-1 promoter
fragments containing the -865 Ets cis-element. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays show that both ERM and PEA3 bind to the caveolin-1 promoter in
murine E10, but not MFLM-4, cells. Normalized luciferase activities show that
only ERM activates the caveolin-1 promoter in E10 cells, but neither protein
enhances promoter activity in MFLM-4 cells. Mutation of the Ets site blocks
ERM-mediated promoter activation in E10 cells. Furthermore, overexpression of ERM
increases the cellular content of caveolin-1 mRNA and protein, in E10, but not
MFLM-4, cells. The effects of PEA3 on the cellular content of endogenous
caveolin-1 expression are variable. These results demonstrate that ERM is
involved in caveolin-1 regulation in a murine lung epithelial, but not lung
endothelial cell line. We conclude that transcriptional regulation of caveolin-1 
differs markedly between lung epithelial and endothelial cell lines, perhaps
explaining why the onset of caveolin-1 expression differs in epithelial and
endothelial cells during lung development.

PMID: 17390339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Pflugers Arch. 2007 Jul;454(4):649-62. Epub 2007 Mar 3.

Roles of Na+/H+ exchange in regulation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
activity and cell death after chemical anoxia in NIH3T3 fibroblasts.

Rentsch ML(1), Ossum CG, Hoffmann EK, Pedersen SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Molecular Biology and Physiology,
University of Copenhagen, 13 Universitetsparken, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.

Activation of Na(+)/H(+) exchange (NHE) plays a major role in cell death
following ischemia/hypoxia in many cell types, yet counteracts apoptotic cell
death after other stimuli. To address the role of NHE activity in regulation of
cell death/survival, we examined the causal relationship between NHE, p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), ERK1/2, p53, and Akt activity, and cell 
death, after chemical anoxia in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. The NHE1 inhibitor
5'-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl) amiloride (EIPA) (5 muM), as well as removal of
extracellular Na(+) [replaced by N-methyl-D: -glucamine (NMDG(+))], prevented
recovery of intracellular pH (pH(i)) during chemical anoxia (10 mM NaN(3) +/- 10 
mM glucose), indicating that activation of NHE was the dominating mechanism of
pH(i) regulation under these conditions. NHE activation by chemical anoxia was
unaffected by inhibitors of p38 MAPK (SB203580) and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) (PD98059). In contrast, chemical anoxia activated
p38 MAPK in an NHE-dependent manner, while ERK1/2 activity was unaffected.
Anoxia-induced cell death was caspase-3-independent, mildly attenuated by EIPA,
potently exacerbated by SB203580, and unaffected by PD98059. Ser(15)
phosphorylation of p53 was increased by anoxia in an NHE- and p38
MAPK-independent manner, while Akt activity was unaffected. It is suggested that 
after chemical anoxia in NIH3T3 fibroblasts, NHE activity is required for
activation of p38 MAPK, which in turn protects the cells against anoxia-induced
death. In spite of this, NHE inhibition slightly attenuates anoxia-induced cell
death, likely due to the involvement of NHE in other anoxia-induced death
pathways.

PMID: 17334779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Toxicol Sci. 2006 Dec;31(5):537-8.

DNA microarray analysis of transcriptional responses of human neuroblastoma
IMR-32 cells to methylmercury.

Hwang GW(1), Naganuma A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Biochemical Toxicology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

We used DNA microarrays to monitor the transcriptional responses of IMR-32
neuroblastoma cells to methylmercury. Methylmercury increased levels of
expression of seven genes, including genes for ETV5 and ID4, and reduced those of
two genes.

PMID: 17202766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Mol Neurosci. 2006;30(1-2):29-30.

Microarray screen for synaptic genes in the neuromuscular junction.

Jevsek M(1), Burden SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathophysiology, Medical Faculty, University of Ljubljana,
Slovenia SI-1000. Marko.Jevsek@MF.UNI-LJ.SI

The formation of neuromuscular synapses requires a complex exchange of signals
between motor neurons and skeletal muscle fibers. Essential for the formation of 
neuromuscular junction (NMJ) is the activation of MuSK, a muscle-specific
receptor tyrosine kinase (DeChiara et al., 1996). In mice lacking MuSK, motor
axons fail to stop and differentiate, acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) fail to
cluster, and AChR genes are expressed uniformly in muscle (DeChiara et al., 1996;
Gautam et al., 1996). The retrograde signals for presynaptic differentiation are 
not known. Because synapse-specific transcription, like presynaptic
differentiation, is MuSK-dependent, it is possible that retrograde signals for
presynaptic differentiation might be encoded by genes that are expressed
preferentially by synaptic nuclei. To identify such synapse-specific genes we
screened Affymetrix microarrays with RNA from the dissected, synapse-enriched,
and extrasynaptic regions of skeletal muscle and further studied those genes that
encode for the secreted or cell-surface proteins.

PMID: 17192615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Brain Res. 2007 Jan 12;1128(1):21-32. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Analysis of transcriptional modulation of the presenilin 1 gene promoter by
ZNF237, a candidate binding partner of the Ets transcription factor ERM.

Pastorcic M(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107,
USA.

DNA sequences required for the expression of the human presenilin 1 (PS1) gene
have been identified between -118 and +178 flanking the major initiation site
(+1) mapped in SK-N-SH cells. Several Ets sites are located both upstream as well
as downstream from the +1 site, including an Ets motif present at -10 that
controls 90% of transcription in SK-N-SH cells. However, in SH-SY5Y cells,
transcription initiates further downstream and requires an alternative set of
promoter elements including a +90 Ets motif. Ets2, ER81, ERM and Elk1 were
identified by yeast one-hybrid selection in a human brain cDNA library using the 
-10 Ets motif as a bait. We have shown that ERM recognizes specifically Ets
motifs on the PS1 promoter located at -10 as well as downstream at +90, +129 and 
+165 and activates PS1 transcription with promoter fragments whether or not they 
contain the -10 Ets site. We have now searched for ERM interacting proteins by
yeast two-hybrid selection in a human brain cDNA library using the C-terminal 415
amino acid of ERM as a bait. One of the interacting proteins was ZNF237, a member
of the MYM gene family. It is widely expressed in different tissues in eukaryotes
under several forms derived by alternative splicing, including a large 382 amino 
acid form containing a single MYM domain, and 2 shorter forms of 208 and 213
amino acids respectively that do not. We show that both the 382 as well as the
208 amino acid forms are expressed in SK-N-SH cells but not in SH-SY5Y cells.
Both forms interact with ERM and repress the transcription of PS1 in SH-SY5Y
cells. The effect of both C-terminal and N-terminal deletions indicates that the 
N-terminal 120 amino acid region is required for interaction with ERM in yeast,
and furthermore single amino acid mutations show that residues 112 and 114 play
an important role. The repression of transcription in SH-SY5Y cells also appears 
to require the N-terminal potion of ZNF237 and was affected by mutation of the
amino acid 112. Data from electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicate that ERM
and possibly ZNF237 interact with a fragment of the PS1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC1876729
PMID: 17126306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Neurosci Res. 2007 Jan;85(1):34-46.

Rho kinase activates ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) proteins and mediates their
function in cortical neuron growth, morphology and motility in vitro.

Haas MA(1), Vickers JC, Dickson TC.

Author information: 
(1)NeuroRepair Group, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia.

The ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) family of proteins contribute to cytoskeletal
processes underlying many vital cellular functions. Their previously elucidated
roles in non-neuronal cells are an indication of their potential importance in
CNS neurons. The specific mechanisms of their activation are unknown, but are
likely to depend on factors such as the cell type and biological context. For ERM
proteins to become active they must be phosphorylated at a specific C-terminal
threonine residue. In non-neuronal cells, several kinases, including the Rho
GTPase family member Rho kinase, have been identified as capable of
phosphorylating the C-terminal threonine. In these experiments we have
investigated specifically the potential role of Rho kinase mediated ERM
activation in cortical neurons, utilizing a new pharmacologic inhibitor of Rho
kinase and quantitative analysis of aspects of neuronal functions potentially
mediated by ERM proteins. Rho kinase inhibition significantly suppressed aspects 
of neuronal development including neurite initiation and outgrowth, as well as
growth cone morphology, with a concomitant loss of phosphorylated ERM
immunolabeling in areas associated with neuronal growth. The ability of the Rho
kinase inhibitor to decrease the amount of pERM protein was shown by
immunoblotting. Post-injury responses were negatively affected by Rho kinase
inhibition, namely by a significant decrease in the number of regenerative
neurites. We investigated a novel role for ERM proteins in neuron migration using
a post-injury motility assay, where Rho kinase inhibition resulted in significant
and drastic reduction in neuron motility and phosphorylated ERM immunolabeling.
Thus, Rho kinase is an important activator of ERMs in mediating specific neuronal
functions.

PMID: 17075902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Oncogene. 2007 Jan 18;26(3):415-24. Epub 2006 Jul 10.

The 26S proteasome system degrades the ERM transcription factor and regulates its
transcription-enhancing activity.

Baert JL(1), Beaudoin C, Monte D, Degerny C, Mauen S, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, CNRS/Université de Lille 1/Université
de Lille 2/Institut Pasteur de Lille, IFR 142, Lille Cedex, France.

ERM is a member of the ETS transcription factor family. High levels of the
corresponding mRNA are detected in a variety of human breast cancer cell lines,
as well as in aggressive human breast tumors. As ERM protein is almost
undetectable in these cells, high degradation of this transcription factor has
been postulated. Here we have investigated whether ERM degradation might depend
on the proteasome pathway. We show that endogenous and ectopically expressed ERM 
protein is short-lived protein and undergoes proteasome-dependent degradation.
Deletion mutagenesis studies indicate that the 61 C-terminal amino acids of ERM
are critical for its proteolysis and serve as a degradation signal. Although ERM 
conjugates with ubiquitin, this post-translational modification does not depend
on the C-terminal domain. We have used an Ets-responsive ICAM-1 reporter plasmid 
to show that the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway can affect transcriptional function
of ERM. Thus, ERM is subject to degradation via the 26S proteasome pathway, and
this pathway probably plays an important role in regulating ERM transcriptional
activity.

PMID: 16832340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jul 1;15(13):2125-37. Epub 2006 May 22.

Fusion between CIC and DUX4 up-regulates PEA3 family genes in Ewing-like sarcomas
with t(4;19)(q35;q13) translocation.

Kawamura-Saito M(1), Yamazaki Y, Kaneko K, Kawaguchi N, Kanda H, Mukai H, Gotoh
T, Motoi T, Fukayama M, Aburatani H, Takizawa T, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) are highly malignant tumors arising from bone and
soft tissues that exhibit EWS-FLI1 or variant EWS-ETS gene fusions in more than
85% of the cases. Here we show that CIC, a human homolog of Drosophila capicua
which encodes a high mobility group box transcription factor, is fused to a
double homeodomain gene DUX4 as a result of a recurrent chromosomal translocation
t(4;19)(q35;q13). This translocation was seen in two cases of soft tissue sarcoma
diagnosed as Ewing-like sarcoma. CIC-DUX4 exhibits a transforming potential for
NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, and as a consequence of fusion with a C-terminal fragment of
DUX4, CIC acquires an enhanced transcriptional activity, suggesting that
expression of its downstream targets might be deregulated. Gene expression
analysis identified the ETS family genes, ERM/ETV5 and ETV1, as potential targets
for the gene product of CIC-DUX4. Indeed, CIC-DUX4 directly binds the ERM
promoter by recognizing a novel target sequence and significantly up-regulates
its expression. This study clarifies the function of CIC and its role in
tumorigenesis, as well as the importance of the PEA3 subclass of ETS family
proteins in the development of EFTs arising through mechanisms different from
those involving EWS-ETS chimeras. Moreover, the study identifies the role of DUX4
that is closely linked to facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy in
transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 16717057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 14;281(28):19665-75. Epub 2006 May 10.

EWI-2 and EWI-F link the tetraspanin web to the actin cytoskeleton through their 
direct association with ezrin-radixin-moesin proteins.

Sala-Valdés M(1), Ursa A, Charrin S, Rubinstein E, Hemler ME, Sánchez-Madrid F,
Yáñez-Mó M.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, UAM, Madrid
28006, Spain.

EWI-2 and EWI-F, two members of a novel subfamily of Ig proteins, are direct
partners of tetraspanins CD9 (Tspan29) and CD81 (Tspan28). These EWI proteins
contain a stretch of basic charged amino acids in their cytoplasmic domains that 
may act as binding sites for actin-linking ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) proteins.
Confocal microscopy analysis revealed that EWI-2 and EWI-F colocalized with ERM
proteins at microspikes and microvilli of adherent cells and at the cellular
uropod in polarized migrating leukocytes. Immunoprecipitation studies showed the 
association of EWI-2 and EWI-F with ERM proteins in vivo. Moreover, pulldown
experiments and protein-protein binding assays with glutathione S-transferase
fusion proteins containing the cytoplasmic domains of EWI proteins corroborated
the strong and direct interaction between ERMs and these proteins. The active
role of ERMs was further confirmed by double transfections with the N-terminal
domain of moesin, which acts as a dominant negative form of ERMs, and was able to
delocalize EWIs from the uropod of polarized leukocytes. In addition, direct
association of EWI partner CD81 C-terminal domain with ERMs was also
demonstrated. Functionally, silencing of endogenous EWI-2 expression by short
interfering RNA in lymphoid CEM cells augmented cell migration, cellular
polarity, and increased phosphorylation of ERMs. Hence, EWI proteins, through
their direct interaction with ERM proteins, act as linkers to connect
tetraspanin-associated microdomains to actin cytoskeleton regulating cell
motility and polarity.

PMID: 16690612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Cell. 2006 Apr;9(4):261-72.

Tumor invasion in the absence of epithelial-mesenchymal transition:
podoplanin-mediated remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton.

Wicki A(1), Lehembre F, Wick N, Hantusch B, Kerjaschki D, Christofori G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Department of Clinical-Biological
Sciences, Center of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.

The expression of podoplanin, a small mucin-like protein, is upregulated in the
invasive front of a number of human carcinomas. We have investigated podoplanin
function in cultured human breast cancer cells, in a mouse model of pancreatic
beta cell carcinogenesis, and in human cancer biopsies. Our results indicate that
podoplanin promotes tumor cell invasion in vitro and in vivo. Notably, the
expression and subcellular localization of epithelial markers are unaltered, and 
mesenchymal markers are not induced in invasive podoplanin-expressing tumor
cells. Rather, podoplanin induces collective cell migration by filopodia
formation via the downregulation of the activities of small Rho family GTPases.
In conclusion, podoplanin induces an alternative pathway of tumor cell invasion
in the absence of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).

PMID: 16616332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Structure. 2006 Apr;14(4):777-89.

Structural basis for NHERF recognition by ERM proteins.

Terawaki S(1), Maesaki R, Hakoshima T.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Laboratory, Nara Institute of Science and Technology,
8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan.

The Na+/H+ exchanger regulatory factor (NHERF) is a key adaptor protein involved 
in the anchoring of ion channels and receptors to the actin cytoskeleton through 
binding to ERM (ezrin/radixin/moesin) proteins. NHERF binds the FERM domain of
ERM proteins, although NHERF has no signature Motif-1 sequence for FERM binding
found in adhesion molecules. The crystal structures of the radixin FERM domain
complexed with the NHERF-1 and NHERF-2 C-terminal peptides revealed a peptide
binding site of the FERM domain specific for the 13 residue motif
MDWxxxxx(L/I)Fxx(L/F) (Motif-2), which is distinct from Motif-1. This Motif-2
forms an amphipathic alpha helix for hydrophobic docking to subdomain C of the
FERM domain. This docking causes induced-fit conformational changes in subdomain 
C and affects binding to adhesion molecule peptides, while the two binding sites 
are not overlapped. Our studies provide structural paradigms for versatile ERM
linkages between membrane proteins and the cytoskeleton.

PMID: 16615918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 16;281(24):16716-26. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

Erm/thyroid transcription factor 1 interactions modulate surfactant protein C
transcription.

Lin S(1), Perl AK, Shannon JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Expression of surfactant protein C (SP-C), which is restricted to alveolar type
II epithelial cells of the adult lung, is critically dependent on thyroid
transcription factor 1 (TTF-1). In the present study we have demonstrated that
Erm, a member of the Ets family of transcription factors, is expressed in the
distal lung epithelium during development and is also restricted to alveolar type
II cells in the adult. Erm was up-regulated by fibroblast growth factors (FGFs)
in culture, and blocking FGF signaling inhibited Erm expression both in vivo and 
in vitro. The SP-C minimal promoter was found to contain two potential Ets
binding sites, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that two 20-bp
wild-type oligonucleotides containing the 5'-GGA(A/T)-3' Ets consensus binding
motif were shifted by nuclear extracts from MLE15 cells. Co-transfection assays
showed that Erm by itself had little effect on SP-C promoter activity but that
Erm significantly enhanced TTF-1-mediated SP-C transcription. Mutation of one of 
the Ets binding sites reduced SP-C transcription to background levels, whereas
mutation of the other site resulted in increased SP-C transcription.
Protein-protein interactions between Erm and TTF-1 were demonstrated by mammalian
two-hybrid assays and by co-immunoprecipitation assays. Mapping studies showed
that the Ets domain of Erm and the combined N terminus and homeodomain of TTF-1
were critical for this interaction. Treatment of primary cultures of adult
alveolar type II cells with siRNA targeting Erm diminished expression of both Erm
and SP-C but had no effect on beta-actin or GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase). Taken together, these results demonstrate that Erm is involved in
SP-C regulation, which results from an interaction with TTF-1.

PMID: 16613858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Dev Biol. 2006 Jun 1;294(1):161-7. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Sohlh1 is essential for spermatogonial differentiation.

Ballow D(1), Meistrich ML, Matzuk M, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of
Medicine, 1709 Dryden Street, Suite 1100, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Spermatogonia are adult germline stem cells that can both self-renew and
differentiate into spermatocytes. Little is known about factors necessary for
spermatogonial differentiation. We identified a novel germ-cell-specific
transcription factor that we named Sohlh1 (testis and ovary expressed basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor). In males, Sohlh1 is preferentially
expressed in prespermatogonia and Type A spermatogonia. Loss of Sohlh1 causes
infertility by disrupting spermatogonial differentiation into spermatocytes.
Seven-day-old testes without Sohlh1 still express the testis-specific
transcription factors Etv5, Taf4b, Zfp148, and Plzf, overexpress a novel Tohlh2
bHLH transcription factor, but lack LIM homeobox gene Lhx8 and show reduced
expression of Ngn3. Sohlh1 represents the first testis-specific bHLH
transcription factor that is essential for spermatogonial differentiation.

PMID: 16564520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Ai Zheng. 2006 Mar;25(3):315-9.

[Expression of ETV5 and MMP-7 in early stage cervical squamous cell carcinoma and
its role in lymphatic metastasis].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu SH(1), Zhang J, Li Y, Li JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, The First Hospital, Shanxi Medical University,
Taiyuan, Shanxi 030001, P. R. China. shwu1215@tom.com

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Transcription factor Ets variant gene 5 (ETV5)
participates in tumor metastasis, and matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) also
plays an important role in tumor invasion and metastasis. This study was to
investigate the expression of ETV5 and MMP-7 in cervical squamous cell carcinoma,
and explore the roles of ETV5 and MMP-7 in invasion and metastasis of early stage
cervical squamous cell carcinoma.
METHODS: Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to
detect the expression of ETV5 and MMP-7 mRNA in 86 samples of cervical squamous
cell carcinoma and 21 samples of normal cervix, and immunohistochemistry was used
to detect the expression of MMP-7 protein in these samples.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of ETV5 and MMP-7 were significantly higher in cervical 
cancer tissues than in normal cervix tissues (0.507+/-0.073 vs. 0.201+/-0.057,
P<0.01; 0.488+/-0.078 vs. 0.305+/-0.064, P<0.01), and were significantly higher
in nodal metastasis group than in no nodal metastasis group (0.538+/-0.063 vs.
0.496+/-0.073, P<0.05; 0.542+/-0.066 vs. 0.468+/-0.072, P<0.01). The protein
level of MMP-7 was significantly higher in cervical cancer tissues than in normal
cervix tissues (3.826+/-1.427 vs. 1.714+/-0.383, P<0.01), and was significantly
higher in nodal metastasis group than in no nodal metastasis group (4.935+/-1.614
vs. 2.623+/-1.086, P<0.01). The positive rate of MMP-7 protein was significantly 
higher in lymph node metastasis group than in no lymph node metastasis group
(65.21% vs. 36.51%, P<0.01). ETV5 expression was positively correlated to MMP-7
expression (r=0.221, P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: ETV5 and MMP-7 are highly expressed in metastatic cervical squamous
cell carcinoma, and may be served as markers in estimating the invasive and
metastatic potential of cervical squamous cell carcinoma.

PMID: 16536985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Microbes Infect. 2006 Jan;8(1):114-21.

Contribution of cell surface protein antigen PAc of Streptococcus mutans to
bacteremia.

Nakano K(1), Tsuji M, Nishimura K, Nomura R, Ooshima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Streptococcus mutans, a major cariogenic bacterium, is occasionally isolated from
the blood of patients with bacteremia and infective endocarditis. Mutant strains 
of S. mutans MT8148, defective in the major surface proteins glucosyltransferase 
(GTF) B-, C-, and D-, and protein antigen c (PAc), were constructed by
insertional inactivation of each respective gene with an antibiotic resistant
cassette. Susceptibility to phagocytosis was determined by analyses of
interactions of the bacteria with human polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and the
PAc-defective mutant strain (PD) showed the lowest rate of phagocytosis. Further,
when PD and MT8148 were separately injected into the jugular veins of
Sprague-Dawley rats, PD was recovered in significantly larger numbers and for a
longer duration, and caused more severe systemic inflammation than MT8148,
indicating that S. mutans PAc is associated with its systemic virulence in blood.
Next, 100 S. mutans clinical isolates from 100 Japanese children and adolescents 
were analyzed by Western blotting using antisera raised against recombinant PAc, 
generated based on the pac sequence of MT8148. Four of the 100 strains showed no 
positive band and each exhibited a significantly lower phagocytosis rate than
that of 25 randomly selected clinical strains (P < 0.01). In addition, three of
the 100 strains possessed a lower molecular weight PAc and a significantly lower 
rate of phagocytosis than the 25 reference strains (P < 0.05). These results
suggest that S. mutans PAc may be associated with phagocytosis susceptibility to 
human polymorphonuclear leukocytes, with approximately 7% of S. mutans clinical
isolates possible high-risk strains for the development of bacteremia.

PMID: 16442486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 May 16;250(1-2):196-200. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Identifying putative contraceptive targets by dissecting signal transduction
networks in the epididymis using an in vivo electroporation (electrotransfer)
approach.

Fox SA(1), Yang L, Hinton BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Our studies have focused on understanding how the initial segment is regulated,
in particular, by testicular luminal fluid factor(s). Our working hypothesis is
that testicular luminal fluid growth factors, e.g. FGFs, regulate initial segment
function via activation of signal transduction pathways and PEA3 family
transcription factors. These, in turn, regulate downstream genes that are
important for providing an appropriate fluid milieu for the protection and
survival of sperm and the initial segment. To test this hypothesis and to look
for potential contraceptive targets, we used an in vivo electroporation technique
to introduce dominant-negative plasmids of FGF Receptor 1 and ERM into the
initial segment of the rat epididymis. The levels of several putative downstream 
genes were estimated using quantitative-PCR (q-PCR). Data suggests that initial
segment genes are regulated by 5alpha-reductase-dependent and -independent
pathways and that multiple growth factor pathways are activated to coordinate the
expression of these genes.

PMID: 16423449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biol Reprod. 2006 Apr;74(4):714-20. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Putative regulation of expression of members of the Ets variant 4 transcription
factor family and their downstream targets in the rat epididymis.

Yang L(1), Fox SA, Kirby JL, Troan BV, Hinton BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Several genes expressed in the initial segment of the epididymis depend on
factors from the testis that reach the epididymis via the luminal system. These
include gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase mRNA IV (Ggt_pr4), steroid 5 alpha
reductase (Srd5a1), glutathione peroxidase 5 (Gpx5), and cystatin-related
epididymal spermatogenic (Cst8) genes. Promoter analyses indicated that these
genes contain several ETS DNA-binding sites. Members of the polyomavirus enhancer
activator 3 (ETV4) family bind to ETS sites on the promoter of target genes to
regulate transcription. In this study, the role of ETV4 family members (ETV4,
ETV5, ETV1) in the transcription of initial segment specific genes was evaluated.
All three ETV4 family mRNAs are expressed in the principal cells of the initial
segment and depend upon the presence of testicular luminal fluid factors. ETV4
protein was localized to principal cell nuclei and displayed the highest
expression in the most proximal region of the initial segment. In addition, ETV4 
protein levels were diminished after loss of testicular luminal fluid factors. A 
dominant-negative construct of ETV5 was in vivo electroporated into the initial
segment to determine if ETV4 family members can regulate the transcription of
testicular luminal fluid factor-regulated genes. Quantitative PCR indicated that 
1 day postelectroporation, all three ETV4 family member mRNAs were significantly 
decreased. In addition, Ggt_pr4, Srd5a1, and Gpx5 mRNA levels were also
significantly decreased. The data suggest that ETV4 family members regulate their
own expression, and that they regulate transcription of a subset of genes that
are dependent upon testicular luminal fluid factors.

PMID: 16394217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 3;281(9):5928-37. Epub 2005 Dec 23.

Characterization of a novel interaction between ELMO1 and ERM proteins.

Grimsley CM(1), Lu M, Haney LB, Kinchen JM, Ravichandran KS.

Author information: 
(1)Beirne Carter Center for Immunology Research, and Department of Microbiology, 
University of Virginia, Lane Road, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA.

ERMs are closely related proteins involved in cell migration, cell adhesion,
maintenance of cell shape, and formation of microvilli through their ability to
cross-link the plasma membrane with the actin cytoskeleton. ELMO proteins are
also known to regulate actin cytoskeleton reorganization through activation of
the small GTPbinding protein Rac via the ELMO-Dock180 complex. Here we showed
that ERM proteins associate directly with ELMO1 as purified recombinant proteins 
in vitro and at endogenous levels in intact cells. We mapped ERM binding on ELMO1
to the N-terminal 280 amino acids, which overlaps with the region required for
binding to the GTPase RhoG, but is distinct from the C-terminal Dock180 binding
region. Consistent with this, ELMO1 could simultaneously bind both radixin and
Dock180, although radixin did not alter Rac activation via the Dock180-ELMO
complex. Most interestingly, radixin binding did not affect ELMO binding to
active RhoG and a trimeric complex of active RhoG-ELMO-radixin could be detected.
Moreover, the three proteins colocalized at the plasma membrane. Finally, in
contrast to most other ERM-binding proteins, ELMO1 binding occurred independently
of the state of radixin C-terminal phosphorylation, suggesting an ELMO1
interaction with both the active and inactive forms of ERM proteins and implying 
a possible role of ELMO in localizing or retaining ERM proteins in certain
cellular sites. Together these data suggest that ELMO1-mediated cytoskeletal
changes may be coordinated with ERM protein crosslinking activity during dynamic 
cellular functions.

PMID: 16377631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Pathol. 2005 Dec;207(4):422-9.

Up-regulation of ERM/ETV5 correlates with the degree of myometrial infiltration
in endometrioid endometrial carcinoma.

Planagumà J(1), Abal M, Gil-Moreno A, Díaz-Fuertes M, Monge M, García A, Baró T, 
Xercavins J, Reventós J, Alameda F.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Recerca Biomèdica, Institut de Recerca, Hospital Universitari Vall
d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

To elucidate alterations in gene expression in endometrioid endometrial carcinoma
(EEC), differential gene expression profiling was previously described in both
tumour and non-tumour contexts, and the up-regulation of the RUNX1/AML1
proto-oncogene in EEC was characterized. Among the set of genes found to be
up-regulated significantly in EEC, the most relevant, ERM/ETV5, corresponds to
the PEA3 subfamily and is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors
that contain the Ets DNA-binding domain and are involved in matrix remodelling.
In the present work, an attempt was made to characterize the expression of
ERM/ETV5 in EEC throughout the process of tumourigenesis. Gene expression levels 
of ERM/ETV5 were quantified by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-Q-PCR) using a
large panel of samples ranging from non-invasive IA to metastatic IIIA stages,
and protein expression was characterized by tissue array immunohistochemistry
(TMA). RT-Q-PCR validated ERM/ETV5 up-regulation in EEC and demonstrated a
specific and significant increase restricted to those tumour stages associated
with myometrial invasion. TMA showed that ERM/ETV5 up-regulation correlated
mainly with the transition from atrophic endometrium to hyperplasia and carcinoma
during tumour progression. Furthermore, ERM/ETV5 gene and protein expression
levels were associated with low tumour grade. Finally, ERM/ETV5 up-regulation
correlated with that of RUNX1/AML1. All of these results lead to the proposal of 
a co-operative role between ERM/ETV5 and RUNX1/AML1 during the early events of
endometrial tumourigenesis, which may be associated with a switch to myometrial
infiltration.

Copyright 2005 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 16175655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005 Nov 1;70(9):1312-9.

Interferon-gamma-induced STAT1-mediated membrane retention of NHE1 and associated
proteins ezrin, radixin and moesin in HT-29 cells.

Magro F(1), Fraga S, Soares-da-Silva P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, 4200 Porto,
Portugal.

This study evaluated the effect of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) upon the function
and expression of type 1 Na(+)/H+ exchanger (NHE1) in human intestinal epithelial
HT-29 cells, namely that concerning the abundance of surface NHE1 and NHE1
binding to the ezrin, radixin and moesin (ERM) family of proteins. HT-29 cells
express endogenous NHE1 and the ERM family of proteins that retain the
localization of NHE1 in the membrane. Long-term exposure (24 h) of HT-29 cells to
IFN-gamma resulted in a concentration-dependent decrease in NHE1 activity.
Inhibition of NHE1 activity by IFN-gamma was absent after pretreatment with
cariporide. The long-term exposure to IFN-gamma was accompanied by increase in
surface NHE1 and ERM abundance and no changes in total NHE1 and ERM abundance.
Inhibition of signal transducer and activator transcription factor 1 (STAT1) with
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) prevented the inhibitory effect of IFN-gamma.
Treatment with IFN-gamma activated phospho-STAT1 was markedly attenuated by EGCG.
The IFN-gamma-induced increase in surface NHE1 and ERM abundance was prevented by
EGCG. In conclusion, long-term inhibition of NHE1 activity by IFN-gamma involves 
STAT1 phosphorylation and is accompanied by increased abundance of surface NHE1
and the NHE1 membrane anchoring ERM proteins.

PMID: 16174516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cell Signal. 2006 Mar;18(3):276-84. Epub 2005 Aug 16.

Protein kinase C and the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton.

Larsson C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lund University, Dept of Laboratory Medicine, Molecular Medicine, Entrance 78,
3rd floor, UMAS SE-205 02, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
christer.larsson@molmed.mas.lu.se

Protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms are central components in intracellular networks 
that regulate a vast number of cellular processes. It has long been known that in
most cell types, one or more PKC isoforms influences the morphology of the
F-actin cytoskeleton and thereby regulates processes that are affected by
remodelling of the microfilaments. These include cellular migration and neurite
outgrowth. This review focuses on the role of classical and novel PKC isoforms in
migration and neurite outgrowth, and highlights some regulatory steps that may be
of importance in the regulation by PKC of migration and neurite outgrowth. Many
studies indicate that integrins are crucial mediators both upstream and
downstream of PKC in inducing morphological changes. Furthermore, a number of PKC
substrates, directly associated with the microfilaments, such as MARCKS, GAP43,
adducin, fascin, ERM proteins and others have been identified. Their potential
role in PKC effects on the cytoskeleton is discussed.

PMID: 16109477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nature. 2005 Aug 18;436(7053):1030-4.

ERM is required for transcriptional control of the spermatogonial stem cell
niche.

Chen C(1), Ouyang W, Grigura V, Zhou Q, Carnes K, Lim H, Zhao GQ, Arber S,
Kurpios N, Murphy TL, Cheng AM, Hassell JA, Chandrashekar V, Hofmann MC, Hess RA,
Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Division of spermatogonial stem cells produces daughter cells that either
maintain their stem cell identity or undergo differentiation to form mature
sperm. The Sertoli cell, the only somatic cell within seminiferous tubules,
provides the stem cell niche through physical support and expression of surface
proteins and soluble factors. Here we show that the Ets related molecule (ERM) is
expressed exclusively within Sertoli cells in the testis and is required for
spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal. Mice with targeted disruption of ERM have 
a loss of maintenance of spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal without a block in
normal spermatogenic differentiation and thus have progressive germ-cell
depletion and a Sertoli-cell-only syndrome. Microarray analysis of primary
Sertoli cells from ERM-deficient mice showed alterations in secreted factors
known to regulate the haematopoietic stem cell niche. These results identify a
new function for the Ets family transcription factors in spermatogenesis and
provide an example of transcriptional control of a vertebrate stem cell niche.

PMCID: PMC2909764
PMID: 16107850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Oncogene. 2005 Sep 29;24(43):6502-15.

Protein 4.1B expression is induced in mammary epithelial cells during pregnancy
and regulates their proliferation.

Kuns R(1), Kissil JL, Newsham IF, Jacks T, Gutmann DH, Sherman LS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon
Health & Science University, 505 NW 185th Ave., Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.

4.1B is a member of the protein 4.1 superfamily of proteins that link
transmembrane proteins to the actin cytoskeleton. The 4.1B gene localizes to
chromosome 18p11.3, which undergoes loss of heterozygosity in mammary tumors.
Here, we examine the expression of 4.1B in murine mammary epithelium and find
that 4.1B is dramatically upregulated in mammary epithelial cells during
pregnancy when there is extensive cell proliferation. In contrast, 4.1B is not
expressed in virgin, lactating, or involuting mammary epithelium. To examine the 
consequence of 4.1B loss on mammary epithelial cell proliferation, we analysed
mammary glands in 4.1B-null mice. 4.1B loss results in a significant increase in 
mammary epithelial cell proliferation during pregnancy, but has no effect on
mammary epithelial cell proliferation, in virgin or involuting mice. Furthermore,
we show that 4.1B inhibits the proliferation of mammary epithelial cell lines by 
inducing a G1 cell cycle arrest, characterized by decreased cyclin A expression
and reduced Rb phosphorylation, and accompanied by reduced erbB2 phosphorylation.
This cell cycle arrest does not involve alterations in the activities of MAPK,
JNK, or Akt. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that 4.1B regulates mammary
epithelial cell proliferation during pregnancy and suggest that its loss may
influence mammary carcinoma pathogenesis in multiparous women.

PMID: 16007173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 May;4(5):596-601. Epub 2005 May 13.

Expression and prognostic significance of 14-3-3sigma and ERM family protein
expression in periampullary neoplasms.

Hustinx SR(1), Fukushima N, Zahurak ML, Riall TS, Maitra A, Brosens L, Cameron
JL, Yeo CJ, Offerhaus GJ, Hruban RH, Goggins M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA.

Aberrant gene expression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas contributes to the 
dismal outcome of patients who develop this disease. The 5' region of 14-3-3sigma
(stratifin) is hypomethylated in pancreatic adenocarcinomas and is associated
with gene overexpression. In multiple experimental systems, ezrin (ERM, Radixin, 
Moesin) has been identified as being important in the metastatic behavior of
pancreatic and other cancers. We investigated the prognostic significance of
aberrant expression of 14-3-3sigma and the ERM proteins (Ezrin, radixin, Moesin) 
in a series of invasive periampullary adenocarcinomas including 300 infiltrating 
pancreatic adenocarcinomas, 54 ampullary adenocarcinomas, and 33 noninvasive
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms from patients who underwent
pancreaticoduodenal resection at The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD,
between 1991 and 2003. Two-hundred fourty-four (82%) primary infiltrating
adenocarcinomas of the pancreas demonstrated positive expression of the
14-3-3sigma, 45 (15%) showed weak immunolabelling, and 9 (3%) were negative. 201 
(68%) showed positive immunolabeling of the ERM proteins, 75 (25%) demonstrated
weak expression and 20 (7%) no expression. A similar proportion of ampullary
cancers showed 14-3-3sigma and ERM protein expression. Expression of 14-3-3sigma 
and ERM protein was more likely in poorly differentiated cancers (p = 0.00005),
and their expression was associated with poor survival in univariate analysis (p 
= 0.09). By multivariate analysis, patients whose cancers expressed 14-3-3sigma, 
but not ERM tended to have a poorer prognosis (Hazard ratio, 1.4; 0.9-2.2, p =
0.14). Aberrant expression of 14-3-3sigma may contribute to the outcome of
patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 15908786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 1;280(26):24330-8. Epub 2005 Apr 27.

SUMO modification of the Ets-related transcription factor ERM inhibits its
transcriptional activity.

Degerny C(1), Monte D, Beaudoin C, Jaffray E, Portois L, Hay RT, de Launoit Y,
Baert JL.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8117, CNRS, Université de Lille I, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de 
Biologie de Lille, BP 447, 1 rue Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex, France.

A variety of transcription factors are post-translationally modified by SUMO, a
97-residue ubiquitin-like protein bound covalently to the targeted lysine. Here
we describe SUMO modification of the Ets family member ERM at positions 89, 263, 
293, and 350. To investigate how SUMO modification affects the function of ERM,
Ets-responsive intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) and E74 reporter
plasmids were employed to demonstrate that SUMO modification causes inhibition of
ERM-dependent transcription without affecting the subcellular localization,
stability, or DNA-binding capacity of the protein. When the adenoviral protein
Gam1 or the SUMO protease SENP1 was used to inhibit the SUMO modification
pathway, ERM-dependent transcription was de-repressed. These results demonstrate 
that ERM is subject to SUMO modification and that this post-translational
modification causes inhibition of transcription-enhancing activity.

PMID: 15857832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Reproduction. 2005 May;129(5):651-7.

Differential expression of the PEA3 subfamily of ETS transcription factors in the
mouse ovary and peri-implantation uterus.

Koo TB(1), Song H, Moon I, Han K, Chen C, Murphy K, Lim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The objective of the present investigation was to examine the spatio-temporal
expression of three members of the ETS family of transcription factors, ERM,
ER81, and PEA3, in the peri-implantation mouse uterus and in the ovary. These
three factors belong to the PEA3 subfamily and are known to mediate diverse
functions ranging from neuronal development to tumor progression. As
transcription factors, they regulate the expression of a number of genes with
various biological functions. Since several genes with known roles in the
reproductive processes have been shown to be under the regulation of one of these
factors, we sought to investigate the expression of ERM, ER81, and PEA3 in the
mouse ovary and uterus. Quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed that ERM, ER81, and
PEA3 were all expressed in the peri-implantation mouse uterus, with higher levels
of expression on days 4 and 5 of pregnancy. To determine the cell type-specific
expression of these factors, we employed in situ hybridization, the results of
which revealed that ERM was expressed in both the epithelium and the stroma on
days 4 and 5 of pregnancy. Uterine glands showed a high expression of ERM on
those days. ERM was also highly expressed in the corpora lutea of the mouse
ovary. Both ER81 and PEA3 were expressed at low levels in the stroma on days 4
and 5. On day 8, while ERM and PEA3 were mainly expressed in the embryo and were 
at low levels in the maternal decidua in a diffused pattern, ER81 was highly
expressed in the vascular bed of the mesometrial deciduum. Both ER81 and PEA3
were undetectable in the mouse ovary. Collectively, these data show that ERM is
implicated in the early event of implantation as well as in ovarian functions,
while ER81 is involved in the establishment of the maternal vasculature for
subsequent placental development. PEA3 is apparently an embryonic factor for
early embryogenesis.

PMID: 15855628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Immunology. 2005 May;115(1):63-73.

Modulated interaction of the ERM protein, moesin, with CD93.

Zhang M(1), Bohlson SS, Dy M, Tenner AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Center for Immunology,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

CD93 is a cell-surface glycoprotein that has been shown to influence defence
collagen-enhanced Fc-receptor or CR1-mediated phagocytosis of suboptimally
opsonized targets in vitro, and CD93-deficient mice are defective in the
clearance of apoptotic cells in vivo. To investigate the mechanism of CD93
modulation of phagocytic activity, GST fusion proteins containing the 47 amino
acid intracellular domain (GST-Cyto), or various mutants of the intracellular
domain of CD93, were constructed and used to identify intracellular CD93-binding 
molecules. The intracellular protein moesin, well characterized for its role in
linking transmembrane proteins to the cytoskeleton and in cytoskeletal
remodelling, bound to GST-Cyto when either cell lysates or recombinant moesin
were used as a source of interacting molecules. An association of moesin with
CD93 within intact cells was confirmed by co-capping moesin with CD93 in human
monocytes. The moesin-binding site on CD93 mapped to the first four positively
charged amino acids in the juxtamembrane region of the CD93 cytoplasmic tail.
Interestingly, deletion of the last 11 amino acids from the C terminus of CD93
(GST-Cyto-C11) dramatically increased moesin binding to the cytoplasmic tail of
CD93 in the cell lysate assay, but not when the binding of purified recombinant
moesin was assessed. Furthermore, moesin binding to CD93 was enhanced by the
addition of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)). Taken together, these
data suggest that the interaction of moesin with the CD93 cytoplasmic domain is
modulated by binding of other intracellular molecules to the C11 region and
implies that a PIP(2) signalling pathway is involved in CD93 function.

PMCID: PMC1782122
PMID: 15819698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Clin Microbiol. 2005 Apr;43(4):1716-21.

Testing for induction of clindamycin resistance in erythromycin-resistant
isolates of Staphylococcus aureus.

Steward CD(1), Raney PM, Morrell AK, Williams PP, McDougal LK, Jevitt L, McGowan 
JE Jr, Tenover FC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, NE, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.

Disk diffusion and broth microdilution (BMD) were used to perform clindamycin
(CLI) induction testing on 128 selected nonduplicate isolates of Staphylococcus
aureus. Disk diffusion testing involved placing CLI and erythromycin (ERY) disks 
approximately 12 mm apart (measured edge to edge) on a Mueller-Hinton agar plate 
that had been inoculated with an S. aureus isolate; the plate was then incubated 
for 16 to 18 h. Two distinct induction phenotypes (labeled D and D(+)) and four
noninduction phenotypes (designated as negative [Neg], hazy D zone [HD],
resistant [R], and susceptible [S]) were observed in disk diffusion results. A
clear, D-shaped zone of inhibition around the CLI disk was designated as the D
phenotype and was observed for 21 isolates while a D-shaped zone containing inner
colonies growing up to the CLI disk was designated as D(+) (17 isolates). In
addition, 10 isolates were CLI susceptible and ERY resistant but were not
inducible and showed no blunting of the CLI zone (Neg phenotype). Isolates that
were CLI and ERY resistant (constitutive macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B
resistance) demonstrated either a double zone of inhibition with an inner ring of
reduced growth up to the edge of the disks (HD phenotype; 33 isolates) or solid
growth around the CLI and ERY disks (R phenotype; 16 isolates). Finally, 31
isolates were susceptible by disk testing to both CLI and ERY (S phenotype). PCR 
results showed that isolates with a D phenotype harbored ermA, isolates with a
D(+) phenotype contained either ermC (16 isolates) or ermA and ermC (one
isolate), and all 10 isolates with a Neg phenotype contained msrA. All isolates
with an HD or R phenotype harbored at least one erm gene. Isolates showing the
D(+) phenotype by disk diffusion were also detected by BMD using a variety of CLI
and ERY concentrations; however, isolates with the D phenotype were more
difficult to detect by BMD and will likely require optimization of ERY and CLI
concentrations in multilaboratory studies to ensure adequate sensitivity. Thus,
at present, disk diffusion is the preferred method for testing S. aureus isolates
for inducible CLI resistance.

PMCID: PMC1081368
PMID: 15814990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Apr;28(4):683-93.

Characterization of the NF2 protein merlin and the ERM protein ezrin in human,
rat, and mouse central nervous system.

Grönholm M(1), Teesalu T, Tyynelä J, Piltti K, Böhling T, Wartiovaara K, Vaheri
A, Carpén O.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Central Hospital, PB 63, Haartmaninkatu 8, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.
mikaela.gronholm@helsinki.fi

The neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) protein, merlin, is structurally related to the ERM
(ezrin-radixin-moesin) protein family of membrane-cytoskeleton linkers and is
mutated in nervous system tumors. Apart from tumor suppressor activity, merlin's 
functions are poorly understood. We compared the localization and expression of
merlin and ezrin in developing and adult brain and in brain-derived progenitor
cells. Both proteins were widely but differentially expressed in human, rat, and 
mouse brain. In brain tissue and neuronal progenitor cell cultures merlin was
predominantly found in neurons while ezrin was expressed in astrocytes. Merlin
expression was seen from E11 in mouse embryos, whereas ezrin was present earlier.
Both proteins were expressed in embryonic mouse neurospheres, where ezrin was
specifically localized in filopodia of adherent neuronal progenitor cells.
Subcellular analysis demonstrated ezrin in fine filopodial structures in
astrocytes, while merlin was detected in neuronal synaptic junctions. The
widespread expression of merlin in brain and its association with protein kinase 
A suggest a role for merlin in brain biology.

PMID: 15797715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Feb 15;303(2):400-14.

Regulation of hyaluronan binding by F-actin and colocalization of CD44 and
phosphorylated ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins in myeloid cells.

Brown KL(1), Birkenhead D, Lai JC, Li L, Li R, Johnson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
#300-6174 University Boulevard, Vancouver, B.C., Canada, V6T 1Z3.

Proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alpha up-regulate the expression of the
cell adhesion molecule, CD44, and induce hyaluronan (HA) binding in peripheral
blood monocytes (PBM). Here we show that in PBM, TNF-alpha induced cytoskeletal
rearrangement, increased threonine phosphorylation of ERM proteins, and induced
the redistribution and colocalization of phospho-ERM proteins (P-ERM) with CD44. 
In the myeloid progenitor cell line, KG1a, hyaluronan binding occurred in the
pseudopod where CD44, P-ERM, and F-actin were highly localized. Hyaluronan
binding correlated with high expression of both CD44 and P-ERM clustered in a
single pseudopod. Disruption of polymerized actin reduced hyaluronan binding in
both PBM and KG1a cells and abolished CD44 clustering and the pseudopod in KG1a
cells. The pseudopod was not required for the clustering of CD44, the
colocalization with P-ERM, or hyaluronan binding. However, treatment with a
kinase inhibitor abolished ERM phosphorylation and reduced hyaluronan binding.
Furthermore, expression of CD44 lacking the putative ERM binding site resulted in
reduced hyaluronan binding. Taken together, these data suggest that CD44-mediated
hyaluronan binding in human myeloid cells is regulated by P-ERM and the actin
cytoskeleton.

PMID: 15652352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jan 3;579(1):66-70.

Expression of the Ets transcription factor Erm is regulated through a
conventional PKC signaling pathway in the Molt4 lymphoblastic cell line.

T'sas F(1), Brenner C, Mauen S, Putmans P, Monté D, Van Lint C, Moser M, Baert
JL, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Faculté de médecine, ULB, CP 614, 808
route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.

Erm, a member of the PEA3 group within the Ets family of transcription factors,
is expressed in murine and human lymphocytes. Here, we show that in the human
Molt4 lymphoblastic cell line, the erm gene expression is regulated by the
conventional PKC (cPKC) pathway. To better characterize the molecular mechanism
by which cPKC regulates Erm transcription in Molt4 cells, we tested proximal
promoter deletions of the human gene, and identified a specific cPKC-regulated
region between positions -420 and -115 upstream of the first exon.

PMID: 15620692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;10(21):7297-303.

Prognostic value of ERM gene expression in human primary breast cancers.

Chotteau-Lelièvre A(1), Révillion F, Lhotellier V, Hornez L, Desbiens X, Cabaret 
V, de Launoit Y, Peyrat JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche 8117-Centre National de la Recherché Scientifique,
Régulation Transcriptionnelle au cours de la Tumorigenèse Mammaire, Institut de
Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France.

We measured the expression of ERM gene, a nuclear transcription factor belonging 
to the ets family, in a series of 364 unselected primary breast cancers from
patients who underwent locoregional surgery in the Centre Oscar Lambret between
May 1989 and December 1991. The expression of ERM was quantified with a real-time
one-step reverse transcription-PCR assay based on the 5'-nuclease activity of the
TaqDNA polymerase and with an Abi Prism 7700 Sequence Detector System (Applied
Biosystems, Courtaboeuf, France). ERM was positively correlated (Spearman test)
to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR; P < 0.001, r = 0.296) and to
histoprognostic grading (P = 0.044, r = 0.112), whereas it was negatively
correlated to estradiol receptors (P = 0.019, r = -0.124), HER3 (c-erbB-3; P =
0.01, r = -0.135), and HER4 (c-erbB-4; P = 0.003, r = -0.154). Using the chi2
test, a positive relationship was found between the expression of ERM and EGFR
(chi2 = 7.795, P = 0.007). In overall survival studies, Cox univariate analyses
demonstrated a prognostic value of ERM (P = 0.006; risk ratio, 2.95) besides the 
classical prognostic factors histoprognostic grading, node involvement, tumor
size, estradiol receptors, progesterone receptors, EGFR, HER3, and HER4. In
multivariate analyses, ERM preserved its prognostic value (P = 0.004; risk ratio,
3.779) together with histoprognostic grading, tumor size, estradiol receptors,
and progesterone receptors. In relapse-free survival studies, univariate analyses
demonstrated that histoprognostic grading, node involvement, tumor size, and HER4
were prognostic factors. These parameters, except histoprognostic grading,
retained their prognostic value in multivariate analyses. This study demonstrates
for the first time that ERM gene expression is an independent adverse prognostic 
factor for overall survival in breast cancer patients.

PMID: 15534105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):887-98. Epub 2004 Oct 5.

Pea3 transcription factor cooperates with USF-1 in regulation of the murine bax
transcription without binding to an Ets-binding site.

Firlej V(1), Bocquet B, Desbiens X, de Launoit Y, Chotteau-Lelièvre A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement UPRES-EA1033, Université des Sciences
et Technologies de Lille, 59655 Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

The Pea3 transcription factor (which belongs to the PEA3 group) from the Ets
family has been shown to be involved in mammary embryogenesis and oncogenesis.
However, except for proteinases, only few of its target genes have been reported.
In the present report, we identified bax as a Pea3 up-regulated gene. We provide 
evidence of this regulation by using Pea3 overexpression and Pea3 silencing in a 
mammary cell line. Both Pea3 and Erm, another member of the PEA3 group, are able 
to transactivate bax promoter fragments. Although the minimal Pea3-regulated bax 
promoter does not contain an Ets-binding site, two functional upstream
stimulatory factor-regulated E boxes are present. We further demonstrate the
ability of Pea3 and USF-1 to cooperate for the transactivation of the bax
promoter, mutation of the E boxes dramatically reducing the Pea3 transactivation 
potential. Although Pea3 did not directly bind to the minimal bax promoter, we
provide evidence that USF-1 could form a ternary complex with Pea3 and DNA. Taken
together, our results suggest that Pea3 may regulate bax transcription via the
interaction with USF-1 but without binding to DNA.

PMID: 15466854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Curr Drug Targets Infect Disord. 2004 Sep;4(3):193-202.

Macrolide resistance based on the Erm-mediated rRNA methylation.

Maravic G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy and
Biochemistry, University of Zagreb, Ante Kovacicca 1, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
gordana@pharma.hr

Macrolide, lincosamide and streptogramin B (MLSB) antibiotics are extensively
used for the treatment of wide variety of clinically important Gram-positive
bacteria. MLSB antibiotics inhibit protein biosynthesis by targeting the peptidyl
transferase centre within the 50S ribosomal subunit. The most widespread
mechanism of bacterial resistance to MLSB antibiotics, reported early after their
introduction into clinical practice is the modification of the target site
exhibited by a family of rRNA methyltransferases designated Erm. Using
S-adenosyl-L-methionine, Erm enzymes catalyze mono- or dimethylation of a
specific adenine residue in the 23S rRNA. The methyl group sterically hinders the
MLSB binding site and disrupts the hydrogen bonding between the macrolides and
the rRNA, thus rendering bacteria resistant. This review summarizes the current
understanding of Erm-mediated resistance, in light of high-resolution structural 
data of bacterial ribosome and with specific focus on the results of recent
genetic, biochemical and structural studies of Erm methyltransferases and their
cognate rRNA substrate. Although many features of MLSB resistance remain
indistinct, the present knowledge can now serve as the guidance for development
of both new antimicrobial drugs and potential inhibitors of Erm enzymes, hence
providing a new lead to solve the urgent problem of the macrolide resistance
based on the ribosome methylation.

PMID: 15379730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 Sep;20(6):1436-44.

Binding partners L1 cell adhesion molecule and the ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM)
proteins are involved in development and the regenerative response to injury of
hippocampal and cortical neurons.

Haas MA(1), Vickers JC, Dickson TC.

Author information: 
(1)NeuroRepair Group, University of Tasmania, 43 Collins Street, Hobart,
Tasmania, 7000, Australia.

Regeneration of the adult central nervous system may require recapitulation of
developmental events and therefore involve the re-expression of developmentally
significant proteins. We have investigated whether the L1 cell adhesion molecule,
and its binding partner, the ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) proteins are involved in 
the neuronal regenerative response to injury. Hippocampal and cortical neurons
were cultured in vitro on either an L1 substrate or poly-L-lysine, and ERM and
other neuronal proteins were localized immunocytochemically both developmentally 
and following neurite transection of neurons maintained in long-term culture.
Activated ERM was localized to growth cones up to 7 days in vitro but relatively 
mature cultures (21 days in vitro) were devoid of active ERM proteins. However,
ERM proteins were localized to the growth cones of sprouting neuronal processes
that formed several hours after neurite transection. In addition, the L1
substrate, relative to poly-L-lysine, resulted in significantly longer
regenerative neurites, as well as larger growth cones with more filopodia.
Furthermore, neurons derived from the cortex formed significantly longer
post-injury neurite sprouts at 6 h post-injury than hippocampal derived neurons
grown on both substrates. We have demonstrated that L1 and the ERM proteins are
involved in the neuronal response to injury, and that neurons derived from the
hippocampus and cortex may have different post-injury regenerative neurite
sprouting abilities.

PMID: 15355311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 5;279(45):46843-50. Epub 2004 Aug 23.

Crk associates with ERM proteins and promotes cell motility toward hyaluronic
acid.

Tsuda M(1), Makino Y, Iwahara T, Nishihara H, Sawa H, Nagashima K, Hanafusa H,
Tanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, Hokkaido University School of 
Medicine, N15, W7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Cell migration is a well organized process regulated by the extracellular
matrix-mediated cytoskeletal reorganization. The signaling adaptor protein Crk
has been shown to regulate cell motility, but its precise role is still under
investigation. Herein, we report that Crk associates with ERM family proteins
(including ezrin, radixin, and moesin), activates RhoA, and promotes cell
motility toward hyaluronic acid. The binding of Crk with ERMs was demonstrated
both by transient and stable protein expression systems in 293T cells and 3Y1
cells, and it was shown that v-Crk translocated the phosphorylated form of ERMs
to microvilli in 3Y1 cells by immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy.
This v-Crk-dependent formation of microvilli was suppressed by inhibitors of
Rho-associated kinase, and the activity of RhoA was elevated by coexpression of
c-Crk-II and ERMs in 3Y1 cells. In concert with the activation of RhoA by Crk,
Crk was found to associate with Rho-GDI, which has been shown to bind to ERMs.
Furthermore, upon hyaluronic acid treatment, coexpression of c-Crk-II and ERMs
enhanced cell motility, whereas the sole expression of c-Crk-II or either of the 
ERMs decreased the motility of 3Y1 cells. These results suggest that Crk may be
involved in regulation of cell motility by a hyaluronic acid-dependent mechanism 
through an association with ERMs.

PMID: 15326184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2004 Aug;48(8):3141-6.

Lack of evidence that DNA in antibiotic preparations is a source of antibiotic
resistance genes in bacteria from animal or human sources.

Lau SK(1), Woo PC, To AP, Lau AT, Yuen KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, 
Hong Kong.

Although DNA encoding antibiotic resistance has been discovered in antibiotic
preparations, its significance for the development of antibiotic resistance in
bacteria is unknown. No phylogenetic evidence was obtained for recent horizontal 
transfer of antibiotic resistance genes from antibiotic-producing organisms to
bacteria from human or animal sources.

PMCID: PMC478514
PMID: 15273135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2004 Jun;48(6):2298-301.

Genetic basis of erythromycin resistance in oral bacteria.

Villedieu A(1), Diaz-Torres ML, Roberts AP, Hunt N, McNab R, Spratt DA, Wilson M,
Mullany P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Eastman Dental Institute for Oral Health
Care Sciences, University College London, 256 Gray's Inn Rd., London WC1X 8LD,
United Kingdom.

We determined the prevalence of erythromycin-resistant bacteria in the oral
cavity and identified mef and erm(B) as the most common resistance determinants. 
In addition, we demonstrate the genetic linkage, on various Tn1545-like
conjugative transposons, between erythromycin and tetracycline resistance in a
number of isolates.

PMCID: PMC415603
PMID: 15155239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004 Jun;5(6):462-70.

Merlin and the ERM proteins in Schwann cells, neurons and growth cones.

Ramesh V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
Massachusetts 02129, USA. ramesh@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

PMID: 15152196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):30028-36. Epub 2004 May 10.

Transcription of the caveolin-1 gene is differentially regulated in lung type I
epithelial and endothelial cell lines. A role for ETS proteins in epithelial cell
expression.

Kathuria H(1), Cao YX, Ramirez MI, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Massachusetts 02118, USA. hasmeena.kathuria@bmc.org

In the lung, caveolin-1 is expressed in both type I alveolar epithelial and
endothelial cells where it is hypothesized to modulate molecular signaling
activities and progression of tumorigenesis. Developmentally, caveolin-1alpha is 
expressed in fetal lung endothelial, but not epithelial, cells; in adult lung,
both cell types express caveolin-1alpha. To test the hypothesis that caveolin-1
transcription is differentially regulated in type I and endothelial cells, we
characterized the proximal promoter of the mouse caveolin-1 gene in lung cell
lines to identify factors that control its cell-specific expression. We show that
caveolin-1 expression is regulated by an Ets cis-element in a lung epithelial
cell line, but not a lung endothelial cell line, and that three ETS family
members, ETS-1, PEA3, and ERM, recognize and bind the Ets site in the epithelial 
cell line. Based on these findings, we have identified the Ets cis-element as a
region that accounts for differential transcriptional regulation of caveolin-1 in
lung epithelial and endothelial cells.

PMID: 15138262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Microbiol. 2004 May;52(4):963-83.

Differential recognition of members of the carcinoembryonic antigen family by
Afa/Dr adhesins of diffusely adhering Escherichia coli (Afa/Dr DAEC).

Berger CN(1), Billker O, Meyer TF, Servin AL, Kansau I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Unité 510,
Faculté de Pharmacie Paris XI, F-92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Little is known about the molecular bases underlying the virulence of diffusely
adhering Escherichia coli (DAEC) harbouring the Afa/Dr family of adhesins. These 
adhesins recognize as receptors the GPI-anchored proteins CD55
(decay-accelerating factor, DAF) and CD66e (carcinoembryonic antigen, CEA). CD66e
is a member of the CEA-related cell adhesion molecules (CEACAM) family,
comprising seven members. We analysed the interactions of Afa/Dr DAEC with the
CEACAMs using CEACAM-expressing CHO and HeLa cells. The results demonstrate that 
only E. coli expressing a subfamily of Afa/Dr adhesins, named here Afa/Dr-I,
including Dr, F1845 and AfaE-III adhesins, bound onto CHO cells expressing
CEACAM1, CEA or CEACAM6. Whereas all the Afa/Dr adhesins elicit recruitment of
CD55 around adhering bacteria, only the Afa/Dr-I subfamily elicits the
recruitment of CEACAM1, CEA and CEACAM6. In addition, although CEACAM3 is not
recognized as a receptor by the subfamily of Afa/Dr adhesins, it is recruited
around bacteria in HeLa cells. The recruited CEACAM1, CEA and CEACAM6 around
adhering bacteria resist totally or in part a detergent extraction, whereas the
recruited CEACAM3 does not. Finally, the results show that recognition of CEA and
CEACAM6, but not CEACAM1, is accompanied by tight attachment to bacteria of cell 
surface microvilli-like extensions, which are elongated. Moreover, recognition of
CEA is accompanied by an activation of the Rho GTPase Cdc42 and by a
phosphorylation of ERM, which in turn elicit the observed cell surface
microvilli-like extensions.

PMID: 15130118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2004 May;48(5):1882-4.

Activities of telithromycin against 13,874 Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates
collected between 1999 and 2003.

Farrell DJ(1), Felmingham D.

Author information: 
(1)GR Micro Limited, London, United Kingdom. D.Farrell@grmicro.co.uk

Telithromycin MICs for 13,874 Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates collected in the 
first 3 years of the global PROTEKT study (1999 to 2003) were studied. There was 
no change in the distribution of telithromycin MICs over this period, even in
countries where telithromycin is in use. The telithromycin MICs for 10 isolates
(0.07%) were >/=4 micro g/ml, and these 10 isolates contained erm(B); there was
no evidence of reproducible clonal spread between centers.

PMCID: PMC400575
PMID: 15105150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Circulation. 2004 May 11;109(18):2234-9. Epub 2004 Apr 19.

Long-term inhibition of Rho-kinase suppresses left ventricular remodeling after
myocardial infarction in mice.

Hattori T(1), Shimokawa H, Higashi M, Hiroki J, Mukai Y, Tsutsui H, Kaibuchi K,
Takeshita A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyushu University Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Rho-kinase has been implicated as an important regulator of
inflammatory responses mediated by cytokines and chemokines. Because
proinflammatory cytokines play a critical role in left ventricular (LV)
remodeling after myocardial infarction (MI), we examined whether long-term
blockade of Rho-kinase suppresses LV remodeling in a mouse model of MI in vivo.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mice underwent ligation of the left coronary artery and were
treated with a Rho-kinase inhibitor, fasudil (100 mg x kg(-1) x d(-1) in tap
water), for 4 weeks, starting 1 day after the surgery. At 4 weeks, LV infarct
size was histologically comparable between the 2 groups. LV cavity dilatation and
dysfunction evaluated by echocardiography were significantly suppressed in the
fasudil group (P<0.05, n=15 to 28). The beneficial effects of fasudil were
accompanied by suppression of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and interstitial fibrosis
(both P<0.01, n=6). The expression of inflammatory cytokines, including
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta2, TGF-beta3, and macrophage migration
inhibitory factor, was upregulated in the noninfarcted LV in the control group
and was significantly suppressed in the fasudil group (both P<0.05, n=10 to 11). 
Rho-kinase activity as evaluated by the extent of phosphorylation of the ERM
family, a substrate of Rho-kinase, was significantly increased in the
noninfarcted LV in the control group and was significantly suppressed in the
fasudil group (P<0.05, n=5).
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that Rho-kinase is substantially involved in 
the pathogenesis of LV remodeling after MI associated with upregulation of
proinflammatory cytokines, suggesting a therapeutic importance of the molecule
for the prevention of post-MI heart failure.

PMID: 15096457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Neurosci. 2004 Mar 17;24(11):2837-45.

Interleukin-1beta induces a reactive astroglial phenotype via deactivation of the
Rho GTPase-Rock axis.

John GR(1), Chen L, Rivieccio MA, Melendez-Vasquez CV, Hartley A, Brosnan CF.

Author information: 
(1)Corinne Goldsmith Dickinson Center for Multiple Sclerosis, Department of
Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.
gareth.john@mssm.edu

The cytokine interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) is critical to the formation of an
astrocytic scar after CNS injury, but the mechanisms by which it induces a
reactive phenotype remain unresolved. Here, we show that IL-1beta regulates the
phenotype of astrocytes via deactivation of the Rho GTPase-Rho kinase (ROCK)
pathway, which governs cellular morphology and migration via effects on F-actin
and its interactions with focal adhesions, nonmuscle myosin, and microvillar
adapter proteins of the ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) family. We found that IL-1beta
induced cortical reorganization of F-actin and dephosphorylation of focal
adhesion kinase, myosin light chain 2, and myosin phosphatase targeting subunit 1
in primary human astrocytes, and that all of these effects were mimicked by
Rho-ROCK pathway blockade. We also found that IL-1beta conversely potentiated ERM
phosphorylation, and that this effect was mediated via a Rho-ROCK-independent
mechanism. Next, we used a rhotekin pulldown assay to confirm directly that
IL-1beta deactivates Rho, and further demonstrated that a constitutively active
Rho construct rescued astrocytes from developing an IL-1beta-induced reactive
phenotype. These data implicate cytokine regulation of the Rho-ROCK pathway in
the generation of a reactive astrogliosis, and we suggest that interventions
targeted at this level may facilitate manipulation of the glial scar in
inflammatory disorders of the human CNS.

PMID: 15028778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biol Reprod. 2004 Mar;70(3):729-36. Epub 2003 Nov 12.

Differential expression of ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) and ERM-associated adhesion
molecules in the blastocyst and uterus suggests their functions during
implantation.

Matsumoto H(1), Daikoku T, Wang H, Sato E, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Reproduction, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, Sendai 981-8555, Japan.

Development of the blastocyst to implantation competency, differentiation of the 
uterus to the receptive state, and a cross talk between the
implantation-competent blastocyst and the uterine luminal epithelium are all
essential to the process of implantation. In the present investigation, we
examined the possibility for a potential cross talk between the blastocyst and
uterus involving the ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins and ERM-associated
cytoskeletal cross-linker proteins CD43, CD44, ICAM-1, and ICAM-2. In normal Day 
4 blastocysts and after rendering dormant blastocysts to implantation-competent
by estrogen in vivo (activated), the outer surface of mural trophectoderm cells
showed much higher levels of radixin as compared to those in the polar
trophectoderm cells, inner cell mass (ICM), and primitive endoderm. In contrast, 
ezrin was present on both the mural and the polar trophectoderm cell surfaces of 
normal Day 4 and activated blastocysts at higher intensity than dormant
blastocysts. A distinct localization was noted in the primitive endoderm of
dormant blastocysts that was not apparent in activated or normal Day 4
blastocysts. The expression of moesin was modestly higher at the mural
trophectoderm of implantation-competent blastocysts, while the localization
appeared to be present primarily on the polar trophectoderm cell surface of Day 4
blastocysts. The localization of ERM-associated adhesion molecules CD43, CD44,
and ICAM-2 was more intense in the implantation-competent blastocysts compared
with the dormant blastocysts. However, while CD44 was present both in the
trophectoderm and in ICM, CD43 and ICAM-2 were localized primarily to the
trophectoderm. The signal for ICAM-1 was very intense in the ICM but was modest
in the trophectoderm. No significant changes in fluorescence intensity were noted
between activated and dormant blastocysts. In the receptive uterus on Day 4 of
pregnancy, ERM proteins were localized to the uterine epithelium, while on Day 5 
the localization, especially of radixin and moesin, extended to the stroma
surrounding the implantation chamber. With respect to ERM-associated adhesion
molecules, while CD44 and ICAM-1 were exclusively localized in the stroma on Day 
4, CD43 and ICAM-2 were localized to the epithelium. On Day 5, the localization
of CD44 and ICAM-1 became highly concentrated in the antimesometrial stroma of
the implantation chamber. The localization of CD43 and ICAM-2 remained mostly
epithelial, although some stromal localization of CD43 was noted on Day 5. These 
results suggest that differential expression and distribution of ERM proteins and
ERM-associated adhesion molecules are involved in the construction of the
cellular architecture necessary for blastocyst activation and uterine receptivity
leading to successful implantation.

PMID: 14613898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Mar;25(3):325-32. Epub 2003 Nov 6.

Expression of ets-related transcriptional factor E1AF is associated with tumor
progression and over-expression of matrilysin in human gastric cancer.

Yamamoto H(1), Horiuchi S, Adachi Y, Taniguchi H, Nosho K, Min Y, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, South-1,
West-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan. h-yama@sapmed.ac.jp

Expression of E1AF/PEA3 (ETV4), an ets family transcriptional factor, has been
implicated in tumor progression through induction of matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP) expression. The aim of this study was to examine E1AF mRNA expression and
to determine whether it is correlated with progression of, and/or MMP expression 
in, human gastric cancer. Using the semi-quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), we analyzed 100 gastric cancer 
tissues for E1AF mRNA expression. Expression of ER81 (ETV1) and ERM (ETV5), the
other two members of the PEA3 subfamily, and Ets-1 and Ets-2 was also analyzed.
The results were correlated with clinicopathological characteristics and MMP
expression. Immunohistochemical analysis and an in vitro invasion assay were also
performed. E1AF mRNA expression was detected in 64% of the 100 gastric cancer
tissues, but was undetectable or only faintly detected in adjacent non-tumor
tissues. E1AF expression was significantly correlated with depth of invasion,
lymphatic and venous invasion, lymph node and distant metastasis, advance in
pathological tumor-node-metastasis stage and recurrence. Patients with
E1AF-positive tumors had significantly shorter overall and disease-free survival 
periods than did those with E1AF-negative tumors (P < 0.0001 and P < 0.0001,
respectively). E1AF expression retained its significant predictive value for
overall and disease-free survival in multivariate analysis that included
conventional clinicopathological factors (P = 0.0082 and P = 0.0096,
respectively). Among the MMPs analyzed, expression of matrilysin (MMP-7) was
significantly correlated with E1AF expression. Immunohistochemical expression of 
E1AF was predominantly observed at the invasive front, where the expression of
matrilysin was often co-localized. Antisense E1AF-transfected MKN45 gastric
cancer cells expressed reduced levels of matrilysin and were less invasive in
vitro than mock-transfected MKN45 cells. The results of this study suggest that
E1AF, the expression of which is closely correlated with the expression of
matrilysin, plays a key role in the progression of gastric cancer.

PMID: 14604892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Cell Cycle. 2003 Nov-Dec;2(6):517-20.

ERM proteins and Cdk5 in cellular senescence.

Yang HS(1), Alexander K, Santiago P, Hinds PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

Cellular senescence is a tumor-suppressive process instigated by proliferation in
the absence of telomere replication, by cellular stresses such as oncogene
activation, or by activation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein, pRb.
This process is characterized by an irreversible cell cycle exit, a unique
morphology, and expression of senescence-associated-beta-galactosidase
(SA-beta-gal). Despite the potential biological importance of cellular
senescence, little is known of the mechanisms leading to the senescent phenotype.
We have recently discovered that expression of active pRb induces expression and 
altered localization of the ERM family member ezrin, an actin-binding protein
involved in membrane-cytoskeletal signaling. pRb expression results in the
stimulation of cdk5-mediated phosphorylation of ezrin with subsequent membrane
association and induction of cell shape changes, linking pRb activity to
cytoskeletal regulation in senescent cells. Cdk5 activity increases in senescing 
cells and is required for expression of SA-beta-gal and for actin polymerization 
accompanying acquisition of the senescent morphology. These results begin to
illuminate the mechanisms underlying induction of senescence and the senescent
shape change and describe new pathways that may contribute to the ability of
senescent cells to influence tumor growth.

PMID: 14504464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 1;261(1):10-24.

Role for ETS domain transcription factors Pea3/Erm in mouse lung development.

Liu Y(1), Jiang H, Crawford HC, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

During the development of the mouse lung, the expression of a number of genes,
including those encoding growth factors and components of their downstream
signaling pathways, is enriched in the epithelium and/or mesenchyme of the distal
buds. In this location, they regulate processes such as cell proliferation,
branching morphogenesis, and the differentiation of specialized cell types. Here,
we report that the expression of Pea3 and Erm (or Etv5, Ets variant gene 5),
which encode Pea3 subfamily ETS domain transcription factors, is initially
restricted to the distal buds of the developing mouse lung. Erm is transcribed
exclusively in the epithelium, while Pea3 is expressed in both epithelium and
mesenchyme. Erm/Pea3 are downstream of FGF signaling from the mesenchyme, but
their responses toward different FGFs are not the same. The functions of the two 
proteins were investigated by transgenic expression of a repressor form of Erm
specifically in the embryonic lung epithelium. When examined at E18.5, the distal
epithelium of transgenic lungs is composed predominantly of immature type II
cells, while no mature type I cells are observed. In contrast, the
differentiation of proximal epithelial cells, including ciliated cells and Clara 
cells, appears to be unaffected. A model is proposed for the role of Pea3/Erm
during the dynamic process of lung bud outgrowth and proximal-distal
differentiation, in response to FGF signaling. Our results provide the first
functional evidence that Pea3 subfamily members play a role in
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during lung organogenesis.

PMID: 12941618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Pathol. 2003 Aug;200(5):568-76.

Association of ets-related transcriptional factor E1AF expression with tumour
progression and overexpression of MMP-1 and matrilysin in human colorectal
cancer.

Horiuchi S(1), Yamamoto H, Min Y, Adachi Y, Itoh F, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, South-1,
West-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan.

Expression of E1AF/PEA3 (ETV4), an ets family transcription factor, has been
implicated in the invasive potential of several cancer cell lines through
induction of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression. The aim of this study was
to examine E1AF mRNA expression and to determine whether it is correlated with
progression of, and/or MMP expression in, human colorectal cancer. Using the
semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), 100
colorectal cancer tissues were analysed for E1AF mRNA expression. Expression of
ER81 (ETV1) and ERM (ETV5), the other two members of the PEA3 subfamily, and
Ets-1 and Ets-2 was also analysed. The results were correlated with
clinicopathological characteristics and MMP expression. Immunohistochemical
analysis and an in vitro invasion assay were also performed. E1AF mRNA expression
was detected in 62% of the 100 colorectal cancer tissues, but was undetectable or
only faintly detected in adjacent non-tumour tissues. E1AF mRNA was detected in
all of the ten liver metastases from colorectal cancers. E1AF expression
correlated significantly with depth of invasion, lymphatic and venous invasion,
lymph node and distant metastasis, advance in pathological tumour-node-metastasis
stage, and recurrence. Patients with E1AF-positive tumours had significantly
shorter overall and disease-free survival periods than did those with
E1AF-negative tumours (p < 0.0001 and p < 0.0001, respectively). E1AF expression 
retained its significant predictive value for overall and disease-free survival
in multivariate analysis that included conventional clinicopathological factors
(p = 0.0066 and p = 0.0109, respectively). Among the MMPs analysed, expression of
MMP-1 and matrilysin correlated significantly with E1AF expression. In contrast, 
expression of ER81 and ERM did not correlate with clinicopathological
characteristics or the expression of these MMPs. Immunohistochemical expression
of E1AF was predominantly observed at the invasive front, where the expression of
MMP-1 and matrilysin and nuclear beta-catenin expression were often co-localized.
Antisense E1AF-transfected HT-29 colon cancer cells expressed reduced levels of
MMP-1 and matrilysin and were less invasive in vitro than neo-transfected HT-29
cells. The results of this study suggest that E1AF, the expression of which is
closely correlated with the expression of MMP-1 and matrilysin, plays a key role 
in the progression of colorectal cancer.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12898592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Br J Cancer. 2003 Jun 16;88(12):1995-2001.

Interferon-gamma suppresses S100A4 transcription independently of apoptosis or
cell cycle arrest.

Andersen K(1), Smith-Sørensen B, Pedersen KB, Hovig E, Myklebost O, Fodstad Ø,
Maelandsmo GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumour Biology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Montebello,
N-0310 Oslo, Norway.

The S100A4 protein has been associated with increased metastatic capacity of
cancer cells, and recent studies have suggested a correlation between the
expression level of S100A4 and the prognostic outcome for patients with various
types of cancer. The knowledge about the mechanisms underlying the
metastasis-promoting effects is still limited, and the aim of the present study
was to elucidate signal transduction pathways involved in the regulation of
S100A4. After treatment of human carcinoma cells with interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma), we observed downregulation of S100A4 both at mRNA and protein
levels. The effect was not dependent on IFN-gamma-induced apoptosis or
IFN-gamma-mediated cell cycle arrest. Moreover, IFN-gamma-mediated decrease in
mRNA stability could not account for the observed decrease in S100A4 transcript
level. Finally, microarray analysis suggests ISGF3G, ETV5, ZNF133 and CEBPG as
possible candidate genes involved in IFN-gamma-mediated repression of S100A4.

PMCID: PMC2741112
PMID: 12799648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Blood. 2003 Oct 1;102(7):2581-92. Epub 2003 Jun 5.

Gene profiling of a myeloma cell line reveals similarities and unique signatures 
among IL-6 response, N-ras-activating mutations, and coculture with bone marrow
stromal cells.

Croonquist PA(1), Linden MA, Zhao F, Van Ness BG.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA.

ANBL-6, a myeloma cell line, proliferates in response to interleukin 6 (IL-6)
stimulation, coculture with bone marrow stromal cells, and when harboring a
constitutively active mutant N-ras gene. Eighteen samples, including 4
IL-6-treated, 3 mutant N-ras-transfected, 3 normal stroma-stimulated, 2 multiple 
myeloma (MM) stroma-stimulated, and 6 untreated controls were profiled using
microarrays interrogating 12 626 genes. Global hierarchical clustering analysis
distinguished at least 6 unique expression signatures. Notably, the different
stimuli altered distinct functional gene programs. Class comparison analysis (P
=.001) revealed 138 genes (54% involved in cell cycle) that distinguished
IL-6-stimulated versus nontreated samples. Eighty-seven genes distinguished
stroma-stimulated versus IL-6-treated samples (22% encoded for extracellular
matrix [ECM] proteins). A total of 130 genes distinguished N-ras transfectants
versus IL-6-treated samples (26% involved in metabolism). A total of 157 genes,
20% of these involved in signaling, distinguished N-ras from stroma-interacting
samples. All 3 stimuli shared 347 genes, mostly of metabolic function. Genes that
distinguished MM1 from MM4 clinical groups were induced at least by one
treatment. Notably, only 3 genes (ETV5, DUSP6, and KIAA0735) are uniquely induced
in mutant ras-containing cells. We have demonstrated gene expression patterns in 
myeloma cells that distinguish an intrinsic genetic transformation event and
patterns derived from both soluble factors and cell contacts in the bone marrow
microenvironment.

PMID: 12791645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Bacteriol. 2003 Mar;185(6):1857-69.

Novel genomic rearrangement that affects expression of the Streptococcus pyogenes
streptolysin O (slo) gene.

Savic DJ(1), Ferretti JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA. Dragutin-Savic@ouhsc.edu

A RecA-independent chromosomal rearrangement in the upstream region of the
streptolysin O (slo) gene of Streptococcus pyogenes which affects slo expression 
was identified. PCR analysis was used to demonstrate that this kind of
rearrangement was found in several strains of different lineages. Chromosomal
loci involved in the recombination were found to be 746 kb apart on the
1.85-Mb-long chromosome. The primary structure of the splicing region, the
reproducibility of the rearrangement, and the fact that reconstructed recombinant
molecules fused to erm and lacZ reporter genes affected their expression indicate
that this event is not accidental but may play a role in the expression of the
slo gene. In addition, the product of the recombining DNAs, including the
splicing site, does not follow any example of a known recombination mechanism.
The implications of this rearrangement for slo expression are discussed.

PMCID: PMC150118
PMID: 12618450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Physiol Behav. 2002 Dec;77(4-5):571-6.

The role of the ETS gene PEA3 in the development of motor and sensory neurons.

Ladle DR(1), Frank E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3500 
Terrace Street, 15261, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

The ETS family of transcription factors includes two members, ER81 and PEA3,
which are expressed in groups of sensory and motor neurons supplying individual
muscles. To investigate a possible role of these genes in determining sensory
and/or motor neuron phenotype, we studied mice in which each of these genes was
deleted. In contrast to the deletion of ER81, which blocks the formation of
projections from muscle sensory neurons to motor neurons in the spinal cord,
deletion of PEA3 causes no obvious effects on sensory neurons or on their
synaptic connections with motor neurons. PEA3 does play a major role in the
formation of some brachial motoneurons however. Motoneurons innervating the
cutaneous maximus muscle, which are normally PEA3(+), fail to develop normally so
that postnatally the muscle is innervated by few motoneurons and is severely
atrophic. Other studies suggest that these motoneurons initially appear during
development but fail to contact their normal muscle targets.

PMID: 12527001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2002 Dec;47(16 Suppl):2227-33.

[Molecular mechanism of immunological synapse formation].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito T(1), Sakakibara M.

Author information: 
(1)saito@med.m.chiba-u.ac.jp

PMID: 12518441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Neuron. 2002 Dec 19;36(6):1035-49.

A role for neuregulin1 signaling in muscle spindle differentiation.

Hippenmeyer S(1), Shneider NA, Birchmeier C, Burden SJ, Jessell TM, Arber S.

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, Department of Cell Biology, University of Basel,
Klingelbergstrasse 70, 4056-, Basel, Switzerland.

The maturation of synaptic structures depends on inductive interactions between
axons and their prospective targets. One example of such an interaction is the
influence of proprioceptive sensory axons on the differentiation of muscle
spindles. We have monitored the expression of three transcription factors, Egr3, 
Pea3, and Erm, that delineate early muscle spindle development in an assay of
muscle spindle-inducing signals. We provide genetic evidence that Neuregulin1
(Nrg1) is required for proprioceptive afferent-evoked induction of muscle spindle
differentiation in the mouse. Ig-Nrg1 isoforms are preferentially expressed by
proprioceptive sensory neurons and are sufficient to induce muscle spindle
differentiation in vivo, whereas CRD-Nrg1 isoforms are broadly expressed in
sensory and motor neurons but are not required for muscle spindle induction.

PMID: 12495620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Immunity. 2002 Oct;17(4):401-12.

ITAM-based interaction of ERM proteins with Syk mediates signaling by the
leukocyte adhesion receptor PSGL-1.

Urzainqui A(1), Serrador JM, Viedma F, Yáñez-Mó M, Rodríguez A, Corbí AL,
Alonso-Lebrero JL, Luque A, Deckert M, Vázquez J, Sánchez-Madrid F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital de la Princesa, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 (PSGL-1) is a leukocyte adhesion molecule
involved in cell tether and rolling on activated endothelium. Our work shows that
PSGL-1 associates with Syk. This association is mediated by the actin-linking
proteins moesin and ezrin, which directly interact with Syk in an ITAM-dependent 
manner. PSGL-1 engagement induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Syk and
SRE-dependent transcriptional activity. Treatment of cells with the Syk inhibitor
piceatannol and overexpression of either a Syk dead kinase mutant or an
ITAM-mutated moesin abrogated PSGL-1-induced transcriptional activation. These
data unveil a new functional role for the ERMs (ezrin/radixin/moesin) as adaptor 
molecules in the interactions of adhesion receptors and intracellular tyrosine
kinases and show that PSGL-1 is a signaling molecule in leukocytes.

PMID: 12387735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Dev Biol. 2002 Oct 1;250(1):168-80.

The role of the Ets domain transcription factor Erm in modulating differentiation
of neural crest stem cells.

Paratore C(1), Brugnoli G, Lee HY, Suter U, Sommer L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
ETH-Hönggerberg, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland.

The transcription factor Erm is a member of the Pea3 subfamily of Ets domain
proteins that is expressed in multipotent neural crest cells, peripheral neurons,
and satellite glia. A specific role of Erm during development has not yet been
established. We addressed the function of Erm in neural crest development by
forced expression of a dominant-negative form of Erm. Functional inhibition of
Erm in neural crest cells interfered with neuronal fate decision, while
progenitor survival and proliferation were not affected. In contrast, blocking
Erm function in neural crest stem cells did not influence their ability to adopt 
a glial fate, independent of the glia-inducing signal. Furthermore, glial
survival and differentiation were normal. However, the proliferation rate was
drastically diminished in glial cells, suggesting a glia-specific role of Erm in 
controlling cell cycle progression. Thus, in contrast to other members of the
Pea3 subfamily that are involved in late steps of neurogenesis, Erm appears to be
required in early neural crest development. Moreover, our data point to multiple,
lineage-specific roles of Erm in neural crest stem cells and their derivatives,
suggesting that Erm function is dependent on the cell intrinsic and extrinsic
context.

PMID: 12297104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Immunol. 2002 Sep 1;169(5):2498-506.

Cytokine coexpression during human Th1/Th2 cell differentiation: direct evidence 
for coordinated expression of Th2 cytokines.

Cousins DJ(1), Lee TH, Staynov DZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, GKT School of Medicine, King's
College, London, United Kingdom. david.cousins@kcl.ac.uk

We have developed an in vitro differentiation assay in which human naive CD4(+)
cells are driven toward either the Th1 or Th2 phenotype. We have examined the
interrelationships among the expression of IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, IL-13,
GM-CSF, and IFN-gamma in individual cells using intracellular cytokine staining
at various times during the differentiation process. We provide direct evidence
that the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, unlike the other cytokines, are
regulated by a coordinated mechanism. We also show that IL-10 is expressed by a
different subset of cells that is prevalent at early stages of Th2
differentiation, but then diminishes. Additionally we demonstrate that while
naive cells can express IL-2 upon activation, they cannot express GM-CSF.
Commitment to GM-CSF expression occurs during differentiation in a Th1/Th2
subset-independent manner. Furthermore, we have examined the levels of GATA3,
c-Maf, T-bet, and Ets-related molecule during human Th1/Th2 differentiation and
suggest that differences in the levels of these critical transcription factors
are responsible for commitment toward the Th1 or Th2 lineage.

PMID: 12193719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Curr Biol. 2002 Jul 9;12(13):1117-23.

Establishment of hindbrain segmental identity requires signaling by FGF3 and
FGF8.

Walshe J(1), Maroon H, McGonnell IM, Dickson C, Mason I.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, New Hunt's House, King's College
London, Guy's Campus, United Kingdom.

The hindbrain (brainstem) of all vertebrates follows a segmental developmental
strategy and has been the focus of intense study not only for its intrinsic
interest but also as a model for how more complex regions of the brain are
patterned. Segmentation ultimately serves to organize the development of neuronal
populations and their projections, and regional diversity is achieved through
each segment having its own identity. The latter being established through
differential expression of a hierarchy of transcription factors, including Hox
genes, Krox20, and Kreisler/Valentino. Here we identify a novel signaling center 
in the zebrafish embryo that arises prior to establishment of segmental
patterning and which is located centrally within the hindbrain territory in a
region that corresponds to the presumptive rhombomere 4. We show that signaling
from this region by two members of the FGF family of secreted proteins, FGF3 and 
FGF8, is required to establish correct segmental identity throughout the
hindbrain and for subsequent neuronal development. Spatiotemporal studies of Fgf 
expression suggest that this patterning mechanism is conserved during hindbrain
development in other vertebrate classes.

PMID: 12121619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Dev Biol. 2002 Jul 15;247(2):237-50.

FGF signaling regulates expression of Tbx2, Erm, Pea3, and Pax3 in the early
nasal region.

Firnberg N(1), Neubüser A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7, Vienna, A-1030,
Austria.

Fgf8 is required for normal development of the nasal region. Here, we have used a
candidate approach to identify genes that are induced in chick nasal mesenchyme
in response to FGF signaling. Using an explant culture system, we show that
expression of the transcription factors Tbx2, Erm, Pea3, and Pax3, but not Pax7, 
in nasal mesenchyme is regulated by ectodermal signals in a stage-dependent
manner. Using beads soaked in recombinant FGF protein and an FGF receptor
antagonist, we furthermore demonstrate that FGF signaling is necessary and
sufficient for expression of Tbx2, Erm, Pea3, and Pax3, but has no effect on Pax7
expression. We also show that, within the nasal mesenchyme, competence to respond
to FGF signaling is initially widespread and uniform but becomes restricted to
regions normally exposed to FGF at later stages of development, coincident with
changes in FGF receptor expression. Finally, we provide evidence that FGF8 also
regulates Erm and Pea3 expression in the nasal placodes. Together, these results 
identify Tbx2, Erm, Pea3, and Pax3 as downstream targets of FGF signaling in the 
facial area and suggest that these genes may mediate some of the effects of FGF8 
during development of the nasal region.

2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12086464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Cell Biol. 2002 Jun 24;157(7):1105-12. Epub 2002 Jun 17.

Functional binding interaction identified between the axonal CAM L1 and members
of the ERM family.

Dickson TC(1), Mintz CD, Benson DL, Salton SR.

Author information: 
(1)Fishberg Research Center for Neurobiology, The Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, NY 10029, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Biol 2002 Aug 19;158(4):817.

A yeast two-hybrid library was screened using the cytoplasmic domain of the
axonal cell adhesion molecule L1 to identify binding partners that may be
involved in the regulation of L1 function. The intracellular domain of L1 bound
to ezrin, a member of the ezrin, radixin, and moesin (ERM) family of
membrane-cytoskeleton linking proteins, at a site overlapping that for AP2, a
clathrin adaptor. Binding of bacterial fusion proteins confirmed this
interaction. To determine whether ERM proteins interact with L1 in vivo,
extracellular antibodies to L1 were used to force cluster the protein on cultured
hippocampal neurons and PC12 cells, which were then immunolabeled for ERM
proteins. Confocal analysis revealed a precise pattern of codistribution between 
ERMs and L1 clusters in axons and PC12 neurites, whereas ERMs in dendrites and
spectrin labeling remained evenly distributed. Transfection of hippocampal
neurons grown on an L1 substrate with a dominant negative ERM construct resulted 
in extensive and abnormal elaboration of membrane protrusions and an increase in 
axon branching, highlighting the importance of the ERM-actin interaction in axon 
development. Together, our data indicate that L1 binds directly to members of the
ERM family and suggest this association may coordinate aspects of axonal
morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2173555
PMID: 12070130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Immunol Lett. 2002 Sep 2;83(2):143-7.

Clustering of a lipid-raft associated pool of ERM proteins at the immunological
synapse upon T cell receptor or CD28 ligation.

Tomas EM(1), Chau TA, Madrenas J.

Author information: 
(1)The Biotherapeutics, and the Transplantation and Immunobiology Groups, The
John P. Robarts Research Institute, Room 2.05, P.O. Box 5015, 100 Perth Drive,
London Ont., Canada N6A 5K8.

Although ezrin is tyrosine phosphorylated following TCR ligation, its biological 
role in T cell activation is not known. Here, we shhow that ezrin clusters at the
immunological synapse upon T cell stimulation. Clustering of ezrin can be
triggered by TCR ligation, or, more efficiently, by CD28 ligation. The clusters
of ezrin at the immunological synapse include serine/threonine phosphorylated
ezrin predominantly located within cell membrane lipid rafts. Based on these
data, we propose that ezrin may play a role in the formation/stabilization of
lipid raft signalosomes at the immunological synapse and therefore contribute to 
sustain TCR-dependent signalling.

PMID: 12067763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Blood. 2002 Jun 15;99(12):4554-61.

Evidence for distinct pathomechanisms in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and 
mantle cell lymphoma by quantitative expression analysis of cell cycle and
apoptosis-associated genes.

Korz C(1), Pscherer A, Benner A, Mertens D, Schaffner C, Leupolt E, Döhner H,
Stilgenbauer S, Lichter P.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Molekulare Genetik and Zentrale Einheit Biostatistik, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.

The B-cell lymphoproliferative malignancies B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(B-CLL) and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) share characteristics, including
overlapping chromosomal aberrations with deletions on chromosome bands 13q14,
11q23, 17p13, and 6q21 and gains on chromosome bands 3q26, 12q13, and 8q24. To
elucidate the biochemical processes involved in the pathogenesis of B-CLL and
MCL, we analyzed the expression level of a set of genes that play central roles
in apoptotic or cell proliferation pathways and of candidate genes from
frequently altered genomic regions, namely ATM, BAX, BCL2, CCND1, CCND3, CDK2,
CDK4, CDKN1A, CDKN1B, E2F1, ETV5, MYC, RB1, SELL, TFDP2, TNFSF10, and TP53.
Performing real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
in a panel of patients with MCL and B-CLL and control samples, significant
overexpression and underexpression was observed for most of these genes.
Statistical analysis of the expression data revealed the combination of CCND1 and
CDK4 as the best classifier concerning separation of both lymphoma types.
Overexpression in these malignancies suggests ETV5 as a new candidate for a
pathogenic factor in B-cell lymphomas. Characteristic deregulation of multiple
genes analyzed in this study could be combined in a comprehensive picture of 2
distinctive pathomechanisms in B-CLL and MCL. In B-CLL, the expression parameters
are in strong favor of protection of the malignant cells from apoptosis but did
not provide evidence for promoting cell cycle. In contrast, in MCL the impairment
of apoptosis induction seems to play a minor role, whereas most expression data
indicate an enhancement of cell proliferation.

PMID: 12036888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Trends Cell Biol. 2002 Jan;12(1):4-5.

Actin' up (and down).

Hyams JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Biology, Darwin Building, University College London, Gower Street,
WC1E 6BT, London, UK. j.hyams@ucl.ac.uk

The Côte D'Azure provided a stunning backdrop for a recent conference* on the
role of microfilament function and regulation in cell polarity. Although sadly
missing several North American participants in the wake of events in Washington
and New York, the largely European audience was nevertheless treated to
fascinating insights into the many roles of actin polymerization and other
processes involved in the establishment and maintenance of cell polarity. (*Joint
CNRS/Jacques Monod/EMBO Conference on 'The Role of Microfilament Function and
Regulation in Cell Polarity'; Presqu'ile de Giens, France 15-19 Sept 2001.
Organized by Daniel Louvard and Tony Bretscher.)

PMID: 11853994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Immunol. 2002 Jan 15;168(2):541-4.

Cutting edge: negative regulation of immune synapse formation by anchoring lipid 
raft to cytoskeleton through Cbp-EBP50-ERM assembly.

Itoh K(1), Sakakibara M, Yamasaki S, Takeuchi A, Arase H, Miyazaki M, Nakajima N,
Okada M, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and General Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

Ag recognition by T lymphocytes induces immune synapse formation and recruitment 
of signaling molecules into a lipid raft. Cbp/PAG is a Csk-associated membrane
adapter protein exclusively localized in a lipid raft. We identified NHERF/EBP50 
as a Cbp-binding molecule, which connects the membrane raft and cytoskeleton by
binding to both Cbp through its PDZ domain and ezrin-radixin-moesin through the C
terminus. Overexpression of Cbp reduced the mobility of the raft on the cell
surface of unstimulated T cells and prevented synapse formation and subsequent T 
cell activation, whereas a mutant incapable of EBP50 binding restored both
synapse formation and activation. These results suggest that anchoring of lipid
raft to the cytoskeleton through Cbp-EBP50-ezrin-radixin-moesin assembly
regulates membrane dynamism for synapse formation and T cell activation.

PMID: 11777944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Curr Biol. 2001 Nov 13;11(22):1739-48.

The pea3 subfamily ets genes are required for HER2/Neu-mediated mammary
oncogenesis.

Shepherd TG(1), Kockeritz L, Szrajber MR, Muller WJ, Hassell JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, McMaster University, 1280
Main Street, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The PEA3 Ets transcription factor is overexpressed in the vast
majority of human breast tumors and in nearly all of those of the
HER2/Neu-positive subclass. PEA3 is also overexpressed in various transgenic
mouse models of this disease. Whether PEA3 plays an essential role in
HER2/Neu-mediated oncogenesis has heretofore not been addressed.
RESULTS: Here, we report that each of the three highly related ets genes of the
pea3 subfamily (pea3, er81, and erm) were coordinately overexpressed in mammary
tumors of MMTV-neu transgenic mice. Other ets genes normally expressed in the
mammary gland were not upregulated in these tumors. Expression of a
dominant-negative pea3 transgene under the control of the MMTV promoter in
mammary epithelial cells of MMTV-neu transgenic mice dramatically delayed the
onset of mammary tumors and reduced the number and size of such tumors in
individual mice. Those tumors that arose in bitransgenic mice expressed the
MMTV-neu transgene, but not the MMTV-dominant-negative pea3 transgene.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings imply that one or more of the PEA3 subfamily Ets
proteins or other Ets proteins with related DNA binding specificity play an
essential role in Neu-mediated mammary oncogenesis. Hence, agents that inhibit
the expression or activity of the PEA3 subfamily proteins may prove efficacious
in the treatment of breast cancer.

PMID: 11719215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 11;277(2):1002-12. Epub 2001 Oct 26.

ERM transactivation is up-regulated by the repression of DNA binding after the
PKA phosphorylation of a consensus site at the edge of the ETS domain.

Baert JL(1), Beaudoin C, Coutte L, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8526 CNRS/Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie de Lille, BP
447, 1 rue Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex, France.

The final step of the transduction pathway is the activation of gene
transcription, which is driven by kinase cascades leading to changes in the
activity of many transcription factors. Among these latter, PEA3/E1AF, ER81/ETV1,
and ERM, members of the well conserved PEA3 group from the Ets family are
involved in these processes. We show here that protein kinase A (PKA) increases
the transcriptional activity of human ERM and human ETV1, through a Ser residue
situated at the edge of the ETS DNA-binding domain. PKA phosphorylation does not 
directly affect the ERM transactivation domains but does affect DNA binding
activity. Unphosphorylated wild-type ERM bound DNA avidly, whereas after PKA
phosphorylation it did so very weakly. Interestingly, S367A mutation
significantly reduced the ERM-mediated transcription in the presence of the
kinase, and the DNA binding of this mutant, although similar to that of
unphosphorylated wild-type protein, was insensitive to PKA treatment. Mutations, 
which may mimic a phosphorylated serine, converted ERM from an efficient
DNA-binding protein to a poor DNA binding one, with inefficiency of PKA
phosphorylation. The present data clearly demonstrate a close correlation between
the capacity of PKA to increase the transactivation of ERM and the drastic
down-regulation of the binding of the ETS domain to the targeted DNA. What we
thus demonstrate here is a relatively rare transcription activation mechanism
through a decrease in DNA binding, probably by the shift of a non-active form of 
an Ets protein to a PKA-phosphorylated active one, which should be in a
conformation permitting a transactivation domain to be active.

PMID: 11682477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mech Dev. 2001 Oct;108(1-2):191-5.

Expression patterns of the Ets transcription factors from the PEA3 group during
early stages of mouse development.

Chotteau-Lelievre A(1), Dolle P, Peronne V, Coutte L, de Launoit Y, Desbiens X.

Author information: 
(1)Mécanismes du Développement et de la Cancérisation, UMR 8526 CNRS/Institut
Pasteur de Lille - Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1 rue Calmette, BP 447, 59021
Lille Cedex, France. anne.chotteau@ibl.fr

erm, er81 and pea3 are three related genes that define a novel Ets-related
subfamily of transcription factors. The expression patterns of these genes has
been previously characterized in the mouse from embryonic day (E) 9.5 to birth
(Oncogene 15 (1997) 937). In this study, we report differential expression
patterns of the PEA3 group genes during early mouse post-implantation
development. erm and pea3 expression patterns were partly overlapping. erm was
activated prior to pea3 in the distal tip of the embryonic epiblast but, at
primitive streak-stages, both genes were coexpressed in the posterior region of
the embryo in epiblast, primitive streak and adjacent mesoderm. Similar erm and
pea3 expression patterns were seen later in posterior neural plate, presomitic
and lateral mesoderm, mesonephros, and tail bud. Only erm, however, was expressed
in specific brain regions corresponding to prospective midbrain and ventral
forebrain. erm was also strongly expressed as early as E8 in the developing
branchial region, especially at the level of branchial pouches, whereas pea3
transcripts appeared later in frontonasal and first arch mesenchyme. er81
transcripts were not detected prior to E9.0-9.5, suggesting that this gene may
not be involved in early developmental events.

PMID: 11578874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Curr Biol. 2001 Apr 3;11(7):503-7.

Zebrafish pea3 and erm are general targets of FGF8 signaling.

Roehl H(1), Nüsslein-Volhard C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Spemannstrasse 35/III, D-72076, 
Tübingen, Germany. henryroehl@yahoo.com

Phenotypic analysis of both zebrafish and mouse has shown that fibroblast growth 
factor 8 (FGF8) is required for many developmental decisions. To further our
understanding of the FGF8 signaling process, we sought to identify new
transcriptional targets of the pathway. Here, we propose that two zebrafish ETS
genes, pea3 and erm, are general targets of FGF8 signaling, based upon the
following observations: both genes are expressed around all early FGF8 signaling 
sources, both genes are downregulated in fgf8 mutant embryos in all tissues known
to require fgf8 function, a pharmacological inhibitor of the FGF pathway
completely abolishes expression of both genes, and ectopic expression of fgf8 is 
sufficient to induce both genes. The finding that pea3 and erm are common
transcriptional targets of FGF8 signaling suggests that they are general
mediators of FGF8 signaling during development. In addition, we observed that
pea3 is often expressed close to an FGF8 source, and erm is expressed in a
broader domain. To test whether this differential expression is established by
FGF8, we have induced FGF8 ectopically and show that it is sufficient to
recapitulate the endogenous nested expression pattern of pea3 and erm.

PMID: 11413000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Neurobiol Dis. 2001 Apr;8(2):266-78.

The protein 4.1 tumor suppressor, DAL-1, impairs cell motility, but regulates
proliferation in a cell-type-specific fashion.

Gutmann DH(1), Hirbe AC, Huang ZY, Haipek CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S.
Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) tumor suppressor belongs to the Protein 4.1 family 
of molecules that link the actin cytoskeleton to cell surface glycoproteins. We
have previously demonstrated that the NF2 protein, merlin, can suppress cell
growth in vitro and in vivo as well as impair actin cytoskeleton-associated
processes, such as cell spreading, attachment, and motility. Recently, we
determined that expression of a second Protein 4.1 tumor suppressor, DAL-1, was
lost in 60% of sporadic meningiomas, but not schwannomas. In this report, we
demonstrate that DAL-1 suppresses cell proliferation in meningioma, but not
schwannoma cells. Similar to merlin, DAL-1 interacts with other ERM proteins and 
betaII-spectrin, but not the merlin interactor protein, SCHIP-1. In addition, we 
report the identification of the full-length DAL-1 tumor suppressor, termed
KIAA0987. Collectively, these results suggest that the two Protein 4.1 meningioma
tumor suppressors, merlin and DAL-1, may be functionally distinct proteins with
different mechanisms of action.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11300722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Cell. 2000 Dec;6(6):1425-36.

Direct binding of the Na--H exchanger NHE1 to ERM proteins regulates the cortical
cytoskeleton and cell shape independently of H(+) translocation.

Denker SP(1), Huang DC, Orlowski J, Furthmayr H, Barber DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The association of actin filaments with the plasma membrane maintains cell shape 
and adhesion. Here, we show that the plasma membrane ion exchanger NHE1 acts as
an anchor for actin filaments to control the integrity of the cortical
cytoskeleton. This occurs through a previously unrecognized structural link
between NHE1 and the actin binding proteins ezrin, radixin, and moesin (ERM).
NHE1 and ERM proteins associate directly and colocalize in lamellipodia.
Fibroblasts expressing NHE1 with mutations that disrupt ERM binding, but not ion 
translocation, have impaired organization of focal adhesions and actin stress
fibers, and an irregular cell shape. We propose a structural role for NHE1 in
regulating the cortical cytoskeleton that is independent of its function as an
ion exchanger.

PMID: 11163215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Dec 29;279(3):879-83.

Neuronal expression of the ERM-like protein MIR in rat brain and its localization
to human chromosome 6.

Olsson PA(1), Bornhauser BC, Korhonen L, Lindholm D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Neurobiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, S-751
23, Sweden.

The ERM proteins, ezrin, radixin, and moesin, regulate cell motility by linking
cortical F-actin to the plasma membrane in different cell types. Myosin
regulatory light chain interacting protein (MIR) is a recently cloned ERM-like
protein which was shown to be involved in neurite outgrowth. Here we have studied
the occurrence and expression of MIR in rats during brain development. As shown
using Western blotting, MIR is present in different regions both in developing
and adult brain. Immunohistochemistry and double labelling studies showed that
MIR is localized especially to neurons in hippocampus and cerebellum. A search
using the gene bank showed that the MIR gene localised to human chromosome 6 in
the interval 6p22.3-23, the loss of which is characterized by mental retardation 
and different malformations in man. The presence of MIR in brain neurons during
development together with its known effects on neurite outgrowth suggest an
important function of the protein in the regulation of nerve cell motility and
cytoskeletal interactions.

PMID: 11162443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Dev Biol. 2000 Mar 1;219(1):44-58.

The Ets domain transcription factor Erm distinguishes rat satellite glia from
Schwann cells and is regulated in satellite cells by neuregulin signaling.

Hagedorn L(1), Paratore C, Brugnoli G, Baert JL, Mercader N, Suter U, Sommer L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
ETH-Hönggerberg, CH-8093, Switzerland.

Distinct glial cell types of the vertebrate peripheral nervous system (PNS) are
derived from the neural crest. Here we show that the expression of the Ets domain
transcription factor Erm distinguishes satellite glia from Schwann cells
beginning early in rat PNS development. In developing dorsal root ganglia (DRG), 
Erm is present both in presumptive satellite glia and in neurons. In contrast,
Erm is not detectable at any developmental stage in Schwann cells in peripheral
nerves. In addition, Erm is downregulated in DRG-derived glia adopting Schwann
cell traits in culture. Thus, Erm is the first described transcription factor
expressed in satellite glia but not in Schwann cells. In culture, the Neuregulin1
(NRG1) isoform GGF2 maintains Erm expression in presumptive satellite cells and
reinduces Erm expression in DRG-derived glia but not in Schwann cells from
sciatic nerve. These data demonstrate that there are intrinsic differences
between these glial subtypes in their response to NRG1 signaling. In neural crest
cultures, Erm-positive progenitor cells give rise to two distinct glial subtypes:
Erm-positive, Oct-6-negative satellite glia in response to GGF2, and
Erm-negative, Oct-6-positive Schwann cells in the presence of serum and the
adenylate cyclase activator forskolin. Thus, Erm-positive neural crest-derived
progenitor cells and presumptive satellite glia are able to acquire Schwann cell 
features. Given the in vivo expression of Erm in peripheral ganglia, we suggest
that ganglionic Erm-positive cells may be precursors of Schwann cells.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10677254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Histochem Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;111(6):435-43.

Embryonic gene expression resolved at the cellular level by fluorescence in situ 
hybridization.

Paratore C(1), Suter U, Sommer L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zürich.

Tyramide signal amplification has successfully been applied to enhance detection 
limits of both immunological reactions and in situ hybridization methods. The
technique uses short-range deposition of activated tyramide mediated by
horseradish peroxidase. We have adapted this method to fluorescence in situ
hybridization on embryonic tissue sections using fluorophore-labeled tyramide.
The sensitivity of the procedure was sufficient to analyze the embryonic
expression of mRNAs encoding both transcription factors and structural proteins. 
Combining fluorescence in situ hybridization and immunofluorescence with confocal
microscopy allows the simultaneous detection of distinct mRNA species or of mRNAs
together with proteins on the cellular level. Thus, the cell types expressing a
particular gene at a given developmental stage can be studied even if no antibody
to the gene product of interest is available. Moreover, the technique allows to
study in situ the combinatorial marker expression that characterizes progenitor
stages of a given cell lineage.

PMID: 10429965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Mar 25;1423(2):M29-36.

Merlin: the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor.

Gusella JF(1), Ramesh V, MacCollin M, Jacoby LB.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114,
USA. gusella@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

In recent years, it has become clear that the ERMs occupy a crucial position as
protein linkers that both respond to and participate in reorganization of
membrane-cytoskeletal interactions. With the identification of new binding
partners, the ERMs are also implicated in linked regulation of the activities of 
particular membrane proteins. Thus, they reside at a junction in a complex web of
interactions that must respond to stimuli from both outside and inside the cell. 
As expected from its structural motifs, merlin behaves in a manner similar to the
ERM proteins, but with some notable differences. Chief among these is the absence
of intramolecular interaction to mask intermolecular interaction domains in
isoform 2. The full range of merlin's intermolecular interactions remains to be
delineated, but it can be expected from the comparison to ERMs that merlin also
sits within a web of interactions that may involve multiple partners and
signaling pathways, some of which it shares with the ERMs. Defining merlin's
tumor suppressor function will likely require identifying those differences that 
are peculiarly important in the target cell types of NF2. However, the fact that 
inactivation of merlin in the mouse by targeted mutagenesis produces a variety of
malignant tumors with a high rate of metastasis [33] suggests that merlin's
suppression of tumor formation may involve different partners and pathways in
different cell types and genetic backgrounds. Consequently, the disruptions due
to merlin inactivation in the progression of malignant mesothelioma may represent
a tumor suppressor role operating by a different pathway than that in schwannoma 
or meningioma.

PMID: 10214350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 30;96(7):3888-93.

The Ets transcription factor ERM is Th1-specific and induced by IL-12 through a
Stat4-dependent pathway.

Ouyang W(1), Jacobson NG, Bhattacharya D, Gorham JD, Fenoglio D, Sha WC, Murphy
TL, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Interleukin 12 (IL-12)-induced T helper 1 (Th1) development requires Stat4
activation. However, antigen-activated Th1 cells can produce interferon gamma
(IFN-gamma) independently of IL-12 and Stat4 activation. Thus, in differentiated 
Th1 cells, factors regulated by IL-12 and Stat4 may be involved in IFN-gamma
production. Using subtractive cloning, we identified ERM, an Ets transcription
factor, to be a Th1-specific, IL-12-induced gene. IL-12-induction of ERM occurred
in wild-type and Stat1-deficient, but not Stat4-deficient, T cells, suggesting
ERM is Stat4-inducible. Retroviral expression of ERM did not restore IFN-gamma
production in Stat4-deficient T cells, but augmented IFN-gamma expression in
Stat4-heterozygous T cells. Ets factors frequently regulate transcription via
cooperative interactions with other transcription factors, and ERM has been
reported to cooperate with c-Jun. However, in the absence of other transcription 
factors, ERM augmented expression of an IFN-gamma reporter by only 2-fold. Thus, 
determining the requirement for ERM in Th1 development likely will require gene
targeting.

PMCID: PMC22390
PMID: 10097133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Hepatology. 1999 Mar;29(3):839-48.

Control of the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 promoter in
culture-activated rat hepatic stellate cells: regulation by activator protein-1
DNA binding proteins.

Bahr MJ(1), Vincent KJ, Arthur MJ, Fowler AV, Smart DE, Wright MC, Clark IM,
Benyon RC, Iredale JP, Mann DA.

Author information: 
(1)University Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, UK.

In the injured liver hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) undergo a dramatic phenotypic 
transformation known as "activation" in which they become myofibroblast-like and 
express high levels of the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP-1). HSC 
activation is accompanied by transactivation of the TIMP-1 promoter. Truncation
mutagenesis studies delineated a minimal active promoter consisting of
nucleotides -102 to +60 relative to the major start site for transcription.
Removal of an AP-1 site located at nucleotides -93 to -87 caused almost a
complete loss of promoter activity. Analysis of AP-1 DNA binding activities
during culture activation of HSCs initially indicated transient expression of
proteins capable of forming a low mobility AP-1 DNA binding complex (LMAP-1).
LMAP-1 was maximally induced at 24 hours of culture and then fell to undetectable
levels at 120 hours. Western blot studies showed that both c-Fos and c-Jun
underwent similar transient inductions. These temporal changes in c-Fos and c-Jun
activities were unexpected because TIMP-1 mRNA expression is not detected in HSCs
until culture day 3 to 5 and is thereafter sustained at a high level. Previous
work in other cell lineages has established a key role for Pea3 binding proteins 
(Ets-1) in AP-1 mediated transactivation of the TIMP-1 promoter. We show that
HSCs express relatively low levels Ets-1 and Ets-2 and show that mutagenesis of
the Pea3 DNA binding site in the TIMP-1 promoter has less than a twofold effect
on its activity in activated HSCs. Further analysis of AP-1 DNA binding
activities in 7- to 14-day culture activated HSCs led to the discovery of high
mobility AP-1 complexes (HMAP-1). HMAP-1 DNA binding activities were sequence
specific with respect to AP-1 and absent from freshly isolated HSCs. Supershift
EMSA and Western blot studies identified JunD, Fra2, and FosB as potential
components of the HMAP-1. Mutations of the AP-1 site of the TIMP-1 promoter that 
prevented formation of HMAP-1 caused a 70% loss of activity in transfected
activated HSCs. Taken together the data indicate that sustained upregulation of
TIMP-1 gene expression may be at least partially controlled by a novel AP-1
dependent regulation of TIMP-1 promoter activity.

PMID: 10051488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Korean Med Sci. 1998 Aug;13(4):355-60.

Phylogenetically interrelated ETS genes, ETV1, ERM and E1A-F locate on different 
chromosomes.

Jeon IS(1), Shapiro DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN, USA.

ETV1, ERM and E1A-F are members of the multigene ETS domain containing a class of
transcription factors, first identified in the genome of the avian retrovirus
E26. Based upon extensive homology between these genes within their ETS domain
(96% identity each other), these three genes comprise a distinct sub-family of
ETS genes as a human PEA3 sub-family. By analyzing somatic cell hybrid
segregating human chromosomes, the genes encoding ETV1, ERM and E1A-F were
localized to human chromosome 7, 3 and 17, respectively. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization confirmed these assignments and allowed mapping of the genes to
7p22 (ETV1), 3q29 (ERM) and 17q12 (E1A-F). These results suggest the ancestral
PEA3 gene may have duplicated first, then dispersed to other chromosomal
locations.

PMCID: PMC3054419
PMID: 9741538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Oncogene. 1998 Jul 9;17(1):93-104.

Molecular characterization of the zebrafish PEA3 ETS-domain transcription factor.

Brown LA(1), Amores A, Schilling TF, Jowett T, Baert JL, de Launoit Y, Sharrocks 
AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

The PEA3 subfamily of ETS-domain proteins play important roles in regulating
transcriptional activation and have been implicated in several tumorigenic
processes. Here we describe the identification of a further member of this family
from zebrafish which most likely represents a homologue of PEA3. A high degree of
sequence conservation is observed in the ETS DNA-binding domain and acidic
transcriptional activation domain. The DNA binding specificity of zebrafish PEA3 
is virtually identical to that exhibited by mammalian family members and is
autoregulated by cisacting inhibitory domains. Transcriptional activation by
zebrafish PEA3 is potentiated by the ERK MAP kinase and protein kinase A
pathways. During embryogenesis, PEA3 is expressed in complex spatial and temporal
patterns in both mesodermal somites and ectodermal tissues including the brain,
dorsal spinal chord and neural crest. Our characterisation of zebrafish PEA3
furthers our understanding of its molecular function and its expression profile
suggests a novel role in cell patterning in the early vertebrate embryo.

PMID: 9671318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Apr 28;245(3):641-5.

The Rho small G protein family-Rho GDI system as a temporal and spatial
determinant for cytoskeletal control.

Sasaki T(1), Takai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Osaka University Medical
School, Suita, Japan.

Recent extensive studies have clarified the functions of the small G protein
superfamily, which consists of the Ras, Rho, Rab, Arf, Sar1, and Ran families
(for reviews, Refs, 1 and 2). The Ras family regulates gene expression at least
through the MAP kinase cascade; the Rho family mainly regulates reorganization of
the actin cytoskeleton; the Rab, Arf, and Sar1 families regulate intracellular
vesicle trafficking; and the Ran family regulates nuclear transport. Of these
cellular functions, reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, seen in the
formation of filopodia, lamellipodia, and ruffles during cell motility,
dynamically occurs at specific sites of cells. To regulate this type of dynamic
cellular functions, temporal and spatial determination mechanisms of signal
transduction would be important. Like other G proteins, small G proteins cycle
between the GDP-bound inactive and GTP-bound active forms (1,2). They receive
upstream signals through their regulators and transduce signals to downstream
targets while they stay in the GTP-bound form. Thus, G proteins serve as timers. 
There are at least three types of regulators for small G proteins: GDP/GTP
exchange protein (GEP) which stimulates conversion from the GDP-bound form to the
GTP-bound form; GDP dissociation inhibitor (GDI) which inhibits this reaction;
and GTPase activating protein (GAP) which stimulates conversion from the
GTP-bound form to the GDP-bound form. Of these regulators, GDI has thus far been 
found for the Rho and Rab families. We have recently found that the Rho
family-Rho GDI system plays an important role in spatial determination in the
actin cytoskeletal control (3-6). We briefly describe here this function of the
Rho family-Rho GDI system.

PMID: 9588168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Oncogene. 1998 Apr 23;16(16):2065-73.

The transcription of the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 is regulated by Ets
transcription factors.

de Launoit Y(1), Audette M, Pelczar H, Plaza S, Baert JL.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 319 CNRS - Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie, France.

The Ets family of transcription factors comprises several members which are
involved to regulate gene transcription. Although several consensus binding sites
for Ets proteins can be found in a wide series of promoter, only a limited number
of them are indeed activated by these transcription factors. The human
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) plays a crucial role in immune
responses by enabling the binding of effector cells to various target cell types.
ICAM-1 is constitutively expressed at different levels in the absence of stimuli 
in different cell types, and its expression is upregulated by several
proinflammatory cytokines. We have here examined the transcriptional regulation
of human ICAM-1 expression by Ets proteins, and more particularly by ERM, a
member of this family of transcription factors. Transient transfection assays
revealed that Ets-2 and ERM significantly activate the transcription of ICAM-1
promoter, whereas the less-related Ets family member, Spi-1/Pu.1, failed to do
so. Transfection of a series of ICAM-1 promoter deletion mutants together with
ERM expression plasmids have shown that an Ets responsive element is located
within the first 176 bp upstream from the translational start site.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and DNase I footprinting analysis have
enabled us to identify two Ets binding sites at positions -158 and -138 from the 
ATG, respectively. Site directed mutagenesis of these elements has shown that the
distal site is the major element required for the ERM-mediated activation of the 
ICAM-1 promoter. We can thus conclude that expression of ICAM-1 can be regulated 
by Ets transcription factors.

PMID: 9572487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Nov 15;25(22):4455-63.

The ETS family member ERM contains an alpha-helical acidic activation domain that
contacts TAFII60.

Defossez PA(1), Baert JL, Monnot M, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Mécanismes du Développement et de la Cancérisation, UMR 319 CNRS/Institut
Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1 rue Calmette, BP 447, 59021
Lille Cedex, France.

Transcription factors are modular entities built up of discrete domains, some
devoted to DNA binding and others permitting transcriptional modulation. The
structure of DNA binding domains has been thoroughly investigated and structural 
classes clearly defined. In sharp contrast, the structural constraints put on
transactivating regions, if any, are mostly unknown. Our investigations focus on 
ERM, a eukaryotic transcription factor of the ETS family. We have previously
shown that ERM harbours two transactivating domains (TADs) with distinct
functional features: AD1 lies in the first 72 amino acids of ERM, while AD2 sits 
in the last 62. Here we show that AD1 is a bona fide acidic TAD, for it activated
transcription in yeast cells, while AD2 did not. AD1 contains a 20 amino acid
stretch predicted to form an alpha-helix that is found unchanged in the related
PEA3 and ER81 transcription factors. Circular dichroism analysis revealed that a 
32 amino acid peptide encompassing this region is unstructured in water but folds
into a helix when the hydrophobic solvent trifluoroethanol is added. The isolated
helix was sufficient to activate transcription and mutations predicted to disrupt
it dramatically affected AD1-driven transactivation, whereas mutations decreasing
its acidity had more gentle effects. A phenylalanine residue within the helix was
particularly sensitive to mutations. Finally, we observed that ERM bound TAFII60 
via AD1 and bound TBP and TAFII40, presumably via other activation domains.

PMCID: PMC147095
PMID: 9358152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 16;273(3):1273-6.

NHE-RF, a regulatory cofactor for Na(+)-H+ exchange, is a common interactor for
merlin and ERM (MERM) proteins.

Murthy A(1), Gonzalez-Agosti C, Cordero E, Pinney D, Candia C, Solomon F, Gusella
J, Ramesh V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown
02129, USA.

We have identified the human homologue of a regulatory cofactor of Na(+)-H+
exchanger (NHE-RF) as a novel interactor for merlin, the neurofibromatosis 2
tumor suppressor protein. NHE-RF mediates protein kinase A regulation of Na(+)-H+
exchanger NHE3 to which it is thought to bind via one of its two PDZ domains. The
carboxyl-terminal region of NHE-RF, downstream of the PDZ domains, interacts with
the amino-terminal protein 4.1 domain-containing segment of merlin in yeast
two-hybrid assays. This interaction also occurs in affinity binding assays with
full-length NHE-RF expressed in COS-7 cells. NHE-RF binds to the related ERM
proteins, moesin and radixin. We have localized human NHE-RF to actin-rich
structures such as membrane ruffles, microvilli, and filopodia in HeLa and COS-7 
cells, where it co-localizes with merlin and moesin. These findings suggest that 
hNHE-RF and its binding partners may participate in a larger complex (one
component of which might be a Na(+)-H+ exchanger) that could be crucial for the
actin filament assembly activated by the ERM proteins and for the tumor
suppressor function of merlin.

PMID: 9430655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Oct 9;239(1):252-6.

A conditional version of the Ets transcription factor Erm by fusion to the ligand
binding domain of the oestrogen receptor.

Pelczar H(1), Albagli O, Chotteau-Lelievre A, Damour I, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Mécanismes du Développement et de la Cancérisation, UMR 319 CNRS/Institut
Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie de Lille, France.

The fusion of a wide range of proteins to the ligand-binding domain of nuclear
receptors has been shown to impart ligand-dependent inducible activity of the
resulting chimera. Transcriptional regulators of the ETS family are involved in
both normal and oncogenic processes. In order to address the role of Erm, a "PEA3
subgroup" member of this family, we generated a chimera between Erm and the
widely used ligand-binding domain of the oestrogen receptor (ER). The chimera,
ErmER, consists of Erm protein fused at its C-terminal end to the ER domain. We
show that ErmER displays a ligand-dependent transcriptional activity on ets
responsive elements. The efficiency of ErmER mediated transactivation is
modulated by the hormone concentration while its weak leakiness is reduced by
using the steroidal anti-oestrogen EM-139. Our results define ErmER as the first 
conditional version of an Ets transcription factor, providing a useful tool to
decipher Erm biological role and to identify potential Erm target genes.

PMID: 9345304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 18;15(8):937-52.

Differential expression patterns of the PEA3 group transcription factors through 
murine embryonic development.

Chotteau-Lelièvre A(1), Desbiens X, Pelczar H, Defossez PA, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Mécanismes du Développement et de la Cancérisation, UMR 319 CNRS/Institut
Pasteur de Lille-Institut de Biologie de Lille, France.

ERM, ER81 and PEA3 are three highly related transcription factors belonging to
the ETS family. Together they form the PEA3 group within this family. Little data
is yet available regarding the roles of these three genes during embryonic
development. A prerequisite to investigations in this field is to obtain an
accurate spatio-temporal expression map for the erm, er81 and pea3 genes. To this
end, we have used in situ hybridization to compare their expression patterns
during critical stages of murine embryogenesis. We report that all three genes
are expressed in numerous developing organs coming from different embryonic
tissues. The three genes appeared co-expressed in different organs but presented 
specific sites of expression, so that the resultant expression pattern could in
fact reveal several distinct functions depending upon isolated and/or various
combinations of the PEA3 member expression. These results suggest that erm, er81 
and pea3 genes are differentially regulated, probably to serve important
functions as cell proliferation control, tissue interaction mediator or cell
differentiation, all over successive steps of the mouse organogenesis.

PMID: 9285689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Int J Cancer. 1997 Mar 4;70(5):590-7.

Expression of the PEA3 group of ETS-related transcription factors in human
breast-cancer cells.

Baert JL(1), Monté D, Musgrove EA, Albagli O, Sutherland RL, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The PEA3 group of transcription factors belongs to the ets family and is composed
of 3 known members, PEA3, ERM and ER81, which are more than 95% identical within 
the DNA-binding ETS domain and exhibit 50% aa identity overall. Recently,
transgenic mice bearing the c-erbB-2/neu oncogene have been shown to over-express
PEA3 mRNA in mammary adenocarcinomas, suggesting a role for this gene family in
mammary tumorigenesis. In the present work we characterized the mRNA expression
levels of PEA3-group genes in a series of human epithelial breast cell lines.
Each of the 3 genes was highly expressed in normal human HMEC 1001-7 and HMEC
219-4 cells. In breast-cancer cell lines, the 3 genes were highly expressed in
the ER- MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-330, MDA-MB-231 and BT-20 cell lines, but not in the
ER+ MDA-MB-134-VI and ZR-75-1 cells. In an attempt to characterize the PEA3-group
proteins in breast-cancer cells, we first produced and characterized specific
antibodies against each of these 3 proteins. The anti-ERM and anti-ER81
antibodies recognized specific strong bands at approximately 72 kDa and 62 kDa,
corresponding to ERM and ER81, respectively, in MDA-MB-231 and Hs-578T cells
expressing significant levels of the 3 mRNAs. No protein was detected in MCF-7
cells expressing low levels of mRNA for PEA3-group-family genes, or in ZR-75-1
cells, where mRNA was undetectable by Northern blot. Although in vitro-translated
PEA3 is specifically immunoprecipitated by anti-PEA3 anti-serum, we were unable
to immunoprecipitate PEA3 protein from MDA-MB-231 and Hs-578T cells. In order to 
study the transcription factor activity of ERM, PEA3 and ER81 proteins in
mammary-cancer cells, we tested their ability to transactivate a reporter plasmid
containing 3 Ets-binding sites, and were able to show that, in all the
breast-cancer cells tested, transfected ERM, PEA3 and ER81 are able to
transactivate. Although the target genes of the PEA3 group of transcription
factors in breast-cancer cells have yet to be determined, these genes have a
potential role in the regulation of growth and the progression of human breast
cancer.

PMID: 9052761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Emerg Infect Dis. 1996 Oct-Dec;2(4):339-42.

Rapid increase of resistance to erythromycin and clindamycin in Streptococcus
pyogenes in Italy, 1993-1995. The Italian Surveillance Group for Antimicrobial
Resistance.

Cornaglia G(1), Ligozzi M, Mazzariol A, Valentini M, Orefici G, Fontana R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Verona, Italy.

A survey of antibiotic resistance in Streptococcus pyogenes in Italy showed a
sharp increase in erythromycin resistance. In 1993, the incidence of
erythromycin-resistant strains was on average 5.1%, with marked variations by
geographic area. Two years later, the incidence of these strains had registered a
1.5- to roughly 20-fold increase, with a mean value of 25.9%, exceeding 40% in
three centers out of 13 and 30% in another four. For all the strains studied,
normal levels of susceptibility to penicillin were reported.

PMCID: PMC2639920
PMID: 9011381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 27;271(39):23907-13.

Androgen receptor-Ets protein interaction is a novel mechanism for steroid
hormone-mediated down-modulation of matrix metalloproteinase expression.

Schneikert J(1), Peterziel H, Defossez PA, Klocker H, de Launoit Y, Cato AC.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute of Genetics, P.O. Box 3640, D-76021
Karlsruhe, Federal Republic of Germany.

Matrix metalloproteinases belong to a family of structurally related enzymes that
plays important role in tissue morphogenesis, differentiation, and wound healing.
Their expression is negatively regulated by several members of the steroid
hormone receptor family. This is thought to occur through interaction of the
steroid receptors with the transcription factor AP-1 that is otherwise required
for positive regulation. Here, we demonstrate that AP-1 is not always a target
for down-regulation of expression of matrix metalloproteinases by steroid
receptors. Androgen receptor negatively regulates matrix metalloproteinase-1
expression not through AP-1 but through a family of Ets-related transcription
factors that are also required for positive regulation. This negative regulation 
is specific for the androgen receptor. It does not require the DNA binding
activity but needs amino-terminal sequences of the receptor. These results
identify a novel regulatory pathway for negative regulation utilized by a member 
of the steroid hormone receptor family for down-regulating the expression of
matrix metalloproteinases.

PMID: 8798622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Genomics. 1996 Jul 1;35(1):236-40.

Genomic organization of the human ERM (ETV5) gene, a PEA3 group member of ETS
transcription factors.

Monté D(1), Coutte L, Dewitte F, Defossez PA, Le Coniat M, Stéhelin D, Berger R, 
de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160-Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille 
Cedex, 59019, France.

The ERM protein belongs to the family of Ets transcription factors. We show here 
that the human ERM gene is organized into 14 exons distributed along 65 kb of
genomic DNA on chromosome 3. The two main functional domains of ERM, the acidic
domain and the DNA-binding ETS domain, are overlapped by three different exons
each. The 3'-untranslated region of ERM is 2.1 kb, whereas the 5'-untranslated
region is about 0.3 kb; this allows the transcription of ERM transcripts of
approximately 4 kb. The human ERM gene is localized to the q27-q29 region of
chromosome 3.

PMID: 8661127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Oncogene. 1996 Mar 21;12(6):1325-36.

Two functionally distinct domains responsible for transactivation by the Ets
family member ERM.

Laget MP(1), Defossez PA, Albagli O, Baert JL, Dewitte F, Stehelin D, de Launoit 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The recently cloned human Ets transcription factor ERM is closely related to the 
ER81 and PEA3 genes. Here, we report the functional analysis of the DNA-binding
and transactivation properties of ERM. Specific DNA-binding by ERM requires the
ETS domain, conserved in all members of the Ets family and is inhibited by an 84 
residue long central region and the carboxy-terminal tail. Two fragments of ERM
are transferrable activation domains: alpha, which sits in the 72 first residues 
and encompasses the acidic domain conserved between ERM, ER81 and PEA3, and the
carboxy-terminal tail which also bears a DNA-binding inhibition function.
Deletion of alpha strongly reduces transactivation by ERM. Moreover, alpha and
the carboxy-terminal tail exhibit functional synergism, suggesting that they
activate transcription through different mechanisms. In support of this idea, we 
demonstrate that VP16 squelches transactivation by alpha but not by the
carboxy-terminal tail. This result also indicates that alpha and VP16 may share
common limiting cofactors. alpha and the carboxy-terminal tail do not seem to be 
conserved within the whole Ets family, indicating that the specificity of ERM may
rely on interactions with distinct cofactors.

PMID: 8649835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1996;74(3):220.

Assignment of the ERM gene (ETV5) coding for the ets-related protein to human
chromosome band 3q28 by in situ hybridization.

Protopopova MV(1), Vorobieva NV, Protopopov AI, Gizatullin RZ, Kashuba VI, Klein 
G, Zabarovsky ER, Graphodatsky AS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, 
Russia.

PMID: 8941378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 6;270(40):23795-800.

ERM, a PEA3 subfamily of Ets transcription factors, can cooperate with c-Jun.

Nakae K(1), Nakajima K, Inazawa J, Kitaoka T, Hirano T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

A human cDNA clone for ERM, a member of the ets gene family, has been obtained by
polymerase chain reaction with degenerate primers corresponding to highly
conserved regions within an Ets DNA binding domain. ERM mRNA is expressed
ubiquitously. The gene was mapped to chromosome 3q27. In in vivo
transient-expression assays, ERM induced transcription more efficiently from a
synthetic element containing both an ets-binding site (EBS) and a cyclic AMP
response element (CRE) than from one containing an EBS alone. The activation of a
synthetic EBS-CRE site by ERM was likely to involve a leucine zipper protein
capable of dimerizing with CRE-BP1 leucine zipper. Indeed, ERM and c-Jun
synergistically activated the EBS-CRE without making an apparent ternary complex.
The synergy between c-Jun and ERM may be attributed to the enhancing effect of
c-Jun on the transcription activity of ERM, because c-Jun increased ERM
transcription activity by more than 20-fold in an assay system using a variety of
fusion proteins between a Gal4 DNA-binding domain and a portion of ERM. This
enhancing effect of c-Jun required the amino-terminal portion of ERM.

PMID: 7559555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochem Cell Biol. 1995 Sep-Oct;73(9-10):733-7.

Schwannomin: new insights into this member of the band 4.1 superfamily.

Belliveau MJ(1), Lutchman M, Claudio JO, Marineau C, Rouleau GA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by 
the development of central nervous system tumours. The NF2 gene was recently
cloned and found to encode a protein, schwannomin (or merlin), with homology to
the band 4.1 superfamily. This superfamily of proteins includes ezrin, moesin,
radixin, and talin, as well as several protein tyrosine phosphatases. How does a 
cytoskeleton-associated protein act as a tumour suppressor? While this
fundamental question remains unanswered, recent studies have begun to address key
questions regarding the function of schwannomin. In this review, we examine what 
is known about the band 4.1 superfamily and how this information pertains to
schwannomin. In addition, we summarize recent studies of schwannomin itself.

PMID: 8714694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Cell Biol. 1994 Jun;125(6):1371-84.

Perturbation of cell adhesion and microvilli formation by antisense
oligonucleotides to ERM family members.

Takeuchi K(1), Sato N, Kasahara H, Funayama N, Nagafuchi A, Yonemura S, Tsukita
S, Tsukita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information Physiology, National Institute for Physiological
Sciences, Aichi, Japan.

To examine the functions of ERM family members (ezrin, radixin, and moesin),
mouse epithelial cells (MTD-1A cells) and thymoma cells (L5178Y), which coexpress
all of them, were cultured in the presence of antisense phosphorothioate
oligonucleotides (PONs) complementary to ERM sequences. Immunoblotting revealed
that the antisense PONs selectively suppressed the expression of each member.
Immunofluorescence microscopy of these ezrin, radixin, or moesin
"single-suppressed" MTD-1A cells revealed that the ERM family members are
colocalized at cell-cell adhesion sites, microvilli, and cleavage furrows, where 
actin filaments are densely associated with plasma membranes. The
ezrin/radixin/moesin antisense PONs mixture induced the destruction of both
cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion, as well as the disappearance of
microvilli. Ezrin or radixin antisense PONs individually affected the initial
step of the formation of both cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion, but did not 
affect the microvilli structures. In sharp contrast, moesin antisense PONs did
not singly affect cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion, whereas it partly
affected the microvilli structures. These data indicate that ezrin and radixin
can be functionally substituted, that moesin has some synergetic functional
interaction with ezrin and radixin, and that these ERM family members are
involved in cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion, as well as microvilli
formation.

PMCID: PMC2290919
PMID: 8207064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Oncogene. 1994 May;9(5):1397-406.

Molecular cloning and characterization of human ERM, a new member of the Ets
family closely related to mouse PEA3 and ER81 transcription factors.

Monté D(1), Baert JL, Defossez PA, de Launoit Y, Stéhelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Molèculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

The ets-related transcription factors PEA3 and ER81 have recently been isolated
and characterized in the mouse. They share 95% identity in a 85 amino acid (AA)
domain termed the ETS domain which is responsible for DNA binding, and therefore 
they form an Ets family group. By screening a human testis cDNA library with a
probe containing the mouse PEA3 ETS domain, we isolated a 2.2 kb clone containing
a 510 AA open reading frame. Since the ETS domain, which is localized in the
carboxy terminal region of the encoded protein, is 95% and 96% identical to that 
of PEA3 and ER81, respectively, we named this new member 'Ets Related Molecule
PEA3-like' (ERM). Although the first 120 AA in the amino-terminal region of ERM
share 47% identity with PEA3 and 66% with ER81, ERM contains a central region of 
approximately 35 AA not found in the two mouse proteins. Gel shift analysis
indicates that the full-length ERM protein is able to bind specifically to an
oligonucleotide containing the consensus nucleotide core sequence GGAA recognized
by the Ets proteins. Moreover, in vitro translation of 83 AA of the ERM ETS
domain led to the production of a truncated protein which also binds to DNA.
Though differential expression is observed in primary tumors and normal
lymphocytes do not express ERM, this gene is almost ubiquitously expressed in
human normal tissues. ERM mRNA is highly expressed in brain as well as in
placenta and, to a lesser degree, in lung, pancreas, and heart. Moreover, almost 
all human cell lines tested express it at varying levels. In mouse tissues, we
showed that PEA3 and ER81 mRNAs display restricted expression, whereas ERM is
almost ubiquitously expressed as observed for human tissues. Altogether these
results indicate that ERM is clearly a new ets family member and not the human
equivalent of PEA3 or ER81.

PMID: 8152800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


