
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 8. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7993. [Epub ahead of print]

EVI1 promotes cell proliferation in HBx-induced hepatocarcinogenesis as a
critical transcription factor regulating lncRNAs.

Huang JF(1), Wang Y(1), Liu F(1), Liu Y(1), Zhao CX(1), Guo YJ(1), Sun SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Medical Genetics, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China.

The involvement of the hepatitis B virus X (HBx) protein in epigenetic
modifications during hepatocarcinogenesis has been previously characterized. Long
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), a kind of epigenetic regulator molecules, have also
been shown to play crucial roles in HBx-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
In this study, we analyzed the key transcription factors of aberrantly expressed 
lncRNAs in the livers of HBx transgenic mice by bioinformatics prediction, and
found that ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) was a potential main
transcription regulator. Further investigation showed that EVI1 was positively
correlated to HBx expression and was frequently up-regulated in HBV-related HCC
tissues. The forced expression of HBx in liver cell lines resulted in a
significant increase of the expression of EVI1. Furthermore, suppression of EVI1 
expression decreased the proliferation of HCC cells overexpressing HBx in vitro
and in vivo.CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that EVI1 is frequently up-regulated
and regulates a cluster of lncRNAs in HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
These findings highlight a novel mechanism for HBx-induced hepatocarcinogenesis
through transcription factor EVI1 and its target lncRNAs, and provide a potential
new approach to predict the functions of lncRNAs.

PMID: 26967394  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Jan 13;9:315-20. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S95831. eCollection
2016.

Expression of MECOM is associated with unfavorable prognosis in glioblastoma
multiforme.

Hou A(1), Zhao L(1), Zhao F(2), Wang W(3), Niu J(1), Li B(1), Zhou Z(1), Zhu
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Yidu Central Hospital of Weifang City. (2)Department 
of Orthopedics, People's Hospital of Qingzhou City. (3)Department of
Psychiatrics, People's Third Hospital of Weifang City, Weifang. (4)Department of 
Medical Oncology, Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute, Shandong Academy of
Medical Sciences.

BACKGROUND: MDS1 and EVI1 complex locus protein EVI1 (MECOM) is an oncogenic
transcription factor in several kinds of cancers. However, the clinical
significance of MECOM in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) has not been well
elucidated.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Our study enrolled 86 resected samples of GBM in three
medical centers. We detected the expression of MECOM in all the 86 samples by
immunohistochemistry and compared the difference of MECOM mRNA between tumor
tissues and adjacent tissues with real-time polymerase chain reaction. With
immunoblotting, we detected the MECOM expression in different GBM cell lines.
Moreover, we analyzed the correlation between MECOM expression and
clinicopathologic factors with chi-square test, and evaluated the prognostic
value of MECOM with univariate and multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: In GBM tissue, the percentage of MECOM high expression is 41.9% (36/86).
The mRNA of MECOM in tumor tissues is remarkably higher than that in adjacent
tissues, indicating the oncogenic role of MECOM in GBM. MECOM exists in all the
detected cell lines with different abundance. Moreover, MECOM is correlated with 
poorer overall survival rate (P=0.033) and can be identified as an independent
prognostic factor in GBM (P=0.042).
CONCLUSION: MECOM could be considered as an independent prognostic factor in GBM,
predicting it as a potential and promising molecular drug target.

PMCID: PMC4716764
PMID: 26834490  [PubMed]


3. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 12;6:19204. doi: 10.1038/srep19204.

miR-133 regulates Evi1 expression in AML cells as a potential therapeutic target.

Yamamoto H(1), Lu J(2), Oba S(3), Kawamata T(4), Yoshimi A(5), Kurosaki N(1),
Yokoyama K(4), Matsushita H(6), Kurokawa M(5), Tojo A(4), Ando K(6), Morishita
K(7), Katagiri K(8), Kotani A(1,)(6,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematological Malignancy, Institute of Medical Science, Tokai
University, 143 Shimokasuya, Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193 Japan. (2)Department of
Intractable Diseases, Institute of National Center for Global Health and
Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655 Japan. (3)Department of
Nephrology and Endocrinology, the University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655 Japan. (4)Department of Hematology/ Oncology, Institute
of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo
108-8639 Japan. (5)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of
Medicine, the University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639 
Japan. (6)Department of Hematology / Oncology, School of Medicine, Tokai
University, 143 Shimokasuya, Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193 Japan. (7)Department of
Medical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 5200 Kiyotakecho
Kihara, Miyazaki-city, Miyazaki 889-1692 Japan. (8)Department of Biosciences,
School of Science, Kitasato University 1-15-1, Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara,
Knagawa 252-0373 Japan. (9)Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) Science
Plaza 5-3, Yonbancho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-8666 Japan.

The Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) is a zinc finger transcription
factor, which is located on chromosome 3q26, over-expression in some acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Elevated Evi1
expression in AML is associated with unfavorable prognosis. Therefore, Evi1 is
one of the strong candidate in molecular target therapy for the leukemia.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs, vital to many cell functions that
negatively regulate gene expression by translation or inducing sequence-specific 
degradation of target mRNAs. As a novel biologics, miRNAs is a promising
therapeutic target due to its low toxicity and low cost. We screened miRNAs which
down-regulate Evi1. miR-133 was identified to directly bind to Evi1 to regulate
it. miR-133 increases drug sensitivity specifically in Evi1 expressing leukemic
cells, but not in Evi1-non-expressing cells The results suggest that miR-133 can 
be promising therapeutic target for the Evi1 dysregulated poor prognostic
leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4709720
PMID: 26754824  [PubMed - in process]


4. Br J Haematol. 2016 Mar;172(6):870-8. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13898. Epub 2016 Jan 5.

Review: Aberrant EVI1 expression in acute myeloid leukaemia.

Hinai AA(1), Valk PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Deregulated expression of the ecotropic virus integration site 1 (EVI1) gene is
the molecular hallmark of therapy-resistant myeloid malignancies bearing
chromosomal inv(3)(q21q26·2) or t(3;3)(q21;q26·2) [hereafter referred to as
inv(3)/t(3;3)] abnormalities. EVI1 is a haematopoietic stemness and transcription
factor with chromatin remodelling activity. Interestingly, the EVI1 gene also
shows overexpression in 6-11% of adult acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cases that
do not carry any 3q aberrations. Deregulated expression of EVI1 is strongly
associated with monosomy 7 and 11q23 abnormalities, which are known to be
associated with poor response to treatment. However, EVI1 overexpression has been
revealed as an important independent adverse prognostic marker in adult AML and
defines distinct risk categories in 11q23-rearranged AML. Recently, important
progress has been made in the delineation of the mechanism by which EVI1 becomes 
deregulated in inv(3)/t(3;3) as well as the cooperating mutations in this
specific subset of AML with dismal prognosis.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26729571  [PubMed - in process]


5. Nat Commun. 2015 Dec 1;6:10045. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10045.

MicroRNA miR124 is required for the expression of homeostatic synaptic
plasticity.

Hou Q(1), Ruan H(2), Gilbert J(1), Wang G(1), Ma Q(2), Yao WD(2), Man HY(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Mall, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA. (2)Division of Neuroscience, New England Primate
Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts 01772, USA. 
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston University, 5
Cummington Mall, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Homeostatic synaptic plasticity is a compensatory response to alterations in
neuronal activity. Chronic deprivation of neuronal activity results in an
increase in synaptic AMPA receptors (AMPARs) and postsynaptic currents. The
biogenesis of GluA2-lacking, calcium-permeable AMPARs (CP-AMPARs) plays a crucial
role in the homeostatic response; however, the mechanisms leading to CP-AMPAR
formation remain unclear. Here we show that the microRNA, miR124, is required for
the generation of CP-AMPARs and homeostatic plasticity. miR124 suppresses GluA2
expression via targeting its 3'-UTR, leading to the formation of CP-AMPARs.
Blockade of miR124 function abolishes the homeostatic response, whereas miR124
overexpression leads to earlier induction of homeostatic plasticity. miR124
transcription is controlled by an inhibitory transcription factor EVI1, acting by
association with the deacetylase HDAC1. Our data support a cellular cascade in
which inactivity relieves EVI1/HDAC-mediated inhibition of miR124 gene
transcription, resulting in enhanced miR124 expression, formation of CP-AMPARs
and subsequent induction of homeostatic synaptic plasticity.

PMCID: PMC4686673
PMID: 26620774  [PubMed - in process]


6. Dis Model Mech. 2016 Jan 1;9(1):69-79. doi: 10.1242/dmm.021659. Epub 2015 Nov 26.

A new model for non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae middle ear infection in the
Junbo mutant mouse.

Hood D(1), Moxon R(2), Purnell T(1), Richter C(1), Williams D(1), Azar A(3),
Crompton M(1), Wells S(4), Fray M(4), Brown SD(1), Cheeseman MT(5).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC Harwell, Didcot, Oxford, OX11 0RD, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford Medical Sciences Division,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK. (3)Developmental Biology Division, 
The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, Easter Bush
Campus, University of Edinburgh, EH25 9RG, UK. (4)Mary Lyon Centre, MRC Harwell, 
Harwell, Didcot, Oxford, OX11 0RD, UK. (5)MRC Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC
Harwell, Didcot, Oxford, OX11 0RD, UK Developmental Biology Division, The Roslin 
Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, Easter Bush Campus,
University of Edinburgh, EH25 9RG, UK Mary Lyon Centre, MRC Harwell, Harwell,
Didcot, Oxford, OX11 0RD, UK michael.cheeseman@roslin.ed.ac.uk.

Acute otitis media, inflammation of the middle ear, is the most common bacterial 
infection in children and, as a consequence, is the most common reason for
antimicrobial prescription to this age group. There is currently no effective
vaccine for the principal pathogen involved, non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae 
(NTHi). The most frequently used and widely accepted experimental animal model of
middle ear infection is in chinchillas, but mice and gerbils have also been used.
We have established a robust model of middle ear infection by NTHi in the Junbo
mouse, a mutant mouse line that spontaneously develops chronic middle ear
inflammation in specific pathogen-free conditions. The heterozygote Junbo mouse
(Jbo/+) bears a mutation in a gene (Evi1, also known as Mecom) that plays a role 
in host innate immune regulation; pre-existing middle ear inflammation promotes
NTHi middle ear infection. A single intranasal inoculation with NTHi produces
high rates (up to 90%) of middle ear infection and bacterial titres
(10(4)-10(5) colony-forming units/µl) in bulla fluids. Bacteria are cleared from 
the majority of middle ears between day 21 and 35 post-inoculation but remain in 
approximately 20% of middle ears at least up to day 56 post-infection. The
expression of Toll-like receptor-dependent response cytokine genes is elevated in
the middle ear of the Jbo/+ mouse following NTHi infection. The translational
potential of the Junbo model for studying antimicrobial intervention regimens was
shown using a 3 day course of azithromycin to clear NTHi infection, and its
potential use in vaccine development studies was shown by demonstrating
protection in mice immunized with killed homologous, but not heterologous, NTHi
bacteria.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728332
PMID: 26611891  [PubMed - in process]


7. Sci Adv. 2015 Sep 4;1(8):e1500503. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1500503. eCollection 2015.

Cis-regulatory mechanisms governing stem and progenitor cell transitions.

Johnson KD(1), Kong G(2), Gao X(1), Chang YI(2), Hewitt KJ(1), Sanalkumar R(1),
Prathibha R(1), Ranheim EA(3), Dewey CN(4), Zhang J(2), Bresnick EH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Carbone Cancer Center, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University
of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA. ;
University of Wisconsin-Madison Blood Research Program, Madison, WI 53705, USA.
(2)University of Wisconsin-Madison Blood Research Program, Madison, WI 53705,
USA. ; McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, 1111 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 
53705, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA. (4)Department of
Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine
and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Cis-element encyclopedias provide information on phenotypic diversity and disease
mechanisms. Although cis-element polymorphisms and mutations are instructive,
deciphering function remains challenging. Mutation of an intronic GATA motif
(+9.5) in GATA2, encoding a master regulator of hematopoiesis, underlies an
immunodeficiency associated with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Whereas an inversion relocalizes another GATA2 cis-element (-77) 
to the proto-oncogene EVI1, inducing EVI1 expression and AML, whether this
reflects ectopic or physiological activity is unknown. We describe a mouse strain
that decouples -77 function from proto-oncogene deregulation. The -77(-/-) mice
exhibited a novel phenotypic constellation including late embryonic lethality and
anemia. The -77 established a vital sector of the myeloid progenitor
transcriptome, conferring multipotentiality. Unlike the +9.5(-/-) embryos,
hematopoietic stem cell genesis was unaffected in -77(-/-) embryos. These results
illustrate a paradigm in which cis-elements in a locus differentially control
stem and progenitor cell transitions, and therefore the individual cis-element
alterations cause unique and overlapping disease phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4643771
PMID: 26601269  [PubMed]


8. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2015 Fall;45(5):598-601.

Effect of Decitabine Combined with Unrelated Cord Blood Transplantation in an
Adult Patient with -7/EVI1+ Acute Myeloid Leukemia: a Case Report and Literature 
Review.

Jiang YZ(1), Su GP(1), Dai Y(1), He HS(1), Huang LQ(1), Sun ZM(2), Huang DP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, the Affiliated Yijishan Hospital of Wannan Medical
College, Wuhu, China. (2)Department of Hematology, Anhui Provincial Hospital,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. (3)Department of Hematology, the
Affiliated Yijishan Hospital of Wannan Medical College, Wuhu, China
hdp0513@163.com.

Patients with relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia (rAML) have a poor
prognosis if they do not undergo hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). 
We describe a case herein of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with monosomy 7 and
EVI1(+)(-7/EVI1(+)) in a patient who failed to achieve a complete remission (CR) 
after two cycles of standard induction chemotherapy. He subsequently received
decitabine (DAC) as "bridge therapy" and directly underwent unrelated cord blood 
transplantation (UCBT) due to the absence of an available sibling donor. Although
DAC treatment did not induce CR, it did produce hematologic improvement and
control disease progression with acceptable side effects, thus effectively
bridging the time of donor search. Following UCBT, the marrow showed complete
hematologic and cytogenetic remission. At present, 18 months after the
transplantation, the patient's general condition is still good.

© 2015 by the Association of Clinical Scientists, Inc.

PMID: 26586716  [PubMed - in process]


9. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Dec 3;97(6):848-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.10.010. Epub
2015 Nov 12.

Mutations in MECOM, Encoding Oncoprotein EVI1, Cause Radioulnar Synostosis with
Amegakaryocytic Thrombocytopenia.

Niihori T(1), Ouchi-Uchiyama M(2), Sasahara Y(3), Kaneko T(4), Hashii Y(5), Irie 
M(2), Sato A(6), Saito-Nanjo Y(2), Funayama R(7), Nagashima T(7), Inoue S(8),
Nakayama K(7), Ozono K(5), Kure S(3), Matsubara Y(9), Imaizumi M(6), Aoki Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai
980-8574, Japan. Electronic address: tniihori@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (2)Department of 
Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan;
Department of Hematology and Oncology, Miyagi Children's Hospital, Sendai
989-3126, Japan. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan. (4)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Tokyo
Metropolitan Children's Medical Center, Fuchu 183-8561, Japan. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita 565-0871, Japan. 
(6)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Miyagi Children's Hospital, Sendai
989-3126, Japan. (7)Division of Cell Proliferation, United Centers for Advanced
Research and Translational Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (8)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku
University School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan. (9)Department of Medical
Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan; National 
Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

Radioulnar synostosis with amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (RUSAT) is an
inherited bone marrow failure syndrome, characterized by thrombocytopenia and
congenital fusion of the radius and ulna. A heterozygous HOXA11 mutation has been
identified in two unrelated families as a cause of RUSAT. However, HOXA11
mutations are absent in a number of individuals with RUSAT, which suggests that
other genetic loci contribute to RUSAT. In the current study, we performed whole 
exome sequencing in an individual with RUSAT and her healthy parents and
identified a de novo missense mutation in MECOM, encoding EVI1, in the individual
with RUSAT. Subsequent analysis of MECOM in two other individuals with RUSAT
revealed two additional missense mutations. These three mutations were clustered 
within the 8(th) zinc finger motif of the C-terminal zinc finger domain of EVI1. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and qPCR assays of the regions harboring the
ETS-like motif that is known as an EVI1 binding site showed a reduction in
immunoprecipitated DNA for two EVI1 mutants compared with wild-type EVI1.
Furthermore, reporter assays showed that MECOM mutations led to alterations in
both AP-1- and TGF-ß-mediated transcriptional responses. These functional assays 
suggest that transcriptional dysregulation by mutant EVI1 could be associated
with the development of RUSAT. We report missense mutations in MECOM resulting in
a Mendelian disorder that provide compelling evidence for the critical role of
EVI1 in normal hematopoiesis and in the development of forelimbs and fingers in
humans.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4678429 [Available on 2016-06-03]
PMID: 26581901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Feb;170(2):504-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37451. Epub 2015 Nov
10.

Congenital thrombocytopenia in a neonate with an interstitial microdeletion of
3q26.2q26.31.

Bouman A(1), Knegt L(1), Gröschel S(2,)(3), Erpelinck C(2), Sanders M(2), Delwel 
R(2), Kuijpers T(4), Cobben JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Translational Oncology, National
Center for Tumor Diseases and German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Interstitial deletions encompassing the 3q26.2 region are rare. Only one
case-report was published this far describing a patient with an interstitial
deletion of 3q26.2 (involving the MDS1-EVI1 complex (MECOM)) and congenital
thrombocytopenia. In this report we describe a case of a neonate with congenital 
thrombocytopenia and a constitutional 4.52<U+2009>Mb deletion of 3q26.2q26.31 including 
TERC and the first 2 exons of MECOM, involving MDS1 but not EVI1. The deletion
was demonstrated by array-CGH on lymphocytes. Our report confirms that congenital
thrombocytopenia can be due to a constitutional deletion of 3q26.2 involving
MECOM. We suggest that in case of unexplained neonatal thrombocytopenia, with
even just slight facial dysmorphism, DNA microarray on peripheral blood should be
considered early in the diagnostic work-up. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26554871  [PubMed - in process]


11. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Dec;36(6):1615-22. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2385. Epub 2015 Oct
21.

Suppression of Evi1 promotes the osteogenic differentiation and inhibits the
adipogenic differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells in
vitro.

An Q(1), Wu D(2), Ma Y(3), Zhou B(1), Liu Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030001, P.R. China. (2)Department
of Orthopaedics, Shanxi Dayi Hospital, Shanxi Academy of Medical Sciences,
Taiyuan, Shanxi 030032, P.R. China. (3)Shanxi Provincial People's Hospital,
Taiyuan, Shanxi 030012, P.R. China.

Osteoporosis (OP) is considered a complex disease with a strong genetic impact,
mainly affecting post-menopausal women and is also a common cause of fracture.
Elucidating the molecular mechanisms that regulate the osteogenic differentiation
of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) is crucial to developing
treatment strategies to combat OP. In the present study, we found that ectopic
viral integration site-1 (Evi1) was highly expressed during the process of
adipogenesis of rat BMSCs. Notably, Evi1 levels markedly increased on day 3 of
adipogenic differentiation following the addition of adipogenic induction
supplements. In addition, we interfered with the expression of the Evi1 gene in
the adipogenesis of BMSCs by supplementing adenoviral plasmids and measured the
expression levels of bone sialoprotein (BSP), osteocalcin (OCN), osteopontin
(OPN), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>2 (PPAR<U+03B3>2) and lipoprotein
lipase (LPL) by RT-qPCR and western blot analysis. The mRNA and protein levels of
osteogenic and adipogenic markers in the BMSCs were up- and downregulated,
respectively following the silencing of siEvi1. Our experimental results
substantiate that the suppression of Evi1 in BMSCs by RNA interference inhibits
adipogenic differentiation, while it promotes osteogenic differentiation. The
results from our study demonstrated that the Evi1 gene may be targeted as a
therapeutic strategy for promoting bone formation.

PMID: 26497332  [PubMed - in process]


12. Leuk Res. 2015 Dec;39(12):1443-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.09.021. Epub 2015
Oct 9.

Quantification of EVI1 transcript levels in acute myeloid leukemia by RT-qPCR
analysis: A study by the ALFA Group.

Smol T(1), Nibourel O(2), Marceau-Renaut A(2), Celli-Lebras K(3), Berthon C(4),
Quesnel B(4), Boissel N(5), Terré C(6), Thomas X(7), Castaigne S(8), Dombret
H(5), Preudhomme C(2), Renneville A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Laboratory, Biology and Pathology Center, CHRU of Lille, France;
University of Lille Nord de France, Lille, France. (2)Hematology Laboratory,
Biology and Pathology Center, CHRU of Lille, France; University of Lille Nord de 
France, Lille, France; UMR-S 1172, Team 3, Cancer Research Institute of Lille,
Lille, France. (3)ALFA coordination, Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris, France.
(4)University of Lille Nord de France, Lille, France; UMR-S 1172, Team 3, Cancer 
Research Institute of Lille, Lille, France; Hematology Department, CHRU of Lille,
Lille, France. (5)Hematology Department, Saint-Louis Hospital, APHP, Paris,
France. (6)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Versailles Hospital, Le Chesnay, France.
(7)Hematology Department, Edouard Herriot Hospital, Lyon, France. (8)Hematology
Department, Versailles Hospital, Le Chesnay, France. (9)Hematology Laboratory,
Biology and Pathology Center, CHRU of Lille, France; University of Lille Nord de 
France, Lille, France; UMR-S 1172, Team 3, Cancer Research Institute of Lille,
Lille, France. Electronic address: aline.renneville@chru-lille.fr.

EVI1 overexpression confers poor prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Quantification of EVI1 expression has been mainly assessed by real-time
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) based on relative quantification of EVI1-1D splice
variant. In this study, we developed a RT-qPCR assay to perform quantification of
EVI1 expression covering the different splice variants. A sequence localized in
EVI1 exons 14 and 15 was cloned into plasmids that were used to establish RT-qPCR
standard curves. Threshold values to define EVI1 overexpression were determined
using 17 bone marrow (BM) and 31 peripheral blood (PB) control samples and were
set at 1% in BM and 0.5% in PB. Samples from 64 AML patients overexpressing EVI1 
included in the ALFA-0701 or -0702 trials were collected at diagnosis and during 
follow-up (n=152). Median EVI1 expression at AML diagnosis was 23.3% in BM and
3.6% in PB. EVI1 expression levels significantly decreased between diagnostic and
post-induction samples, with an average variation from 21.6% to 3.56% in BM and
from 4.0% to 0.22% in PB, but did not exceed 1 log10 reduction. Our study
demonstrates that the magnitude of reduction in EVI1 expression levels between
AML diagnosis and follow-up is not sufficient to allow sensitive detection of
minimal residual disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26467814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Lab Hematol. 2016 Feb;38(1):64-71. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12435. Epub 2015 Sep
29.

NUP98-HOXA9 bearing therapy-related myeloid neoplasm involves myeloid-committed
cell and induces HOXA5, EVI1, FLT3, and MEIS1 expression.

Burillo-Sanz S(1), Morales-Camacho RM(2), Caballero-Velázquez T(2), Vargas MT(2),
García-Lozano JR(1), Falantes JF(2), Prats-Martín C(2), Bernal R(2), Pérez-Simón 
JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla,
Spain. (2)Department of Hematology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla
(IBIS)/Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla,
Sevilla, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Chromosomal rearrangements involving NUP98 gene have been
associated with human leukemias such as de novo AML, therapy-related AML (t-AML),
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Genetic
fusion NUP98-HOXA9, caused by t(7;11)(p15;p15), is a recurrent cytogenetic
alteration in de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) usually found in young Asian
patients and its description in therapy-related myeloid neoplasms (t-MN) is rare.
Only one Asian case with molecular demonstration of the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion has
been reported in therapy-related leukemia. NUP98-HOXA9 leukemogenic mechanism is 
derived from the transcription factor activity of the chimeric protein, which
enhances the expression of genes related to cellular differentiation arrest and
proliferation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied a Caucasian woman with a therapy-related acute
myeloid leukemia after Ewing's sarcoma. Molecular demonstration of the genetic
fusion NUP98-HOXA9 was performed by RT-PCR, and gene expression was analyzed by
real-time PCR, including four AML patients with MLL rearrangements for
comparative analysis. Cytologic and flow cytometric analysis was also carried
out.
RESULTS: After cytologic and flow cytometric analysis diagnostics was
therapy-related myeloid neoplasm (t-MN). The major component of blasts in the
acute leukemia was with neutrophilic differentiation, but 13% erythroid lineage
blasts were also found. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis revealed t(7;11)(p15;p15)
and NUP98-HOXA9 fusion gene was demonstrated. Gene expression analysis showed
upregulation of EVI1 and MEIS1 in the index patient, both of them previously
related to a worst outcome.
CONCLUSION: In this work, we include a detailed molecular, clinical, cytological,
and cytometric study of the second t-AML bearing NUP98-HOXA9 genetic fusion.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26418229  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Mol Cytogenet. 2015 Aug 19;8:68. doi: 10.1186/s13039-015-0171-2. eCollection
2015.

Double inv(3)(q21q26.2) in acute myeloid leukemia is resulted from an acquired
copy neutral loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 3q and associated with disease 
progression.

Gu J(1), Patel KP(2), Bai B(2), Liu CH(3), Tang G(2), Kantarjian HM(4), Tang
Z(2), Abraham R(2), Luthra R(2), Medeiros LJ(2), Lin P(2), Lu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetic Technology Program, School of Health Professions, The University
of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd. Unit 0002, Houston, TX
77030 USA. (2)The Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd. Unit 0149, Houston, TX 77030 USA.
(3)Cytogenetic Technology Program, School of Health Professions, The University
of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd. Unit 0002, Houston, TX
77030 USA ; The Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd. Unit 0149, Houston, TX 77030 USA.
(4)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Blvd. Unit 0428, Houston, TX 77030 USA.

BACKGROUND: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with inv(3)(q21q26.2)/t(3;3)(q21;q26.2) 
is a distinct clinicopathologic entity with a poor prognosis. However, double
inv(3)(q21q26.2) is extremely rare in AML. We report here 3 cases analyzed by
oligonucleotide microarray comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). Clinicopathologic, cytogenetic and molecular
findings were correlated with clinical outcome to better understand the entity.
RESULTS: The study group included one man and two women at 56-74 years of age.
The AML arose from myelodysplastic syndrome in one patient and from chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia in another patient. Monosomy 7 was found as additional
cytogenetic finding in one patient. One patient had a single inv(3) in the
initial clone and acquired double inv(3) as part of clonal evolution. EVI1
(MECOM) rearrangement was confirmed using metaphase/interphase fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH). Microarray (aCGH<U+2009>+<U+2009>SNP) data analysis revealed that
the double inv(3) was a result of acquiring copy neutral loss of heterozygosity
of chromosome 3q: arr[hg19] 3q13.21q29(10,344,387-197,802,470)x2 hmz,
spanning<U+2009>~<U+2009>94.3 Mb in size. Mutational profiling showed a PTPN11 mutation at a
low level (~10 %) in one patient and wild type FLT3 and RAS in all patients. No
patients achieved cytogenetic remission and all died with an overall survival
(OS) of 23, 12 and 5 months, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Double inv(3) is a result of acquired copy neutral loss of
heterozygosity, a somatic repair event occurring as a part of mitotic
recombination of the partial chromosome 3q. The double inv(3) in AML patients is 
highly associated with a rapid disease progression.

PMCID: PMC4545786
PMID: 26300976  [PubMed]


15. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 3. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.286. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional features of EVI1 and EVI1<U+0394>324 isoforms of MECOM gene in genome-wide
transcription regulation and oncogenicity.

Sayadi A(1), Jeyakani J(2), Seet SH(1), Wei CL(2), Bourque G(2), Bard FA(1),
Jenkins NA(1), Copeland NG(1), Bard-Chapeau EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Genome
Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

The MDS1 and ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) complex locus (MECOM) gene
encodes several transcription factor variants including MDS1-EVI1, EVI1 and
EVI1<U+0394>324. Although MDS1-EVI1 has been associated with tumor-suppressing activity,
EVI1 is a known oncogene in various cancers, whose expression is associated with 
poor patient survival. Although EVI1<U+0394>324 is co-transcribed with EVI1, its
activity in cancer cells is not fully understood. Previous reports described that
unlike EVI1, EVI1<U+0394>324 protein cannot transform fibroblasts because of its
disrupted N-terminal zinc finger (ZNF) domain. To better understand EVI1<U+0394>324
biology and function, we obtained genome-wide binding occupancies and expression 
data in ovarian cancer cells. We characterized its DNA-binding sites, binding
motif and target genes. Comparative analyses with previous study show that EVI1
and EVI1<U+0394>324 share similar transcriptional activities linked to their common
C-terminus ZNF domain. They bind to an E-twenty-six family (ETS)-like motif,
target to a large extent the same genes and cooperate with AP1 transcription
factor. EVI1<U+0394>324-occupied genes were 70.7% similar to EVI1-bound genes. More
strikingly, EVI1 and EVI1<U+0394>324 differentially expressed genes were 99.87%
identical, indicating comparable transcriptional regulatory functions.
Consistently with gene ontologies linked to these target genes, EVI1<U+0394>324
expression in HeLa cells could enhance anchorage-independent growth, such as
EVI1, showing that EVI1<U+0394>324 expression also lead to pro-oncogenic effects. The
main specific feature of EVI1 variant is its N-terminus ZNF domain that binds DNA
through GATA-like motif. We found that most GATA-like EVI1 chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing peaks are far from genes and are not involved in
transcriptional regulation. These genomic regions were enriched in simple
sequence repeats and displayed high meiotic recombination rates. Overall, our
genomics analyses uncovered common and specific features of two major MECOM
isoforms. Their influence on transcription and downstream cell proliferation was 
comparable. However, EVI1-specific GATA-like binding sites, from its N-terminus
ZNF domain, associated with high recombination rates, suggesting possible
additional oncogenic potential for EVI1 in modulating genomic stability.Oncogene 
advance online publication, 3 August 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.286.

PMID: 26234679  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Jun 9;7(1):59. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0091-3. eCollection
2015.

Targeted next-generation sequencing reveals high frequency of mutations in
epigenetic regulators across treatment-naïve patient melanomas.

Lee JJ(1), Sholl LM(1), Lindeman NI(1), Granter SR(1), Laga AC(1), Shivdasani
P(1), Chin G(1), Luke JJ(2), Ott PA(2), Hodi FS(2), Mihm MC Jr(2), Lin JY(2),
Werchniak AE(2), Haynes HA(2), Bailey N(2), Liu R(1), Murphy GF(1), Lian CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
221 Longwood Avenue, EBRC Suite 401, Boston, MA 02115 USA. (2)Melanoma Center,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 450 Brookline Ave., Boston,
MA 02215-5450 USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent developments in genomic sequencing have advanced our
understanding of the mutations underlying human malignancy. Melanoma is a
prototype of an aggressive, genetically heterogeneous cancer notorious for its
biologic plasticity and predilection towards developing resistance to targeted
therapies. Evidence is rapidly accumulating that dysregulated epigenetic
mechanisms (DNA methylation/demethylation, histone modification, non-coding RNAs)
may play a central role in the pathogenesis of melanoma. Therefore, we sought to 
characterize the frequency and nature of mutations in epigenetic regulators in
clinical, treatment-naïve, patient melanoma specimens obtained from one academic 
institution.
RESULTS: Targeted next-generation sequencing for 275 known and investigative
cancer genes (of which 41 genes, or 14.9 %, encoded an epigenetic regulator) of
38 treatment-naïve patient melanoma samples revealed that 22.3 % (165 of 740) of 
all non-silent mutations affected an epigenetic regulator. The most frequently
mutated genes were BRAF, MECOM, NRAS, TP53, MLL2, and CDKN2A. Of the 40 most
commonly mutated genes, 12 (30.0 %) encoded epigenetic regulators, including
genes encoding enzymes involved in histone modification (MECOM, MLL2, SETD2),
chromatin remodeling (ARID1B, ARID2), and DNA methylation and demethylation
(TET2, IDH1). Among the 38 patient melanoma samples, 35 (92.1 %) harbored at
least one mutation in an epigenetic regulator. The genes with the highest number 
of total UVB-signature mutations encoded epigenetic regulators, including MLL2
(100 %, 16 of 16) and MECOM (82.6 %, 19 of 23). Moreover, on average, epigenetic 
genes harbored a significantly greater number of UVB-signature mutations per gene
than non-epigenetic genes (3.7 versus 2.4, respectively; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01).
Bioinformatics analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) melanoma mutation
dataset also revealed a frequency of mutations in the 41 epigenetic genes
comparable to that found within our cohort of patient melanoma samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a high prevalence of somatic mutations in genes
encoding epigenetic regulators, including those involved in DNA demethylation,
histone modification, chromatin remodeling, and microRNA processing. Moreover,
UVB-signature mutations were found more commonly among epigenetic genes than in
non-epigenetic genes. Taken together, these findings further implicate epigenetic
mechanisms, particularly those involving the chromatin-remodeling enzyme
MECOM/EVI1 and histone-modifying enzyme MLL2, in the pathobiology of melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4517542
PMID: 26221190  [PubMed]


17. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jun;9(6):2459-2462. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Acute myeloid leukemia with monosomy 7, ectopic virus integration site-1
overexpression and central diabetes insipidus: A case report.

Ma H(1), Yang J(1), Xiang B(1), Jia Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.

Central diabetes insipidus (DI) is a rare complication in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), typically occurring in patients with abnormalities of
chromosomes 3 or 7. The association between AML with monosomy 7 and DI has been
described in a number of studies; however, DI has been rarely reported in cases
of ectopic virus integration site-1 (EVI1)-positive AML with monosomy 7. The
current study reports a case of AML with monosomy 7 and EVI1 overexpression, with
central DI as the initial symptom. The patient was an 18-year-old female who
presented with polyuria and polydipsia. Bone marrow aspiration revealed 83.5%
myeloperoxidase-positive blasts without trilineage myelodysplasia. The karyotype 
was 45,XX,-7, and the patient presented monosomy 7 and EVI1 overexpression
(-7/EVI1 (+)) without 3q aberration. Treatment with induction therapy was
unsuccessful. To the best of our knowledge, this is the second case of DI-AML
with -7/EVI1 (+) and without a 3q aberration. The possible mechanisms associated 
with EVI1, monosomy 7 and DI were investigated.

PMCID: PMC4473358
PMID: 26137090  [PubMed]


18. Future Oncol. 2015;11(11):1675-86. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.64.

3q26/EVI1 rearrangements in myeloid hemopathies: a cytogenetic review.

De Braekeleer M(1,)(2,)(3), Le Bris MJ(3), De Braekeleer E(4), Basinko A(2,)(3), 
Morel F(1,)(2,)(3), Douet-Guilbert N(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1Laboratoire d'Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine
et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Brest, Brest, France. (2)2Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1078, Brest, France. 
(3)3Service de Cytogénétique et Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Morvan, CHRU
Brest, Brest, France. (4)5Haematological Cancer Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Cambridge, UK.

The EVI1 gene, located in chromosomal band 3q26, is a transcription factor that
has stem cell-specific expression pattern and is essential for the regulation of 
self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells. It is now recognized as one of the
dominant oncogenes associated with myeloid leukemia. EVI1 overexpression is
associated with minimal to no response to chemotherapy and poor clinical outcome.
Several chromosomal rearrangements involving band 3q26 are known to induce EVI1
overexpression. They are mainly found in acute myeloid leukemia and blastic phase
of Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia, more rarely in
myelodysplastic syndromes. They include inv(3)(q21q26), t(3;3)(q21;q26),
t(3;21)(q26;q22), t(3;12)(q26;p13) and t(2;3)(p15-23;q26). However, many other
chromosomal rearrangements involving 3q26/EVI1 have been identified. The precise 
molecular event has not been elucidated in the majority of these chromosomal
abnormalities and most gene partners remain unknown.

PMID: 26043219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(11):1759. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1037613.

Corrigendum.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(18):2931-43.

Article title: The oncogene EVI1 enhances transcriptional and biological
responses of human myeloid cells to all-trans retinoic acid. Authors: Birgit
Steinmetz, Hubert Hackl, Eva Slabakova, Ilse Schwarzinger, Monika Smejova,
Andreas Spittler, Itziar Arbesu, Medhat Shehata, Karel Soucek, and Rotraud
Wieser. Journal: Cell Cycle. Bibliometrics: Volume 13, Issue 18, Pages 293143.
DOI: 10.4161/15384101.2014.946869. The following information was missing from the
Methods section in print and online: Microarray data described in this article
were deposited in the gene expression omnibus, accession numbers GSE66837 and
GSE66854. The authors apologize for any inconvenience caused.

PMCID: PMC4614106
PMID: 26036413  [PubMed]


20. Cancer Genet. 2015 Jun;208(6):333-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.03.013. Epub 
2015 Apr 9.

Retrospective evaluation of the clinical and laboratory data from 300 patients of
various hematological malignancies with chromosome 3 abnormalities.

Liu D(1), Zhang Y(2), Chen S(3), Pan J(3), He X(3), Liang J(3), Chen Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, 
First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, P.R. China. Electronic
address: liudd_2006@126.com. (2)Jinan Military General Hospital, Jinan, P.R.
China. (3)Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Jiangsu Institute of
Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, P.R. China.

This retrospective study was designed to evaluate the clinical and laboratory
behaviors of chromosome 3 abnormalities by analyzing the morphological,
cytogenetic, and follow-up data from 300 patients of various hematological
malignancies with chromosome 3 abnormalities. From the results, trisomy 3,
translocation (3q), and del(3) were the abnormal types most frequently observed
(>10%) among the chromosome 3 abnormalities. In hematological malignancies,
chromosome 3 abnormalities were most frequently seen in the patients with acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) (24.7%) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) (16%), followed
by those with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) (13.7%) and multiple myeloma (MM) 
(12.7%). In this series, genomic losses were the most frequent genetic
abnormalities in AML, ALL, and hybrid acute leukemia (HAL) patients, whereas
structural rearrangements were frequently seen in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) 
and MDS patients, and genomic gains in MM, lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) patients. Chromosome 3 abnormalities mainly occurred as a
component of a complex abnormality (251/300) rather than a sole one (14/300).
Survival analysis demonstrated a statistical difference between the patients with
trisomy 3, who had a better prognosis, and patients with del(3), who had a worse 
prognosis in this series (P < 0.05). Abnormalities in chromosome 3 may imply an
unfavorable outcome in CML and ALL.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26032184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2016 Feb;20(1):30-8. doi: 10.1007/s10157-015-1128-9. Epub 2015 
May 28.

High glucose promotes TGF-ß1 production by inducing FOS expression in human
peritoneal mesothelial cells.

Kokoroishi K(1), Nakashima A(2,)(3), Doi S(4,)(5), Ueno T(1), Doi T(1), Yokoyama 
Y(1), Honda K(6), Kanawa M(7), Kato Y(6), Kohno N(8), Masaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
ayumu@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Regeneration and Medicine, Medical
Center for Translational and Clinical Research, Hiroshima University Hospital,
1-2-3 Kasumi Minami-Ku, Hiroshima, 734-8553, Japan. ayumu@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
sdoi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Blood Purification, Hiroshima University
Hospital, 1-2-3 Kasumi Minami-Ku, Hiroshima, 734-8553, Japan.
sdoi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (6)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry,
Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University,
Hiroshima, Japan. (7)Natural Science Center for Basic Research and Development,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. (8)Department of Molecular and Internal
Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: High glucose (HG) induces production of transforming growth
factor-beta1 (TGF-ß1), but the mechanism remains elusive. The aim of this study
was to determine the gene(s) involved in HG-induced TGF-ß1 production in human
peritoneal mesothelial cells (HPMCs).
METHODS: Microarray analysis was performed following a 3-h preincubation of HPMCs
in 4 or 0.1 % glucose medium. Transcriptional genes were selected using Gene
Ontology analysis for biological processes, including regulation of transcription
and DNA-dependent. The effects of small interfering RNA (siRNA) treatments on the
up-regulation of TGF-ß1 mRNA were assessed by quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR). Finally, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was
performed to determine which gene(s) contribute to the production of TGF-ß1
protein in the medium.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed that the expression of 51 genes increased
by more than 3-fold. Gene ontology analysis identified 13 genes for further
study. qPCR confirmed mRNA amplification for 9 of the 13 genes. Furthermore,
HG-induced up-regulation of TGF-ß1 mRNA was attenuated by the siRNA of 4 genes:
MDS1 and EVI1 complex locus (MECOM), FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene
homolog B (FOSB), FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (FOS) and
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). ELISA showed that siRNA treatment of
FOS, but not MECOM, FOSB or ATF3, suppressed the increase of TGF-ß1 protein in
the medium.
CONCLUSIONS: FOS is a downstream effector of HG stimulation in HPMCs that
contributes to TGF-ß1 production, suggesting that blocking FOS expression may be 
a therapeutic target for peritoneal fibrosis.

PMID: 26018137  [PubMed - in process]


22. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2015 Apr;30(2):188-97. doi: 10.1016/j.dmpk.2014.12.008.
Epub 2015 Jan 2.

A CAR-responsive enhancer element locating approximately 31 kb upstream in the
5'-flanking region of rat cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A1 gene.

Gamou T(1), Habano W(1), Terashima J(1), Ozawa S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacodynamics and Molecular Genetics, School of Pharmacy,
Iwate Medical University, 2-1-1, Nishitokuta, Yahaba-cho, Shiwa-gun, Iwate
028-3694, Japan. (2)Department of Pharmacodynamics and Molecular Genetics, School
of Pharmacy, Iwate Medical University, 2-1-1, Nishitokuta, Yahaba-cho, Shiwa-gun,
Iwate 028-3694, Japan. Electronic address: sozawa@iwate-med.ac.jp.

Constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) is one of the principal regulators of
hepatic cytochrome P450s (CYPs) 3A (CYP3A). cDNA-mediated expression of a mature 
rat CAR (rCAR) into rat hepatoma cells induced CYP3A1 and CYP2B mRNAs. Aberrant
rCAR failed in these inductions. Three important human CYP3A4 regulatory elements
(REs), proximal ER6 (proER6), xenobiotic responsive enhancer module (XREM) and
constitutive liver enhancer module (CLEM), support constitutive and inducible
expression of CYP3As mediated by CAR and pregnane X receptor (PXR). NHR-scan
software predicted proER6, XREM and CLEM at -255 b, -8 kb and -11.5 kb,
respectively of CYP3A4, but neither XREM nor CLEM was predicted in rat CYP3A. A
luciferase reporter construct carrying a 5'-flanking sequence of CYP3A1 (-31,739 
to -31,585 from its transcription initiation site) revealed important for the
rCAR-dependent transactivation of CYP3A1. This region includes two putative
binding motifs of nuclear receptors (DR4 and DR2), a putative hepatocyte nuclear 
factor-1 binding motif (HNF1), nuclear factor-kappa B binding motif (NF<U+03BA>B),
activator protein 1 binding motif (AP-1), and ecotropic viral integration site 1 
binding motif (Evi1). We hereby conclude DR4 and/or DR2 motifs being primarily
responsible and HNF1 being synergistically functioning elements for the
rCAR-mediated transcription of CYP3A1.

Copyright © 2015 The Japanese Society for the Study of Xenobiotics. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25989892  [PubMed - in process]


23. Curr Gene Ther. 2015;15(4):416-27.

Successful Combination of Sequential Gene Therapy and Rescue Allo-HSCT in Two
Children with X-CGD - Importance of Timing.

Siler U, Paruzynski A, Holtgreve-Grez H, Kuzmenko E, Koehl U, Renner ED, Alhan C,
de Loosdrecht AA, Schwäble J, Pfluger T, Tchinda J, Schmugge M, Jauch A, Naundorf
S, Kühlcke K, Notheis G, Güngor T, Kalle CV, Schmidt M, Grez M, Seger R,
Reichenbach J(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital Zurich, Div. of Immunology, Steinwiesstr. 75,
CH-8032 Zurich. janine.reichenbach@kispi.uzh.ch.

We report on a series of sequential events leading to long-term survival and cure
of pediatric X-linked chronic granulomatous disease (X-CGD) patients after
gamma-retroviral gene therapy (GT) and rescue HSCT. Due to therapyrefractory
life-threatening infections requiring hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT) but absence of HLAidentical donors, we treated 2 boys with X-CGD by GT.
Following GT both children completely resolved invasive Aspergillus nidulans
infections. However, one child developed dual insertional activation of ecotropic
viral integration site 1 (EVI1) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) genes, leading to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with
monosomy 7. Despite resistance to mismatched allo-HSCT with standard
myeloablative conditioning, secondary intensified rescue allo-HSCT resulted in
100 % donor chimerism and disappearance of MDS. The other child did not develop
MDS despite expansion of a clone with a single insertion in the myelodysplasia
syndrome 1 (MDS1) gene and was cured by early standard allo-HSCT. The slowly
developing dominance of clones harboring integrations in MDS1-EVI1 may guide
clinical intervention strategies, i.e. early rescue allo-HSCT, prior to malignant
transformation. GT was essential for both children to survive and to clear
therapy-refractory infections, and future GT with safer lentiviral
self-inactivated (SIN) vectors may offer a therapeutic alternative for X-CGD
patients suffering from life-threatening infections and lacking HLA-identical HSC
donors.

PMID: 25981636  [PubMed - in process]


24. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2015 Apr;56(4):375-83. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.56.375.

[Maintenance of leukemic and normal hematopoietic stem cells in bone marrow
niches by EVI1-regulated GPR56].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito Y(1), Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor and Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Medical Science,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with high ecotropic viral integration site-1 (EVI1) 
expression (EVI1high AML) is classified as a refractory leukemia with a poor
prognosis. We identified G protein-coupled receptor 56 (GPR56) as a novel marker 
for EVI1high AML, which is an orphan adhesion G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR). 
GPR56 was found to be associated with high cell adhesion and anti-apoptotic
activities in EVI1high AML through activation of RhoA signaling. Moreover, in
Gpr56-/- mice, the number of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in bone marrow was
significantly decreased with proportional increases in the spleen and peripheral 
blood, reflecting extramedullary hematopoiesis. The number of Gpr56-/- HSC
progenitor cells in the G0 phase was significantly reduced with impaired adhesion
and the loss of GPR56 function, which diminished the in vivo repopulating ability
of HSCs. In conclusion, GPR56 may represent an important GPCR for the maintenance
of quiescence and cellular adhesion of EVI1high AML and HSCs in the bone marrow
niche. Moreover, given that GPR56 expression in leukemia stem cells is much
higher than that in HSCs, GPR56 is a candidate therapeutic target for leukemia
stem cells in EVI1high AML.

PMID: 25971267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cancer Sci. 2015 Jul;106(7):929-37. doi: 10.1111/cas.12694. Epub 2015 Jun 5.

EVI1, a target gene for amplification at 3q26, antagonizes transforming growth
factor-ß-mediated growth inhibition in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yasui K(1), Konishi C(1), Gen Y(1), Endo M(1), Dohi O(1), Tomie A(1), Kitaichi
T(1), Yamada N(1), Iwai N(1), Nishikawa T(1), Yamaguchi K(1), Moriguchi M(1),
Sumida Y(1), Mitsuyoshi H(1), Tanaka S(2,)(3), Arii S(2,)(4), Itoh Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Hepato-Biliary Pancreatic 
Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Hamamatsu Rosai Hospital, Japan Labour Health and Welfare Organization,
Hamamatsu, Japan.

EVI1 (ecotropic viral integration site 1) is one of the most aggressive oncogenes
associated with myeloid leukemia. We investigated DNA copy number aberrations in 
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines using a high-density
oligonucleotide microarray. We found that a novel amplification at the
chromosomal region 3q26 occurs in the HCC cell line JHH-1, and that MECOM (MDS1
and EVI1 complex locus), which lies within the 3q26 region, was amplified.
Quantitative PCR analysis of the three transcripts transcribed from MECOM
indicated that only EVI1, but not the fusion transcript MDS1-EVI1 or MDS1, was
overexpressed in JHH-1 cells and was significantly upregulated in 22 (61%) of 36 
primary HCC tumors when compared with their non-tumorous counterparts. A copy
number gain of EVI1 was observed in 24 (36%) of 66 primary HCC tumors. High EVI1 
expression was significantly associated with larger tumor size and higher level
of des-<U+03B3>-carboxy prothrombin, a tumor marker for HCC. Knockdown of EVI1 resulted 
in increased induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p15(INK) (4B) by 
transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß and decreased expression of c-Myc, cyclin D1, 
and phosphorylated Rb in TGF-ß-treated cells. Consequently, knockdown of EVI1 led
to reduced DNA synthesis and cell viability. Collectively, our results suggest
that EVI1 is a probable target gene that acts as a driving force for the
amplification at 3q26 in HCC and that the oncoprotein EVI1 antagonizes
TGF-ß-mediated growth inhibition of HCC cells.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4520646
PMID: 25959919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 May 8. doi: 10.1071/RD14511. [Epub ahead of print]

Association of a region of bovine chromosome 1 (BTA1) with age at puberty in
Angus bulls.

Fernández ME, Prando A, Rogberg-Muñoz A, Peral-García P, Baldo A, Giovambattista 
G, Lirón JP.

Age at puberty is an important component of reproductive performance in cattle,
so it is important to identify genes that contribute to the regulation of the
onset of puberty and polymorphisms that explain differences between bulls. In a
previous study, we found putative associations between age at puberty in Angus
bulls and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in Chromosomes 1 and X. In the
present work we aimed to confirm these findings in a larger sample of Angus bulls
(n = 276). Four SNPs located in these regions were genotyped using SEQUENOM
technology and the genotypes obtained were tested for association with age at
puberty. The results showed that SNPs rs135953349 and rs110604205 on BTA1 were
still significantly associated with age of puberty estimated at progressive sperm
motility of 10% (P < 0.05). The association previously found on Chromosome X
could not be confirmed. Analysis of the bovine genome revealed that the
associated region (99.17-99.99 Mb) contained four predicted loci: myelodysplasia 
syndrome 1 (MDS1) and ecotropic virus integration site 1 (EVI1) complex locus
(MECOM), eGF-like and EMI domain-containing 1 pseudogene-like (LOC100337483),
microRNA mir-551b (MIR551B) and mCG140927-like (LOC100139843). The results
obtained could contribute to the understanding of puberty regulation and could be
useful for further identification and annotation of gene function in the context 
of reproduction.

PMID: 25950803  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Leukemia. 2015 Oct;29(10):2003-14. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.114. Epub 2015 May 4.

The regulatory interaction of EVI1 with the TCL1A oncogene impacts cell survival 
and clinical outcome in CLL.

Vasyutina E(1), Boucas JM(1), Bloehdorn J(2), Aszyk C(1), Crispatzu G(1),
Stiefelhagen M(1), Breuer A(1), Mayer P(1), Lengerke C(3), Döhner H(2), Beutner
D(4), Rosenwald A(5), Stilgenbauer S(2), Hallek M(1), Benner A(6), Herling M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology
Cologne-Bonn, and Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Response in
Aging-Associated Diseases, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (2)Department
of Internal Medicine III, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany. (3)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, University of Tübingen Medical Center II, Tübingen,
Germany. (4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University 
of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (5)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, 
Würzburg, Germany. (6)Division of Biostatistics, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Dysregulated T-cell leukemia/lymphoma-1A (TCL1A), a modulator in B-cell receptor 
(BCR) signaling, is causally implicated in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
However, the mechanisms of the perturbed TCL1A regulation are largely unknown. To
characterize TCL1A-upstream networks, we functionally screened for
TCL1A-repressive micro-RNAs (miRs) and their transcriptional regulators. We
identified the novel miR-484 to target TCL1A's 3'-UTR and to be downregulated in 
CLL. In chromatin immunoprecipitations and reporter assays, the oncogenic
transcription factor of myeloid cells, EVI1, bound and activated the miR-484
promoter. Most common in CLL was a pan-EVI1 transcript variant. EVI1 protein
expression revealed distinct normal-tissue and leukemia-associated patterns of
EVI1/TCL1A co-regulation. EVI1 levels were particularly low in TCL1A-high CLL or 
such cellular subsets. Global gene expression profiles from a 337-patient set
linked EVI1 networks to BCR signaling and cell survival via TCL1A, BTK and other 
molecules of relevance in CLL. Enforced EVI1, as did miR-484, repressed TCL1A.
Furthermore, it reduced phospho-kinase levels, impaired cell survival, mitigated 
BCR-induced Ca-flux and diminished the in vitro ibrutinib response. Moreover,
TCL1A and EVI1 showed a strongly interactive hazard prediction in prospectively
treated patients. Overall, we present regressive EVI1 as a novel regulatory
signature in CLL. Through enhanced TCL1A and other EVI1-targeted hallmarks of
CLL, this contributes to an aggressive cellular and clinical phenotype.

PMID: 25936528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Jan;57(1):183-92. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1043547. Epub
2015 Jun 18.

A murine model of acute myeloid leukemia with Evi1 overexpression and autocrine
stimulation by an intracellular form of GM-CSF in DA-3 cells.

Cardona ME(1), Simonson OE(1), Oprea II(1), Moreno PM(1), Silva-Lara MF(2),
Mohamed AJ(1,)(3), Christensson B(4), Gahrton G(5), Dilber MS(5), Smith CI(1),
Arteaga HJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Laboratory Medicine , Clinical Research Center, Karolinska
Institutet , Huddinge , Sweden. (2)b Departament of Basic Science, Medical
School, Universidad Industrial de Santander , Colombia. (3)e Environmental and
Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, Universiti Brunei Darussalam , Negara Brunei
Darussalam , Brunei. (4)c Department of Laboratory Medicine , Division of
Pathology, Karolinska University Hospital , Huddinge , Sweden. (5)d Department of
Medicine , Division of Hematology, Karolinska University Hospital , Huddinge ,
Sweden.

The poor treatment response of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) overexpressing
high-risk oncogenes such as EVI1, demands specific animal models for new
treatment evaluations. Evi1 is a common site of activating integrations in murine
leukemia virus (MLV)-induced AML and in retroviral and lentiviral gene-modified
HCS. Still, a model of overt AML induced by Evi1 has not been generated. Cell
lines from MLV-induced AML are growth factor-dependent and non-transplantable.
Hence, for the leukemia maintenance in the infected animals, a growth factor
source such as chronic immune response has been suggested. We have investigated
whether these leukemias are transplantable if provided with growth factors. We
show that the Evi1(+)DA-3 cells modified to express an intracellular form of
GM-CSF, acquired growth factor independence and transplantability and caused an
overt leukemia in syngeneic hosts, without increasing serum GM-CSF levels. We
propose this as a general approach for modeling different forms of high-risk
human AML using similar cell lines.

PMID: 25907616  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Mar 21;8:28. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0124-6.

EVI1 promotes tumor growth via transcriptional repression of MS4A3.

Heller G(1,)(2), Rommer A(3,)(4), Steinleitner K(5,)(6), Etzler J(7,)(8), Hackl
H(9), Heffeter P(10,)(11), Tomasich E(12,)(13), Filipits M(14,)(15), Steinmetz
B(16,)(17), Topakian T(18,)(19), Klingenbrunner S(20,)(21), Ziegler B(22,)(23),
Spittler A(24), Zöchbauer-Müller S(25,)(26), Berger W(27,)(28), Wieser
R(29,)(30).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel
18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria. gerwin.heller@meduniwien.ac.at. (2)Comprehensive
Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
gerwin.heller@meduniwien.ac.at. (3)Department of Medicine I, Medical University
of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria. apm.rommer@gmail.com.
(4)Comprehensive Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. apm.rommer@gmail.com. (5)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of
Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
katarina.steinleitner@meduniwien.ac.at. (6)Comprehensive Cancer Center of the
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
katarina.steinleitner@meduniwien.ac.at. (7)Department of Medicine I, Medical
University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
julia.etzler@meduniwien.ac.at. (8)Comprehensive Cancer Center of the Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. julia.etzler@meduniwien.ac.at.
(9)Biocenter, Division of Bioinformatics, Medical University of Innsbruck,
Innrain 80, 6020, Innsbruck, Austria. hubert.hackl@i-med.ac.at. (10)Comprehensive
Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
petra.heffeter@meduniwien.ac.at. (11)Department of Medicine I, Institute of
Cancer Research, and Research Platform "Translational Cancer Therapy Research",
Borschkegasse 8A, 1090, Vienna, Austria. petra.heffeter@meduniwien.ac.at.
(12)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel
18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria. erwin.tomasich@meduniwien.ac.at. (13)Comprehensive 
Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
erwin.tomasich@meduniwien.ac.at. (14)Comprehensive Cancer Center of the Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. martin.filipits@meduniwien.ac.at.
(15)Department of Medicine I, Institute of Cancer Research, and Research Platform
"Translational Cancer Therapy Research", Borschkegasse 8A, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
martin.filipits@meduniwien.ac.at. (16)Department of Medicine I, Medical
University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
birgit.steinmetz@meduniwien.ac.at. (17)Comprehensive Cancer Center of the Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. birgit.steinmetz@meduniwien.ac.at.
(18)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel
18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria. thais.topakian@meduniwien.ac.at. (19)Comprehensive 
Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
thais.topakian@meduniwien.ac.at. (20)Department of Medicine I, Medical University
of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria. sim.kling@gmx.at.
(21)Comprehensive Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. sim.kling@gmx.at. (22)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of
Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
barbara.ziegler@meduniwien.ac.at. (23)Comprehensive Cancer Center of the Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. barbara.ziegler@meduniwien.ac.at. (24)Core
Facility Flow Cytometry & Surgical Research Laboratories, Medical University of
Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
andreas.spittler@meduniwien.ac.at. (25)Department of Medicine I, Medical
University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
sabine.zoechbauer-mueller@meduniwien.ac.at. (26)Comprehensive Cancer Center of
the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
sabine.zoechbauer-mueller@meduniwien.ac.at. (27)Comprehensive Cancer Center of
the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
walter.berger@meduniwien.ac.at. (28)Department of Medicine I, Institute of Cancer
Research, and Research Platform "Translational Cancer Therapy Research",
Borschkegasse 8A, 1090, Vienna, Austria. walter.berger@meduniwien.ac.at.
(29)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel
18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria. rotraud.wieser@meduniwien.ac.at. (30)Comprehensive 
Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
rotraud.wieser@meduniwien.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor Ecotropic Virus Integration site 1 (EVI1)
regulates cellular proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, and its
overexpression contributes to an aggressive course of disease in myeloid
leukemias and other malignancies. Notwithstanding, knowledge about the target
genes mediating its biological and pathological functions remains limited. We
therefore aimed to identify and characterize novel EVI1 target genes in human
myeloid cells.
METHODS: U937T_EVI1, a human myeloid cell line expressing EVI1 in a tetracycline 
regulable manner, was subjected to gene expression profiling. qRT-PCR was used to
confirm the regulation of membrane-spanning-4-domains subfamily-A member-3
(MS4A3) by EVI1. Reporter constructs containing various parts of the MS4A3
upstream region were employed in luciferase assays, and binding of EVI1 to the
MS4A3 promoter was investigated by chromatin immunoprecipitation. U937 derivative
cell lines experimentally expressing EVI1 and/or MS4A3 were generated by
retroviral transduction, and tested for their tumorigenicity by subcutaneous
injection into severe combined immunodeficient mice.
RESULTS: Gene expression microarray analysis identified 27 unique genes that were
up-regulated, and 29 unique genes that were down-regulated, in response to EVI1
induction in the human myeloid cell line U937T. The most strongly repressed gene 
was MS4A3, and its down-regulation by EVI1 was confirmed by qRT-PCR in
additional, independent experimental model systems. MS4A3 mRNA levels were also
negatively correlated with those of EVI1 in several published AML data sets.
Reporter gene assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that EVI1 regulated
MS4A3 via direct binding to a promoter proximal region. Experimental
re-expression of MS4A3 in an EVI1 overexpressing cell line counteracted the tumor
promoting effect of EVI1 in a murine xenograft model by increasing the rate of
apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal MS4A3 as a novel direct target of EVI1 in human
myeloid cells, and show that its repression plays a role in EVI1 mediated tumor
aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC4389965
PMID: 25886616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Haematologica. 2015 Mar;100(3):e116-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.124396.

The subtype-specific features of EVI1 and PRDM16 in acute myeloid leukemia.

Matsuo H(1), Goyama S(2), Kamikubo Y(1), Adachi S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan. (2)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College
of Medicine, OH, USA. (3)Department of Human Health Sciences, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan adachiso@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2015 Mar;100(3):e114-5.

PMCID: PMC4349293
PMID: 25740107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Haematologica. 2015 Mar;100(3):e114-5. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.121079.

The closely related rare and severe acute myeloid leukemias carrying EVI1 or
PRDM16 rearrangements share singular biological features.

Eveillard M(1), Delaunay J(2), Richebourg S(3), Lodé L(4), Garand R(4), Wuillème 
S(4), Duhoux F(5), Antoine-Poirel H(5), Godon C(4), Béné MC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Laboratory, University Hospital, Nantes, France
marion.eveillard@chu-nantes.fr. (2)Hematology Clinic, University Hospital,
Nantes, France. (3)Hematology Laboratory, University Hospital, Nantes, France
Cytogenetics, CHU Québec Hôpital Saint Sacrement, Québec, Canada. (4)Hematology
Laboratory, University Hospital, Nantes, France. (5)Hematologic Genetics,
Clinique Universitaire Saint Luc, UCL, Brussels, Belgium.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2015 Mar;100(3):e116-7.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2014 Nov;99(11):e225-7.

PMCID: PMC4349292
PMID: 25740106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Mar;54(3):234-41. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.12.005. Epub
2015 Jan 15.

Activation of non-canonical TGF-ß1 signaling indicates an autoimmune mechanism
for bone marrow fibrosis in primary myelofibrosis.

Ciaffoni F(1), Cassella E(2), Varricchio L(2), Massa M(3), Barosi G(4),
Migliaccio AR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità,
Rome, Italy. (2)Tisch Cancer Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
NY, USA. (3)Biotechnology Research Area, Center for the Study of Myelofibrosis,
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy. (4)Biotechnology Research 
Area, Center for the Study of Myelofibrosis, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo
Foundation, Pavia, Italy; Myeloproliferative Disease Research Consortium, New
York, NY, USA. (5)Tisch Cancer Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY, USA; Myeloproliferative Disease Research Consortium, New York, NY, USA;
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Alma Mater University, Bologna, Italy.
Electronic address: annarita.migliaccio@mssm.edu.

Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is characterized by megakaryocyte hyperplasia,
dysplasia and death with progressive reticulin/collagen fibrosis in marrow and
hematopoiesis in extramedullary sites. The mechanism of fibrosis was investigated
by comparing TGF-ß1 signaling of marrow and spleen of patients with PMF and of
non-diseased individuals. Expression of 39 (23 up-regulated and 16
down-regulated) and 38 (8 up-regulated and 30 down-regulated) TGF-ß1 signaling
genes was altered in the marrow and spleen of PMF patients, respectively.
Abnormalities included genes of TGF-ß1 signaling, cell cycling and abnormal in
chronic myeloid leukemia (EVI1 and p21(CIP)) (both marrow and spleen) and
Hedgehog (marrow only) and p53 (spleen only) signaling. Pathway analyses of these
alterations predict an increased osteoblast differentiation, ineffective
hematopoiesis and fibrosis driven by non-canonical TGF-ß1 signaling in marrow and
increased proliferation and defective DNA repair in spleen. Since activation of
non-canonical TGF-ß1 signaling is associated with fibrosis in autoimmune
diseases, the hypothesis that fibrosis in PMF results from an autoimmune process 
triggered by dead megakaryocytes was tested by determining that PMF patients
expressed plasma levels of mitochondrial DNA and anti-mitochondrial antibodies
greater than normal controls. These data identify autoimmunity as a possible
cause of marrow fibrosis in PMF.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4338409
PMID: 25703685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Environ Res. 2015 Apr;138:74-81. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2015.02.004. Epub 2015 Feb
18.

Infant sex-specific placental cadmium and DNA methylation associations.

Mohanty AF(1), Farin FM(2), Bammler TK(3), MacDonald JW(4), Afsharinejad Z(5),
Burbacher TM(6), Siscovick DS(7), Williams MA(8), Enquobahrie DA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, University of Washington, 1730 Minor Ave,
Seattle, WA 98101, USA; Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address:
april.mohanty@va.gov. (2)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health
Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Washington, 4225 Roosevelt Way
N.E., Suite #100, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. Electronic address:
freddy@u.washington.edu. (3)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health
Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Washington, 4225 Roosevelt Way
N.E., Suite #100, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. Electronic address:
tbammler@u.washington.edu. (4)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health
Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Washington, 4225 Roosevelt Way
N.E., Suite #100, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. Electronic address: jmacdon@uw.edu.
(5)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, School of Public
Health, University of Washington, 4225 Roosevelt Way N.E., Suite #100, Seattle,
WA 98105, USA. Electronic address: zafshari@u.washington.edu. (6)Department of
Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, School of Public Health,
University of Washington, Box: 357234, 1705 N.E. Pacific Street, Seattle, WA
98195, USA. Electronic address: tmb@uw.edu. (7)Cardiovascular Health Research
Unit, University of Washington, 1730 Minor Ave, Seattle, WA 98101, USA;
Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
USA. Electronic address: dsiscovick@nyam.org. (8)Department of Epidemiology,
Harvard School of Public Health, Kresge Building, 9th Floor, 677 Huntington Ave.,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: mawilliams@hsph.harvard.edu.
(9)Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, University of Washington, 1730 Minor Ave,
Seattle, WA 98101, USA; Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Center for Perinatal Studies, Swedish
Medical Center, 1124 Columbia Street, Suite 750, Seattle, WA 98104, USA.
Electronic address: danenq@u.washington.edu.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence suggests that maternal cadmium (Cd) burden and fetal 
growth associations may vary by fetal sex. However, mechanisms contributing to
these differences are unknown.
OBJECTIVES: Among 24 maternal-infant pairs, we investigated infant sex-specific
associations between placental Cd and placental genome-wide DNA methylation.
METHODS: We used ANOVA models to examine sex-stratified associations of placental
Cd (dichotomized into high/low Cd using sex-specific Cd median cutoffs) with DNA 
methylation at each cytosine-phosphate-guanine site or region. Statistical
significance was defined using a false discovery rate cutoff (<0.10).
RESULTS: Medians of placental Cd among females and males were 5 and 2 ng/g,
respectively. Among females, three sites (near ADP-ribosylation factor-like 9
(ARL9), siah E3 ubiquitin protein ligase family member 3 (SIAH3), and heparin
sulfate (glucosamine) 3-O-sulfotransferase 4 (HS3ST4) and one region on
chromosome 7 (including carnitine O-octanoyltransferase (CROT) and TP5S target 1 
(TP53TG1)) were hypomethylated in high Cd placentas. Among males, high placental 
Cd was associated with methylation of three sites, two (hypomethylated) near MDS1
and EVI1 complex locus (MECOM) and one (hypermethylated) near spalt-like
transcription factor 1 (SALL1), and two regions (both hypomethylated, one on
chromosome 3 including MECOM and another on chromosome 8 including rho guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) 10 (ARHGEF10). Differentially methylated sites
were at or close to transcription start sites of genes involved in cell damage
response (SIAH3, HS3ST4, TP53TG1) in females and cell differentiation,
angiogenesis and organ development (MECOM, SALL1) in males.
CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary study supports infant sex-specific placental Cd-DNA 
methylation associations, possibly accounting for previously reported differences
in Cd-fetal growth associations across fetal sex. Larger studies are needed to
replicate and extend these findings. Such investigations may further our
understanding of epigenetic mechanisms underlying maternal Cd burden with
suboptimal fetal growth associations.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4385453
PMID: 25701811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Leukemia. 2015 May;29(5):1076-83. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.5. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

High expression of EVI1 and MEL1 is a compelling poor prognostic marker of
pediatric AML.

Jo A(1), Mitani S(1), Shiba N(2), Hayashi Y(3), Hara Y(2), Takahashi H(4),
Tsukimoto I(5), Tawa A(6), Horibe K(7), Tomizawa D(8), Taga T(9), Adachi S(10),
Yoshida T(1), Ichikawa H(11).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)1] Department of Hematology/Oncology, Gunma Children's Medical Center,
Shibukawa, Japan [2] Department of Pediatrics, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, Maebashi, Japan. (3)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Gunma
Children's Medical Center, Shibukawa, Japan. (4)Graduate School of Horticulture, 
Chiba University, Matsudo, Japan. (5)Department of First Pediatrics, Toho
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Pediatrics,
National Hospital Organization Osaka National Hospital, Osaka, Japan. (7)Clinical
Research Center, National Hospital Organization Nagoya Medical Center, Nagoya,
Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo,
Japan. (9)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu,
Japan. (10)Human Health Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. (11)1] Division
of Genetics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan [2]
Department of Clinical Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Tokyo, Japan [3] Division of Translational Research, Exploratory Oncology
Research and Clinical Trial Center, National Cancer Center, Tokyo, Japan.

EVI1 and MEL1 are homolog genes whose transcriptional activations by chromosomal 
translocations are known in small subsets of leukemia. From gene expression
profiling data of 130 Japanese pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients,
we found that EVI1 and MEL1 were overexpressed in ~30% of patients without
obvious translocations of these gene loci, and that their high expression was
significantly associated with inferior survival. High EVI1 expression was
detected mainly in myelomonocytic-lineage (designated as e-M4/M5 subtype)
leukemia with MLL rearrangements and in megakaryocytic-lineage (designated as
e-M7 subtype) leukemia, and its prognostic association was observed in the
e-M4/M5 subtype but not in the e-M7 subtype. On the other hand, high MEL1
expression was detected in myelocytic-lineage (designated as e-M0/M1/M2 subtype) 
and e-M4/M5 subtype leukemia without MLL rearrangements, and its prognostic
association was independent from the subtypes. Because of their subtype-dependent
and mutually exclusive expression, a combined evaluation of their high expression
enabled a clear distinction of patients with inferior survival (P<0.00001 in
event-free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS)). This association was
confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription PCR analysis of an independent
cohort of 81 patients (P=0.00017 in EFS, P=0.00028 in OS). We propose that the
combined estimation of EVI1 and MEL1 expression will be an effective method to
predict the prognosis of pediatric AML.

PMID: 25567132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Dec;54(12):1815-9. doi: 10.1002/mc.22252. Epub 2014 Dec 9.

Induction of the proapoptotic tumor suppressor gene Cell Adhesion Molecule 1 by
chemotherapeutic agents is repressed in therapy resistant acute myeloid leukemia.

Fisser MC(1,)(2), Rommer A(1,)(2), Steinleitner K(1,)(2), Heller G(1,)(2), Herbst
F(3,)(4), Wiese M(3), Glimm H(3,)(4), Sill H(5), Wieser R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (3)Department of Translational Oncology, National Center for Tumor
Diseases (NCT) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), Heidelberg,
Germany. (5)Division of Hematology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.

Even though a large proportion of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
achieve a complete remission upon initial therapy, the majority of them
eventually relapse with resistant disease. Overexpression of the gene coding for 
the transcription factor Ecotropic Virus Integration site 1 (EVI1) is associated 
with rapid disease recurrence and shortened survival. We therefore sought to
identify EVI1 target genes that may play a role in chemotherapy resistance using 
a previously established in vitro model system for EVI1 positive myeloid
malignancies. Gene expression microarray analyses uncovered the Cell Adhesion
Molecule 1 (CADM1) gene as a candidate whose deregulation by EVI1 may contribute 
to drug refractoriness. CADM1 is an apoptosis inducing tumor suppressor gene that
is inactivated by methylation in a variety of tumor types. In the present study
we provide evidence that it may play a role in chemotherapy induced cell death in
AML: CADM1 was induced by drugs used in the treatment of AML in a human myeloid
cell line and in primary diagnostic AML samples, and its experimental expression 
in a cell line model increased the proportion of apoptotic cells. CADM1
up-regulation was abolished by ectopic expression of EVI1, and EVI1 expression
correlated with increased CADM1 promoter methylation both in a cell line model
and in primary AML cells. Finally, CADM1 induction was repressed in primary
samples from AML patients at relapse. In summary, these data suggest that failure
to up-regulate CADM1 in response to chemotherapeutic drugs may contribute to
therapy resistance in AML.

© 2014 The Authors. Molecular Carcinogenesis published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25491945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Feb;54(2):160-3. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.11.015. Epub 
2014 Nov 26.

Breakpoint heterogeneity in (2;3)(p15-23;q26) translocations involving EVI1 in
myeloid hemopathies.

De Braekeleer M(1), Guéganic N(2), Tous C(3), Le Bris MJ(3), Basinko A(4), Morel 
F(5), Douet-Guilbert N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine et
des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Brest, Brest, France; Institut National
de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1078, Brest, France; Service
de Cytogénétique et Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Morvan, CHRU Brest,
Brest, France. Electronic address: marc.debraekeleer@univ-brest.fr.
(2)Laboratoire d'Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine et
des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Brest, Brest, France; Institut National
de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1078, Brest, France.
(3)Service de Cytogénétique et Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Morvan, CHRU 
Brest, Brest, France. (4)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM), U1078, Brest, France; Service de Cytogénétique et Biologie de 
la Reproduction, Hôpital Morvan, CHRU Brest, Brest, France. (5)Laboratoire
d'Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences
de la Santé, Université de Brest, Brest, France; Institut National de la Santé et
de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1078, Brest, France; Service de Cytogénétique
et Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Morvan, CHRU Brest, Brest, France.

Several chromosomal rearrangements involving band 3q26 are known to induce EVI1
overexpression. They include inv(3)(q21q26), t(3;3)(q21;q26), t(3;21)(q26;q22)
and t(3;12)(q26;p13). Translocations involving the short arm of chromosome 2 and 
3q26 have been reported in more than 50 patients with myeloid disorders. However,
although the breakpoints on 2p are scattered over a long segment, their
distribution had only been analyzed in 9 patients. We performed fluorescent in
situ hybridization with a library of BAC (Bacterial Artificial Chromosome) clones
in 4 patients with t(2;3)(p15-23;q26). Our results combined with those of the 9
previously reported patients showed scattering of the breakpoints in 2 regions. A
1.08Mb region in band 2p21 encompassing the MTA3, ZFP36L2 and THADA genes was
documented in 5 patients. A second region of 1.83Mb in band 2p16.1 was identified
in 8 patients. Four patients showed clustering around the BCL11A gene and the
remaining 4 around a long intergenic non-coding RNA, FLJ30838. These regions are 
characterized by the presence of regulatory sequences (CpG islands and promoters)
that could be instrumental in EVI1 overexpression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25486926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(18):2931-43. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.946869.

The oncogene EVI1 enhances transcriptional and biological responses of human
myeloid cells to all-trans retinoic acid.

Steinmetz B(1), Hackl H, Slabáková E, Schwarzinger I, Smejová M, Spittler A,
Arbesu I, Shehata M, Soucek K, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine I ; Medical University of Vienna ; Währinger Gürtel, 
Vienna , Austria.

Erratum in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(11):1759.

The product of the ecotropic virus integration site 1 (EVI1) gene, whose
overexpression is associated with a poor prognosis in myeloid leukemias and some 
epithelial tumors, regulates gene transcription both through direct DNA binding
and through modulation of the activity of other sequence specific transcription
factors. Previous results from our laboratory have shown that EVI1 influenced
transcription regulation in response to the myeloid differentiation inducing
agent, all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), in a dual manner: it enhanced ATRA induced
transcription of the RARß gene, but repressed the ATRA induction of the EVI1 gene
itself. In the present study, we asked whether EVI1 would modulate the ATRA
regulation of a larger number of genes, as well as biological responses to this
agent, in human myeloid cells. U937 and HL-60 cells ectopically expressing EVI1
through retroviral transduction were subjected to microarray based gene
expression analysis, and to assays measuring cellular proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis. These experiments showed that EVI1 modulated the 
ATRA response of several dozens of genes, and in fact reinforced it in the vast
majority of cases. A particularly strong synergy between EVI1 and ATRA was
observed for GDF15, which codes for a member of the TGF-ß superfamily of
cytokines. In line with the gene expression results, EVI1 enhanced cell cycle
arrest, differentiation, and apoptosis in response to ATRA, and knockdown of
GDF15 counteracted some of these effects. The potential clinical implications of 
these findings are discussed.

PMCID: PMC4613657
PMID: 25486480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Blood. 2015 Jan 1;125(1):133-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-07-591461. Epub 2014 Nov 
7.

Mutational spectrum of myeloid malignancies with inv(3)/t(3;3) reveals a
predominant involvement of RAS/RTK signaling pathways.

Gröschel S(1), Sanders MA(2), Hoogenboezem R(2), Zeilemaker A(2), Havermans M(2),
Erpelinck C(2), Bindels EM(2), Beverloo HB(3), Döhner H(4), Löwenberg B(2),
Döhner K(4), Delwel R(2), Valk PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands; Department of Translational Oncology, National Center for Tumor
Diseases and German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany; Department of
Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany; (2)Department of
Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands; and Dutch Working Group on Hemato-Oncologic Genome Diagnostics, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Internal Medicine III, University
Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany;

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Jan 1;125(1):9-10.

Myeloid malignancies bearing chromosomal inv(3)/t(3;3) abnormalities are among
the most therapy-resistant leukemias. Deregulated expression of EVI1 is the
molecular hallmark of this disease; however, the genome-wide spectrum of
cooperating mutations in this disease subset has not been systematically
elucidated. Here, we show that 98% of inv(3)/t(3;3) myeloid malignancies harbor
mutations in genes activating RAS/receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling
pathways. In addition, hemizygous mutations in GATA2, as well as heterozygous
alterations in RUNX1, SF3B1, and genes encoding epigenetic modifiers, frequently 
co-occur with the inv(3)/t(3;3) aberration. Notably, neither mutational patterns 
nor gene expression profiles differ across inv(3)/t(3;3) acute myeloid leukemia, 
chronic myeloid leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndrome cases, suggesting
recognition of inv(3)/t(3;3) myeloid malignancies as a single disease entity
irrespective of blast count. The high incidence of activating RAS/RTK signaling
mutations may provide a target for a rational treatment strategy in this
high-risk patient group.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4334729
PMID: 25381062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Blood. 2015 Jan 1;125(1):140-3. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-07-591529. Epub 2014 Oct 
20.

EVI1-rearranged acute myeloid leukemias are characterized by distinct molecular
alterations.

Lavallée VP(1), Gendron P(2), Lemieux S(3), D'Angelo G(4), Hébert J(5), Sauvageau
G(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Leucegene Project at the Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, 
Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada; Division of Hematology,
Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montréal, QC, Canada; (2)The Leucegene Project at 
the Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, QC, Canada; (3)The Leucegene Project at the Institute for Research in
Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada; Computer
Science and Operation Research, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada;
(4)Banque de Cellules Leucémiques du Québec, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital,
Montréal, QC, Canada; and. (5)The Leucegene Project at the Institute for Research
in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada; Division 
of Hematology, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montréal, QC, Canada; Banque de
Cellules Leucémiques du Québec, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montréal, QC,
Canada; and Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, 
QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Jan 1;125(1):9-10.

The genetic and transcriptional signature of EVI1 (ecotropic viral integration
site 1)-rearranged (EVI1-r) acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs) remains poorly
defined. We performed RNA sequencing of 12 EVI1-r AMLs and compared the results
with those of other AML subtypes (n = 139) and normal CD34(+) cells (n = 17).
Results confirm high frequencies of RAS and other activated signaling mutations
(10/12 AMLs) and identify new recurrent mutations in splicing factors (5/12 AMLs 
in SF3B1 and 2/12 AMLs in U2AF1), IKZF1 (3/12 AMLs), and TP53 (3/12 AMLs).
Mutations in IKZF1, a gene located on chromosome 7, and monosomy 7 are mutually
exclusive in this disease. Moreover IKZF1 expression is halved in monosomy 7
leukemias. EVI-r AMLs are also characterized by a unique transcriptional
signature with high expression levels of MECOM, PREX2, VIP, MYCT1, and PAWR. Our 
results suggest that EVI1-r AMLs could be molecularly defined by specific
transcriptomic anomalies and a hitherto unseen mutational pattern. Larger patient
cohorts will better determine the frequency of these events.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4358966
PMID: 25331116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Blood. 2014 Dec 4;124(24):3587-96. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-546275. Epub 2014
Oct 8.

Thrombopoietin/MPL signaling confers growth and survival capacity to
CD41-positive cells in a mouse model of Evi1 leukemia.

Nishikawa S(1), Arai S(2), Masamoto Y(2), Kagoya Y(2), Toya T(2), Watanabe-Okochi
N(3), Kurokawa M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Innovative Technology Laboratories, Kyowa
Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan; and. (2)Department of Hematology and
Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan;
(3)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Blood Transfusion, The
University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) is a transcription factor that is
highly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells and is crucial for their
self-renewal capacity. Aberrant expression of Evi1 is observed in 5% to 10% of de
novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients and predicts poor prognosis,
reflecting multiple leukemogenic properties of Evi1. Here, we show that
thrombopoietin (THPO) signaling is implicated in growth and survival of
Evi1-expressing cells using a mouse model of Evi1 leukemia. We first identified
that the expression of megakaryocytic surface molecules such as ITGA2B (CD41) and
the THPO receptor, MPL, positively correlates with EVI1 expression in AML
patients. In agreement with this finding, a subpopulation of bone marrow and
spleen cells derived from Evi1 leukemia mice expressed both CD41 and Mpl. CD41(+)
Evi1 leukemia cells induced secondary leukemia more efficiently than CD41(-)
cells in a serial bone marrow transplantation assay. Importantly, the CD41(+)
cells predominantly expressing Mpl effectively proliferated and survived on OP9
stromal cells in the presence of THPO via upregulating BCL-xL expression,
suggesting an essential role of the THPO/MPL/BCL-xL cascade in enhancing the
progression of Evi1 leukemia. These observations provide a novel aspect of the
diverse functions of Evi1 in leukemogenesis.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25298035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Chem Biol. 2014 Oct 23;21(10):1370-80. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.07.019. Epub 
2014 Sep 11.

Targeted suppression of EVI1 oncogene expression by sequence-specific
pyrrole-imidazole polyamide.

Syed J(1), Pandian GN(2), Sato S(2), Taniguchi J(1), Chandran A(1), Hashiya K(1),
Bando T(1), Sugiyama H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, 
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. (2)Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences
(iCeMS), Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (3)Department of
Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8502,
Japan; Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (iCeMS), Kyoto University,
Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. Electronic address: hs@kuchem.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Human ectopic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) is an oncogenic transcription
factor known to play a critical role in many aggressive forms of cancer. Its
selective modulation is thought to alter the cancer-specific gene regulatory
networks. Pyrrole-imidazole polyamides (PIPs) are a class of small DNA binders
that can be designed to target any destined DNA sequence. Herein, we report a
sequence-specific pyrrole-imidazole polyamide, PIP1, which can target specific
base pairs of the REL/ELK1 binding site in the EVI1 minimal promoter. The
designed PIP1 significantly inhibited EVI1 in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Whole-transcriptome analysis confirmed that PIP1 affected a fraction of
EVI1-mediated gene regulation. In vitro assays suggested that this polyamide can 
also effectively inhibit breast cancer cell migration. Taken together, these
results suggest that EVI1-targeted PIP1 is an effective transcriptional regulator
in cancer cells.

PMID: 25219965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 Jul 15;7:47. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-7-47. eCollection 2014.

Molecular characterization of the rare translocation t(3;10)(q26;q21) in an acute
myeloid leukemia patient.

Jancuskova T(1), Plachy R(1), Zemankova L(1), Hardekopf DW(1), Stika J(1),
Zejskova L(1), Praulich I(2), Kreuzer KA(2), Rothe A(3), Othman MA(4), Kosyakova 
N(4), Pekova S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Diagnostics, synlab genetics s.r.o., Evropska 176/16,
Prague 6 16000, Czech Republic. (2)Department I of Internal Medicine, University 
at Cologne, Kerpener Str., Cologne, Germany. (3)Oncological Therapy Center,
Buchforststr., Cologne, Germany. (4)Jena University Hospital, Institute of Human 
Genetics, Kollegiengasse 10, Jena, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the MDS1 and EVI1 complex locus -
MECOM, also known as the ecotropic virus integration site 1 - EVI1, located in
band 3q26, can be rearranged with a variety of partner chromosomes and partner
genes. Here we report on a 57-year-old female with AML who presented with the
rare translocation t(3;10)(q26;q21) involving the MECOM gene. Our aim was to
identify the fusion partner on chromosome 10q21 and to characterize the precise
nucleotide sequence of the chromosomal breakpoint.
METHODS: Cytogenetic and molecular-cytogenetic techniques, chromosome
microdissection, next generation sequencing, long-range PCR and direct Sanger
sequencing were used to map the chromosomal translocation.
RESULTS: Using a combination of cytogenetic and molecular approaches, we mapped
the t(3;10)(q26;q21) to the single nucleotide level, revealing a fusion of the
MECOM gene (3q26.2) and C10orf107 (10q21.2).
CONCLUSIONS: The approach described here opens up new possibilities in
characterizing acquired as well as congenital chromosomal aberrations. In
addition, DNA sequences of chromosomal breakpoints may be a useful tool for
unique molecular minimal residual disease target identification in acute leukemia
patients.

PMCID: PMC4113123
PMID: 25071866  [PubMed]


43. Haematologica. 2014 Nov;99(11):e225-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.107128. Epub
2014 Jul 11.

EVI1 overexpression is a poor prognostic factor in pediatric patients with mixed 
lineage leukemia-AF9 rearranged acute myeloid leukemia.

Matsuo H(1), Kajihara M(1), Tomizawa D(2), Watanabe T(3), Saito AM(4), Fujimoto
J(5), Horibe K(4), Kodama K(1), Tokumasu M(6), Itoh H(1), Nakayama H(7),
Kinoshita A(8), Taga T(9), Tawa A(10), Taki T(11), Shiba N(12), Ohki K(13),
Hayashi Y(13), Yamashita Y(14), Shimada A(15), Tanaka S(16), Adachi S(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Health Sciences, Kyoto University, Japan. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), Japan. (3)Department of
Nutritional Science, Aichi Gakuin University, Nisshin, Japan. (4)Clinical
Research Center, National Hospital Organization Nagoya Medical Center, Japan.
(5)Epidemiology and Clinical Research Center for Children's Cancer, National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of
Pediatrics, Kyoto University, Japan. (7)Department of Pediatrics, National
Hospital Organization Fukuoka-Higashi Medical Center, Koga, Japan. (8)Department 
of Pediatrics, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Osaka National
Hospital, Japan. (11)Department of Molecular Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Japan. (12)Department of Pediatrics, Gunma
University Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi, Japan. (13)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Gunma Children's Medical Center, Shibukawa, Japan.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Nagoya Medical
Center, Japan. (15)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University Hospitaland,
Japan. (16)Department of Pharmacoepidemiology, Kyoto University, Japan.
(17)Department of Human Health Sciences, Kyoto University, Japan
adachiso@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2015 Mar;100(3):e114-5.

PMCID: PMC4222468
PMID: 25015941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Tumour Biol. 2014 Sep;35(9):9255-62. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2213-5. Epub 2014
Jun 17.

Correlations of common polymorphism of EVI-1 gene targeted by miRNA-206/133b with
the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

Wang TY(1), Huang YP, Ma P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tumors, The First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, 
Nanjing North Street No. 155, Shenyang, 110001, People's Republic of China.

The aim of this study was to identify the correlations of a common polymorphism
(rs6774494 A > G) in the EVI-1 gene targeted by micro-RNA (miRNA)-206/133b with
the pathogenesis of breast cancer (BC). A total of 196 unrelated ethnic Han
Chinese women diagnosed with primary BC were consecutively recruited and 200
healthy controls were randomly selected from the same population-based cohort.
Direct PCR sequencing assay was used to detection of rs6774494 A > G polymorphism
in the EVI-1 gene. Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-PCR) analysis was performed to 
verify the alterations of the EVI1 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels. Kaplan-Meier
analysis was used to investigate and to estimate the survival outcomes for each
endpoint. All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS software (version
18.0, SPSS, Chicago, IL). Our results demonstrated that the carriers of EVI-1 AG 
genotype were more likely to develop BC when compared with the EVI-1 GG genotype 
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.26, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.02<U+2009>~<U+2009>1.57). In addition, it was found that
patients with the G (AG + GG) allele of EVI-1 genetic variants were associated
with higher risk of BC compared with the EVI-1 AA genotype (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.26, 95%
CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.02<U+2009>~<U+2009>1.54, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.028). The results of a subgroup analysis stratified by
menopause revealed that in female post-menopause subgroup patients with the EVI-1
G allele were correlated with a higher risk of BC than those with the EVI-1 AA
genotype (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.31, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.00<U+2009>~<U+2009>1.72, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.054). Kaplan-Meier analyses
suggested that carriers of the G allele (AG + GG) were associated with poorer
overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) compared with those
with AA genotype (OS P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.042; PFS P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.036, respectively). The correlation
analysis showed that EVI-1 mRNA levels were negatively associated with
miRNA-206/133b levels in the carriers of the G allele (AG + GG) (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>-1.274,
P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Our findings provide evidence that the EVI-1 rs6774494 G > A
polymorphism targeted by miRNA-206/133b may contribute to the pathogenesis of BC.

PMID: 24935473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 10;111(23):8595-600. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1401215111. Epub 2014 May 27.

Endogenous retrovirus induces leukemia in a xenograft mouse model for primary
myelofibrosis.

Triviai I(1), Ziegler M(2), Bergholz U(2), Oler AJ(3), Stübig T(4), Prassolov
V(5), Fehse B(4), Kozak CA(6), Kröger N(4), Stocking C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Retrovirus Pathogenesis, Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute of
Experimental Virology, 20251 Hamburg, Germany;Department of Stem Cell
Transplantation, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg,
Germany; (2)Retrovirus Pathogenesis, Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute 
of Experimental Virology, 20251 Hamburg, Germany; (3)Computational Biology
Section, Bioinformatics and Computational Biosciences Branch, and. (4)Department 
of Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 
Hamburg, Germany; (5)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy
of Sciences, Moscow 119991, Russia. (6)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892; and.
(7)Retrovirus Pathogenesis, Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute of
Experimental Virology, 20251 Hamburg, Germany; carol.stocking@hpi.uni-hamburg.de.

The compound immunodeficiencies in nonobese diabetic (NOD) inbred mice homozygous
for the Prkdc(scid) and Il2rg(null) alleles (NSG mice) permit engraftment of a
wide-range of primary human cells, enabling sophisticated modeling of human
disease. In studies designed to define neoplastic stem cells of primary
myelofibrosis (PMF), a myeloproliferative neoplasm characterized by profound
disruption of the hematopoietic microenvironment, we observed a high frequency of
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in NSG mice. AML was of mouse origin, confined to
PMF-xenografted mice, and contained multiple clonal integrations of ecotropic
murine leukemia virus (E-MuLV). Significantly, MuLV replication was not only
observed in diseased mice, but also in nontreated NSG controls. Furthermore, in
addition to the single ecotropic endogenous retrovirus (eERV) located on
chromosome 11 (Emv30) in the NOD genome, multiple de novo germ-line eERV
integrations were observed in mice from each of four independent NSG mouse
colonies. Analysis confirmed that E-MuLV originated from the Emv30 provirus and
that recombination events were not necessary for virus replication or AML
induction. Pathogenicity is thus likely attributable to PMF-mediated paracrine
stimulation of mouse myeloid cells, which serve as targets for retroviral
infection and transformation, as evidenced by integration into the Evi1 locus, a 
hotspot for retroviral-induced myeloid leukemia. This study thus corroborates a
role of paracrine stimulation in PMF disease progression, underlines the
importance of target cell type and numbers in MuLV-induced disease, and mandates 
awareness of replicating MuLV in NOD immunodeficient mice, which can
significantly influence experimental results and their interpretation.

PMCID: PMC4060668
PMID: 24912157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;53:320-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.05.037.
Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Physical and functional interaction of the proto-oncogene EVI1 and tumor
suppressor gene HIC1 deregulates Bcl-xL mediated block in apoptosis.

Pradhan AK(1), Halder A(1), Chakraborty S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Department of Gene Function and Regulation, Nalco 
Square, Bhubaneswar, Orissa 751023, India. (2)Institute of Life Sciences,
Department of Gene Function and Regulation, Nalco Square, Bhubaneswar, Orissa
751023, India. Electronic address: soumen_ils@yahoo.co.in.

Ecotropic viral integration site 1 was originally identified as a retroviral
integration site in murine leukemias. Several studies have established ecotropic 
viral integration site 1 as both a transcription factor and an interacting
partner that presumably regulates gene expression. Using coimmunoprecipitation
and fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis, we found that the N-terminal
domain of hypermethylated in cancer 1 interacts with the proximal set of zinc
fingers of ecotropic viral integration site 1. This interaction not only
abolishes the DNA binding activity of ecotropic viral integration site 1 but also
disrupts the transcriptional activity of an anti-apoptotic gene promoter
selectively targeted by ecotropic viral integration site 1. By using flow
cytometry and western blotting, here we show that hypermethylated in cancer 1 can
deregulate ecotropic viral integration site 1-mediated blockage of apoptosis. We 
hypothesize that therapeutic upregulation of hypermethylated in cancer 1 may
provide an important means of targeting ecotropic viral integration site
1-positive cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24907396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Leukemia. 2015 Feb;29(2):433-40. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.183. Epub 2014 Jun 6.

Survivin modulates genes with divergent molecular functions and regulates
proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells through Evi-1.

Fukuda S(1), Hoggatt J(2), Singh P(3), Abe M(1), Speth JM(3), Hu P(3), Conway
EM(4), Nucifora G(5), Yamaguchi S(1), Pelus LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shimane University School of Medicine, Izumo, Japan.
(2)1] Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA [2] Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(4)Centre for Blood Research, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada. (5)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA.

The inhibitor of apoptosis protein Survivin regulates hematopoiesis, although its
mechanisms of regulation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) remain largely
unknown. While investigating conditional Survivin deletion in mice, we found that
Survivin was highly expressed in phenotypically defined HSCs, and Survivin
deletion in mice resulted in significantly reduced total marrow HSCs and
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Transcriptional analysis of Survivin(-/-) HSCs
revealed altered expression of multiple genes not previously linked to Survivin
activity. In particular, Survivin deletion significantly reduced expression of
the Evi-1 transcription factor indispensable for HSC function, and the downstream
Evi-1 target genes Gata2, Pbx1 and Sall2. The loss of HSCs following Survivin
deletion and impaired long-term HSC repopulating function could be partially
rescued by ectopic Evi-1 expression in Survivin -/- HSCs. These data demonstrate 
that Survivin partially regulates HSC function by modulating the Evi-1
transcription factor and its downstream targets and identify new genetic pathways
in HSCs regulated by Survivin.

PMCID: PMC4258188
PMID: 24903482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 2;9(6):e97080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097080. eCollection 
2014.

Transcription factors involved in prostate gland adaptation to androgen
deprivation.

Rosa-Ribeiro R(1), Nishan U(1), Vidal RO(2), Barbosa GO(1), Reis LO(3), Cesar
CL(4), Carvalho HF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, State University of Campinas,
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, National Center for
Research on Energy and Materials, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Division of
Urology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Department
of Quantum Physics, State University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil;
National Institute of Photonics Applied to Cell Biology (INFABiC), State
University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Department of Structural 
and Functional Biology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo,
Brazil; National Institute of Photonics Applied to Cell Biology (INFABiC), State 
University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.

Androgens regulate prostate physiology, and exert their effects through the
androgen receptor. We hypothesized that androgen deprivation needs additional
transcription factors to orchestrate the changes taking place in the gland after 
castration and for the adaptation of the epithelial cells to the
androgen-deprived environment, ultimately contributing to the origin of
castration-resistant prostate cancer. This study was undertaken to identify
transcription factors that regulate gene expression after androgen deprivation by
castration (Cas). For the sake of comparison, we extended the analysis to the
effects of administration of a high dose of 17ß-estradiol (E2) and a combination 
of both (Cas+E2). We approached this by (i) identifying gene expression profiles 
and enrichment terms, and by searching for transcription factors in the derived
regulatory pathways; and (ii) by determining the density of putative
transcription factor binding sites in the proximal promoter of the 10 most up- or
down-regulated genes in each experimental group in comparison to the controls
Gapdh and Tbp7. Filtering and validation confirmed the expression and localized
EVI1 (Mecom), NFY, ELK1, GATA2, MYBL1, MYBL2, and NFkB family members (NFkB1,
NFkB2, REL, RELA and RELB) in the epithelial and/or stromal cells. These
transcription factors represent major regulators of epithelial cell survival and 
immaturity as well as an adaptation of the gland as an immune barrier in the
absence of functional stimulation by androgens. Elk1 was expressed in smooth
muscle cells and was up-regulated after day 4. Evi1 and Nfy genes are expressed
in both epithelium and stroma, but were apparently not affected by androgen
deprivation.

PMCID: PMC4041569
PMID: 24886974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2014 May;16(5):489-93.

[Clinical characteristics of childhood leukemia with EVI1 gene and BCR/ABL gene
co-expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang M(1), Li XQ, Hu D, Zhang ZQ, Yang YY, Bai LC, Jin RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China. erke_xiehe@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical characteristics of ecotopic viral integration
site-1 (EVI1) and BCR/ABL positive childhood leukemia.
METHODS: Clinical data of four children with EVI1 and BCR/ABL positive leukemia
and eight children with BCR/ABL positive but EVI1 negative chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: In the four children with EVI1 and BCR/ABL positive leukemia, two were
initially diagnosed with chronic phase of CML, one with accelerated phase of CML 
and one with high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). There were no
significant differences in clinical characteristics at diagnosis between the
patients with EVI1 and BCR/ABL positive leukemia and BCR/ABL positive but EVI1
negative leukemia. CD33 and CD38 were highly expressed and t(9;22) abnormality
was present in all patients with EVI1 and BCR/ABL positive leukemia. Two of the 3
children with EVI1 and BCR/ABL positive CML achieved complete remission one or
three months after treatment. Acquired negative status conversion occurred for
EVI1 but not BCR/ABL in one CML case. The 3 children with EVI1 and BCR/ABL
positive CML survived 20, 13 and 14 months, respectively, without recurrence. The
child with EVI1 and BCR/ABL positive ALL failed to achieve complete remission
after the first course of treatment and discontinued further treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Co-expression of EVI1 and BCR/ABL fusion gene can be found in
childhood CML and ALL. The relatively rare leukemia has not significant
difference respect to clinical characteristics. Prognosis of the disease needs to
be determined by clinical studies with a larger sample size.

PMID: 24856998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Feb;56(2):472-9. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.924118. Epub 2014
Jun 25.

Aberrant expression of ecotropic viral integration site-1 in acute myeloid
leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Su G(1), Lian X, Tan D, Tao H, Liu H, Chen S, Yin H, Wu D, Yin B.

Author information: 
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center.

Ecotropic viral integration site-1 (EVI1) proto-oncogene expression in patients
with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) requires
further investigation. Here, EVI1 expression levels were measured in 216 Chinese 
patients with AML and 67 with ALL via quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction. We found that EVI1 expressed at a high level (H-EVI1) was present in
11.1% of patients with AML versus 20.9% with ALL. Low levels of EVI1 expression
occurred in 23.1% with AML versus 43.3% with ALL. This suggested that alteration 
of EVI1 expression was more profound in ALL than in AML. H-EVI1 was significantly
enriched in 30-60-year-old patients. French-American-British (FAB) M3 subtype was
significantly correlated with H-EVI1. Interestingly, we found that EVI1
expression was negatively associated with presence of the Philadelphia chromosome
(Ph+) and MLL rearrangements in AML. However, Ph+, but not MLL rearrangements,
was inversely correlated with EVI1 expression in B-ALL. These results for the
first time suggest a mutually exclusive relationship between EVI1 expression and 
Ph+ karyotype.

PMID: 24828867  [PubMed - in process]


51. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jul 1;20(13):3589-602. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2811. 
Epub 2014 May 5.

Identification of campath-1 (CD52) as novel drug target in neoplastic stem cells 
in 5q-patients with MDS and AML.

Blatt K(1), Herrmann H(2), Hoermann G(3), Willmann M(4), Cerny-Reiterer S(5),
Sadovnik I(1), Herndlhofer S(1), Streubel B(6), Rabitsch W(7), Sperr WR(5),
Mayerhofer M(8), Rülicke T(9), Valent P(10).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of
Hematology & Hemostaseology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria; (2)Ludwig
Boltzmann Cluster Oncology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria; (3)Department 
of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Austria; (4)Department for 
Companion Animals and Horses, Clinic for Small Animals, Clinical Unit of Internal
Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Austria; (5)Authors'
Affiliations: Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology &
Hemostaseology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria; Ludwig Boltzmann Cluster
Oncology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria; (6)Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria; (7)Department of Internal
Medicine I, Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, Medical University of Vienna,
Austria; (8)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology, Hanusch-Hospital, Vienna,
Austria; and. (9)Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, University of Veterinary
Medicine Vienna, Austria. (10)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Internal
Medicine I, Division of Hematology & Hemostaseology, Medical University of
Vienna, Austria; Ludwig Boltzmann Cluster Oncology, Medical University of Vienna,
Austria; peter.valent@meduniwien.ac.at.

PURPOSE: The CD52-targeted antibody alemtuzumab induces major clinical responses 
in a group of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). The mechanism
underlying this drug effect remains unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We asked whether neoplastic stem cells (NSC) in patients
with MDS (n = 29) or acute myelogenous leukemia (AML; n = 62) express CD52.
RESULTS: As assessed by flow cytometry, CD52 was found to be expressed on
NSC-enriched CD34(+)/CD38(-) cells in 8/11 patients with MDS and isolated
del(5q). In most other patients with MDS, CD52 was weakly expressed or not
detectable on NSC. In AML, CD34(+)/CD38(-) cells displayed CD52 in 23/62
patients, including four with complex karyotype and del(5q) and one with del(5q) 
and t(1;17;X). In quantitative PCR (qPCR) analyses, purified NSC obtained from
del(5q) patients expressed CD52 mRNA. We were also able to show that CD52 mRNA
levels correlate with EVI1 expression and that NRAS induces the expression of
CD52 in AML cells. The CD52-targeting drug alemtuzumab, was found to induce
complement-dependent lysis of CD34(+)/CD38(-)/CD52(+) NSC, but did not induce
lysis in CD52(-) NSC. Alemtuzumab also suppressed engraftment of CD52(+) NSC in
NSG mice. Finally, CD52 expression on NSC was found to correlate with a poor
survival in patients with MDS and AML.
CONCLUSIONS: The cell surface target Campath-1 (CD52) is expressed on NSC in a
group of patients with MDS and AML. CD52 is a novel prognostic NSC marker and a
potential NSC target in a subset of patients with MDS and AML, which may have
clinical implications and may explain clinical effects produced by alemtuzumab in
these patients.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24799522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Oncogene. 2014 Oct 16;33(42):5028-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.108. Epub 2014 Apr
21.

Evi1 defines leukemia-initiating capacity and tyrosine kinase inhibitor
resistance in chronic myeloid leukemia.

Sato T(1), Goyama S(2), Kataoka K(2), Nasu R(2), Tsuruta-Kishino T(2), Kagoya
Y(2), Nukina A(2), Kumagai K(3), Kubota N(3), Nakagawa M(2), Arai S(2), Yoshimi
A(2), Honda H(4), Kadowaki T(3), Kurokawa M(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan [2] Department of Transfusion Medicine, The
University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Hematology
and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Metabolic and Diabetic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Disease Model, Research
Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima,
Japan.

Relapse of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is triggered by stem cells with a
reconstituting capacity similar to that of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and
CML stem cells are a source of resistance in drug therapy with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs). Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1), a key transcription
factor in HSC regulation, is known to predict poor outcomes in myeloid
malignancies, however, incapability of prospective isolation of EVI1-high
leukemic cells precludes the functional evaluation of intraindividual EVI1-high
cells. Introduction of CML into Evi1-internal ribosomal entry site (IRES)-green
fluorescent protein (GFP) knock-in mice, a versatile HSC-reporter strain, enables
us to separate Evi1-high CML cells from the individual. Evi1-IRES-GFP allele
models of CML in chronic phase (CML-CP), by retroviral overexpression of BCR-ABL 
and by crossing BCR-ABL transgenic mice, revealed that Evi1 is predominantly
enriched in the stem cell fraction and associated with an enhanced proliferative 
as well as a leukemia-initiating capacity and that Evi1-high CML-CP cells exhibit
resistance to TKIs. Overexpressing BCR-ABL and NUP98-HOXA9 in Evi1-IRES-GFP
knock-in mice to model CML in blast crisis (CML-BC), in which Evi1-high cells
turned to be a major population as opposed to a minor population in CML-CP
models, showed that Evi1-high CML-BC cells have a greater potential to
recapitulate the disease and appear resistant to TKIs. Furthermore, given that
Evi1 heterozygosity ameliorates CML-CP and CML-BC development and that the
combination of Evi1 and BCR-ABL causes acute myeloid leukemia resembling CML-BC, 
Evi1 could regulate CML development as a potent driver. In addition, in human
CML-CP cases, we show that EVI1 is highly expressed in stem cell-enriched
CD34+CD38-CD90+ fraction at single-cell level. This is the first report to
clarify directly that Evi1-high leukemic cells themselves possess the superior
potential to Evi1-low cells in oncogenic self-renewal, which highlights the role 
of Evi1 as a valuable and a functional marker of CML stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4217142
PMID: 24747972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):407-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.031.

Genomic dark matter sheds light on EVI1-driven leukemia.

Koche RP(1), Armstrong SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Department of Pediatrics, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Human Oncology and
Pathogenesis Program and Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: armstros@mskcc.org.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):415-27.
    Cell. 2014 Apr 10;157(2):369-81.

The orchestration of transcriptional programs depends on proper gene-enhancer
pairing. While much remains to be learned about this process in normal
development, two recent studies in Cell (Gröschel and colleagues) and this issue 
of Cancer Cell (Yamazaki and colleagues) highlight how the genomic rearrangement 
of an enhancer plays a causal role in the onset of a leukemogenic program.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4046890
PMID: 24735919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Genet. 2014 Mar;207(3):103-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.02.010. Epub
2014 Feb 28.

Amplification of EVI1 on cytogenetically cryptic double minutes as new mechanism 
for increased expression of EVI1.

Volkert S(1), Schnittger S(1), Zenger M(1), Kern W(1), Haferlach T(1), Haferlach 
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany. (2)MLL Munich Leukemia
Laboratory, Munich, Germany. Electronic address: claudia.haferlach@mll.com.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), increased
expression of EVI1 (ecotropic virus integration site 1) was found to be
associated with adverse prognosis. Although increased expression of the EVI1 gene
is mainly caused by chromosomal rearrangements involving chromosome band 3q26,
where EVI1 is located, it can also be identified in cases without these
rearrangements. The mechanisms that cause increased EVI1 expression in the
absence of 3q26 rearrangements remain unclear. Here, we present four cases with
increased EVI1 expression due to EVI1 amplification on cytogenetically cryptic
double minutes (dmin). The dmin are small acentric chromosome structures and were
observed in about 1% of AML and MDS. We investigated the four cases by
conventional cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and array
comparative genomic hybridization. Furthermore, EVI1 expression was measured by
quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR. By conventional chromosome analysis, the 
EVI1 dmin cannot be detected, due to the small size of the amplicons of 0.49-0.78
Mbp. Median % EVI1/ABL expression was 88.9% and therefore comparable to the
median % EVI1/ABL expression of patients with EVI1 rearrangements. In conclusion,
EVI1 amplification on cytogenetically cryptic dmin causes increased expression of
EVI1 and is a new mechanism that causes increased EVI1 expression without a 3q26 
rearrangement.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Development. 2014 Apr;141(8):1757-66. doi: 10.1242/dev.104422.

Endothelial cell-derived non-canonical Wnt ligands control vascular pruning in
angiogenesis.

Korn C(1), Scholz B, Hu J, Srivastava K, Wojtarowicz J, Arnsperger T, Adams RH,
Boutros M, Augustin HG, Augustin I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Oncology and Metastasis, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance), Heidelberg 69221, Germany.

Multiple cell types involved in the regulation of angiogenesis express Wnt
ligands. Although ß-catenin dependent and independent Wnt signaling pathways have
been shown to control angiogenesis, the contribution of individual cell types to 
activate these downstream pathways in endothelial cells (ECs) during blood vessel
formation is still elusive. To investigate the role of ECs in contributing Wnt
ligands for regulation of blood vessel formation, we conditionally deleted the
Wnt secretion factor Evi in mouse ECs (Evi-ECKO). Evi-ECKO mice showed decreased 
microvessel density during physiological and pathological angiogenesis in the
postnatal retina and in tumors, respectively. The reduced microvessel density
resulted from increased vessel regression accompanied by decreased EC survival
and proliferation. Concomitantly, survival-related genes were downregulated and
cell cycle arrest- and apoptosis-inducing genes were upregulated. EVI silencing
in cultured HUVECs showed similar target gene regulation, supporting a mechanism 
of EC-derived Wnt ligands in controlling EC function. ECs preferentially
expressed non-canonical Wnt ligands and canonical target gene expression was
unaffected in Evi-ECKO mice. Furthermore, the reduced vascularization of Matrigel
plugs in Evi-ECKO mice could be rescued by introduction of non-canonical Wnt5a.
Treatment of mouse pups with the non-canonical Wnt inhibitor TNP470 resulted in
increased vessel regression accompanied by decreased EC proliferation, thus
mimicking the proliferation-dependent Evi-ECKO remodeling phenotype. Taken
together, this study identified EC-derived non-canonical Wnt ligands as
regulators of EC survival, proliferation and subsequent vascular pruning during
developmental and pathological angiogenesis.

PMID: 24715464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):415-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.02.008. Epub 2014 
Apr 3.

A remote GATA2 hematopoietic enhancer drives leukemogenesis in inv(3)(q21;q26) by
activating EVI1 expression.

Yamazaki H(1), Suzuki M(2), Otsuki A(1), Shimizu R(3), Bresnick EH(4), Engel
JD(5), Yamamoto M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (2)Center for Radioisotope Sciences, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan; Department of
Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai
980-8575, Japan. (3)Department of Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (4)UW-Madison Blood Research
Program, Carbone Cancer Center, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, 
USA. (5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (6)Department of Medical Biochemistry, 
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan; Tohoku
Medical Megabank, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8573, Japan. Electronic address: 
masiyamamoto@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):407-8.

Chromosomal inversion between 3q21 and 3q26 results in high-risk acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). In this study, we identified a mechanism whereby a GATA2 distal
hematopoietic enhancer (G2DHE or -77-kb enhancer) is brought into close proximity
to the EVI1 gene in inv(3)(q21;q26) inversions, leading to leukemogenesis. We
examined the contribution of G2DHE to leukemogenesis by creating a bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic model that recapitulates the
inv(3)(q21;q26) allele. Transgenic mice harboring a linked BAC developed leukemia
accompanied by EVI1 overexpression-neoplasia that was not detected in mice
bearing the same transgene but that was missing the GATA2 enhancer. These results
establish the mechanistic basis underlying the pathogenesis of a severe form of
leukemia through aberrant expression of the EVI1 proto-oncogene.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4012341
PMID: 24703906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cell. 2014 Apr 10;157(2):369-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.02.019. Epub 2014 Apr
3.

A single oncogenic enhancer rearrangement causes concomitant EVI1 and GATA2
deregulation in leukemia.

Gröschel S(1), Sanders MA(2), Hoogenboezem R(2), de Wit E(3), Bouwman BA(3),
Erpelinck C(2), van der Velden VH(4), Havermans M(2), Avellino R(2), van Lom
K(2), Rombouts EJ(2), van Duin M(2), Döhner K(5), Beverloo HB(6), Bradner JE(7), 
Döhner H(5), Löwenberg B(2), Valk PJ(2), Bindels EM(2), de Laat W(3), Delwel
R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 3015
GE, the Netherlands; Department of Internal Medicine III, Ulm University
Hospital, 89081 Ulm, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, 3015 GE, the Netherlands. (3)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW
and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 3584 CT, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Immunology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 3015
CN, the Netherlands. (5)Department of Internal Medicine III, Ulm University
Hospital, 89081 Ulm, Germany. (6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 3015 GE, the Netherlands; Dutch Working
Group on Hemato-Oncologic Genome Diagnostics, Rotterdam, 3015 GE, the
Netherlands. (7)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. (8)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, 3015 GE, the Netherlands. Electronic address: h.delwel@erasmusmc.nl.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):407-8.

Chromosomal rearrangements without gene fusions have been implicated in
leukemogenesis by causing deregulation of proto-oncogenes via relocation of
cryptic regulatory DNA elements. AML with inv(3)/t(3;3) is associated with
aberrant expression of the stem-cell regulator EVI1. Applying functional genomics
and genome-engineering, we demonstrate that both 3q rearrangements reposition a
distal GATA2 enhancer to ectopically activate EVI1 and simultaneously confer
GATA2 functional haploinsufficiency, previously identified as the cause of
sporadic familial AML/MDS and MonoMac/Emberger syndromes. Genomic excision of the
ectopic enhancer restored EVI1 silencing and led to growth inhibition and
differentiation of AML cells, which could be replicated by pharmacologic BET
inhibition. Our data show that structural rearrangements involving the
chromosomal repositioning of a single enhancer can cause deregulation of two
unrelated distal genes, with cancer as the outcome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Oncotarget. 2014 Feb 28;5(4):916-32.

Clinical impact of gene mutations and lesions detected by SNP-array karyotyping
in acute myeloid leukemia patients in the context of gemtuzumab ozogamicin
treatment: results of the ALFA-0701 trial.

Renneville A(1), Abdelali RB, Chevret S, Nibourel O, Cheok M, Pautas C, Duléry R,
Boyer T, Cayuela JM, Hayette S, Raffoux E, Farhat H, Boissel N, Terre C, Dombret 
H, Castaigne S, Preudhomme C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematology, Biology and Pathology Center, CHRU of Lille, Lille.

We recently showed that the addition of fractionated doses of gemtuzumab
ozogamicin (GO) to standard chemotherapy improves clinical outcome of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. In the present study, we performed mutational
analysis of 11 genes (FLT3, NPM1, CEBPA, MLL, WT1, IDH1/2, RUNX1, ASXL1, TET2,
DNMT3A), EVI1 overexpression screening, and 6.0 single-nucleotide polymorphism
array (SNP-A) analysis in diagnostic samples of the 278 AML patients enrolled in 
the ALFA-0701 trial. In cytogenetically normal (CN) AML (n=146), 38% of the
patients had at least 1 SNP-A lesion and 89% of the patients had at least 1
molecular alteration. In multivariate analysis, the independent predictors of
higher cumulative incidence of relapse were unfavorable karyotype (P = 0.013) and
randomization in the control arm (P = 0.007) in the whole cohort, and MLL partial
tandem duplications (P = 0.014) and DNMT3A mutations (P = 0.010) in CN-AML. The
independent predictors of shorter overall survival (OS) were unfavorable
karyotype (P <0.001) and SNP-A lesion(s) (P = 0.001) in the whole cohort, and
SNP-A lesion(s) (P = 0.006), DNMT3A mutations (P = 0.042) and randomization in
the control arm (P = 0.043) in CN-AML. Interestingly, CN-AML patients benefited
preferentially more from GO treatment as compared to AML patients with abnormal
cytogenetics (hazard ratio for death, 0.52 versus 1.14; test for interaction, P =
0.04). Although the interaction test was not statistically significant, the OS
benefit associated with GO treatment appeared also more pronounced in FLT3
internal tandem duplication positive than in negative patients.

PMCID: PMC4011594
PMID: 24659740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cell. 2014 Mar 13;156(6):1259-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.053.

SWI/SNF complex prevents lineage reversion and induces temporal patterning in
neural stem cells.

Eroglu E(1), Burkard TR(1), Jiang Y(2), Saini N(2), Homem CC(1), Reichert H(2),
Knoblich JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Dr. 
Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria. (2)Biozentrum, University of Basel,
Klingelbergstrasse 50, 4056 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Molecular
Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna,
Austria. Electronic address: juergen.knoblich@imba.oeaw.ac.at.

Members of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex are among the most frequently
mutated genes in human cancer, but how they suppress tumorigenesis is currently
unclear. Here, we use Drosophila neuroblasts to demonstrate that the SWI/SNF
component Osa (ARID1) prevents tumorigenesis by ensuring correct lineage
progression in stem cell lineages. We show that Osa induces a transcriptional
program in the transit-amplifying population that initiates temporal patterning, 
limits self-renewal, and prevents dedifferentiation. We identify the Prdm protein
Hamlet as a key component of this program. Hamlet is directly induced by Osa and 
regulates the progression of progenitors through distinct transcriptional states 
to limit the number of transit-amplifying divisions. Our data provide a
mechanistic explanation for the widespread tumor suppressor activity of SWI/SNF. 
Because the Hamlet homologs Evi1 and Prdm16 are frequently mutated in cancer,
this mechanism could well be conserved in human stem cell lineages. PAPERCLIP:

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24630726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Cancer. 2014 Oct 1;135(7):1634-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28802. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Multigene pathway-based analyses identify nasopharyngeal carcinoma risk
associations for cumulative adverse effects of TERT-CLPTM1L and DNA double-strand
breaks repair.

Yee Ko JM(1), Dai W, Wun Wong EH, Kwong D, Tong Ng W, Lee A, Kai Cheong Ngan R,
Chung Yau C, Tung S, Li Lung M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong 
SAR, People's Republic of China.

The genetic etiology of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and mechanisms for
inherited susceptibility remain unclear. To examine genetic risk factors for NPC,
we hypothesized that heritable risk is attributable to cumulative effects of
multiple common low-risk variants. With the premise that individual SNPs only
confer subtle effects for cancer risk, a multigenic pathway-based approach was
used to systematically examine associations between NPC genetic susceptibility
with SNPs in genes in DNA repair pathways and from previously identified cancer
genome-wide association study analyses. This case-control study covers 161
genes/loci and focuses on pathway-based analyses in 2,349 Hong Kong individuals, 
allowing stratification according to NPC familial status for meaningful
association analysis. Three SNPs (rs401681, rs6774494 and rs3757318)
corresponding to TERT/CLPTM1L (OR 95% CI = 0.77, 0.68-0.88), MDS1-EVI1 (OR 95%
CI=0.79 0.69-0.89) and CCDC170 (OR 95% CI = 0.76, 0.66-0.86) conferred modest
protective effects individually for NPC risk by the logistic regression analysis 
after multiple testing adjustment (p(Bonferroni) <U+2009>< 0.05). Stratification of NPC 
according to familial status identified rs2380165 in BLM (OR 95% CI = 1.49,
1.20-1.86, p(Bonferroni) <U+2009>< 0.05) association with family history-positive NPC
(FH+ NPC) patients. Multiple SNPs pathway-based analysis revealed that the
combined gene dosage effects for increasing numbers of unfavorable genotypes in
TERT-CLPTM1L and double-strand break repair (DSBR) conferred elevated risk in FH+
and sporadic NPC patients (ORs per allele, 95% CIs = 1.37, 1.22-1.55,
p(Bonferroni) <U+2009>= 5.00 × 10(-6); 1.17, 1.09-1.26, p(Bonferroni) <U+2009>= 4.58 × 10(-4) ,
respectively, in TERT/NHEJ pathways). Our data suggested cumulative increased NPC
risk associations with TERT-CLPTM1L and DSBR pathways contribute to genetic
susceptibility to NPC and have potential translational relevance for patient
stratification and therapeutics.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24615621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2014 Jul;36(5):e322-4. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0000000000000042.

Azacitidine in the treatment of pediatric therapy-related myelodysplastic
syndrome after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Inoue A(1), Kawakami C, Takitani K, Tamai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan.

We herein present a case of pediatric therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome
(t-MDS) with complex karyotype who was treated with azacitidine (AZA) for
AML1-EVI1 fusion transcript as minimal residual disease after allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). The patient was started on AZA 41
days after the HSCT without having achieved complete remission. After 9 cycles of
AZA, the AML1-EVI1 fusion transcript disappeared, and there was no manifestation 
of graft versus host disease during AZA treatment. Preemptive AZA treatment for
minimal residual disease has an acceptable safety profile and appears to be an
effective strategy for preventing or substantially delaying hematological relapse
in pediatric patients with high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome after HSCT.

PMID: 24608072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jan;35(1):29-34. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2014.01.008.

[Application of multiplex nested RT- PCR assay for screening the fusion genes in 
acute myeloid leukemia and its clinical significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu Y(1), Gao L(1), Sun J(1), Ding Y(1), Xu Y(1), Lyu C(1), Liu W(1), Wang N(1),
Wang L(1), Yu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical value of multiplex nested reverse
transcription PCR (RT-nPCR) in screening acute myeloid leukemia(AML)fusion genes.
METHODS: A novel multiplex RT-nPCR assay was developed to detect 16 AML-related
fusion genes (AML1-EVI1, AML1-ETO, AML1-MDS1, AML1-MTG16, MLL-AF9, MLL-AF6,
MLL-AF10, MLL-ENL, MLL-MLL, PML-RARa, PLZFRARa, NPM1-RARa, CBFB-MYH11, DEK-CAN,
SET-CAN and TLS-ERG) according to 2008 WHO classification of AML. The chromosome 
reciprocal translocations of 356 AML cases were detected by multiplex RT-nPCR and
karyotyping. The positive samples were further confirmed by split- out PCR and
FISH.
RESULTS: The fusion genes were detected in 172 patients with the positive
detection rate of 48.31%(172/356), which was higher than that of karyotyping
(31.46%) (<U+03C7>²=70.314, P<0.01). Multiplex RT-nPCR is superior to karyotyping and
FISH in identifying the rare, cryptic chromosome translocation (<U+03C7>²=96.074,
P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The multiplex RT-nPCR used in this study can quickly, effectively and
accurately screen the fusion genes in AML patients, which can provide important
evidence for assessing diagnosis and treatment, and also provide necessary
information for minimal residual disease (MRD) and prognosis.

PMID: 24602728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 27;9(2):e89397. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089397. eCollection
2014.

Mice carrying a hypomorphic Evi1 allele are embryonic viable but exhibit severe
congenital heart defects.

Bard-Chapeau EA(1), Szumska D(2), Jacob B(3), Chua BQ(1), Chatterjee GC(4), Zhang
Y(5), Ward JM(1), Urun F(6), Kinameri E(6), Vincent SD(7), Ahmed S(1),
Bhattacharya S(2), Osato M(3), Perkins AS(5), Moore AW(6), Jenkins NA(1),
Copeland NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Welcome
Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. (3)Cancer Science
Institute, Singapore, Singapore. (4)MYSM School of Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America. (6)RIKEN Brain
Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan. (7)Department of
Development and Stem Cells, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 7104, Inserm U964, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch,
France.

The ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) oncogenic transcription factor is
one of a number of alternative transcripts encoded by the Mds1 and Evi1 complex
locus (Mecom). Overexpression of Evi1 has been observed in a number of myeloid
disorders and is associated with poor patient survival. It is also amplified
and/or overexpressed in many epithelial cancers including nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, ovarian carcinoma, ependymomas, and lung and colorectal cancers. Two
murine knockout models have also demonstrated Evi1's critical role in the
maintenance of hematopoietic stem cell renewal with its absence resulting in the 
death of mutant embryos due to hematopoietic failure. Here we characterize a
novel mouse model (designated Evi1(fl3)) in which Evi1 exon 3, which carries the 
ATG start, is flanked by loxP sites. Unexpectedly, we found that germline
deletion of exon3 produces a hypomorphic allele due to the use of an alternative 
ATG start site located in exon 4, resulting in a minor Evi1 N-terminal truncation
and a block in expression of the Mds1-Evi1 fusion transcript. Evi1(dex3/dex3)
mutant embryos showed only a mild non-lethal hematopoietic phenotype and bone
marrow failure was only observed in adult Vav-iCre/+, Evi1(fl3/fl3) mice in which
exon 3 was specifically deleted in the hematopoietic system. Evi1(dex3/dex3)
knockout pups are born in normal numbers but die during the perinatal period from
congenital heart defects. Database searches identified 143 genes with similar
mutant heart phenotypes as those observed in Evi1(dex3/dex3) mutant pups.
Interestingly, 42 of these congenital heart defect genes contain known
Evi1-binding sites, and expression of 18 of these genes are also effected by Evi1
siRNA knockdown. These results show a potential functional involvement of Evi1
target genes in heart development and indicate that Evi1 is part of a
transcriptional program that regulates cardiac development in addition to the
development of blood.

PMCID: PMC3937339
PMID: 24586749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Feb;16(2):129-34.

[Clinical and biological characteristics of childhood acute myeloid leukemia with
EVI1 gene positive expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang M(1), Li XQ, Hu D, Qiu YN, Zhang ZQ, Zhang BY, Han J, Jin RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Scinence and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.
erke_xiehe@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of ecotropic viral integration site (EVI1)
gene in childhood acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and the clinical features of
EVI1-positive children with AML.
METHODS: The clinical data of EVI1-positive children with AML were collected and 
analyzed. RT-PCR and real-time quantitative PCR were used for qualitative and
quantitative analysis of expression of EVI1. Flow cytometry (FCM) was used for
determining the immunophenotypes of bone marrow cells. Multiparameter FCM was
used for monitoring minimal residual disease. The karyotypes were determined.
RESULTS: Of 241 children with AML, 33 (13.7%) were positive for EVI1 expression. 
There were no significant differences in age at first visit as well as the white 
blood cell count, hemoglobin level, and platelet count in peripheral blood
between EVI1-positive and EVI1-negative children with AML (P>0.05), but
EVI1-positive children had a significantly increased proportion of females
compared with EVI1-negative children (P<0.05). The change in EVI1 expression was 
not synchronous with clinical remission and the change of MRD: some children had 
clinical remission or negative conversion of MRD before negative conversion of
EVI1, while some had negative conversion of EVI1 before clinical remission or
while MRD showed positive. EVI1 gene was usually co-expressed with other fusion
genes. CD33 (100%), CD38 (88%), and HLADR (76%) were highly expressed in
EVI1-positive children with AML. Abnormal chromosome structure or number was
found in 15 patients. Compared with EVI1-negative children, EVI1-positive
children had significantly lower complete remission rates after the first course 
of treatment (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: EVI1-positive children with AML have a poor short-term prognosis. In
the development of AML, the activation of EVI1 gene is not isolated, but the
result of interactions with other genes or chromosome abnormalities, and the
mechanism of activation and its function need further study.

PMID: 24568904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Oncol Lett. 2014 Mar;7(3):787-790. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

De novo acute myeloid leukemia subtype-M4 with initial trisomy 8 and later
acquired t(3;12)(q26;p12) leading to ETV6/MDS1/EVI1 fusion transcript expression:
A case report.

Achkar WA(1), Aljapawe A(2), Liehr T(3), Wafa A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Division of Human Genetics,
Atomic Energy Commission of Syria, Damascus 6091, Syria. (2)Laboratory of
Flow-Cytometry, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Division of
Mammalians Biology, Atomic Energy Commission of Syria, Damascus 6091, Syria.
(3)Jena University Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena 07740, Germany.

The t(3;12)(q26;p13) translocation is a recurrent chromosomal aberration observed
in myeloid malignancies. The translocation results in the generation of the
ETV6/myelodysplastic syndrome 1 (MDS1)/ectopic viral integration site 1 (EVI1)
fusion gene. However, the present case report is the first to present this
rearrangement in acute myelogeneous leukemia (AML)-M4. Notably, this case is the 
first report of AML-M4 with an initial trisomy 8 and secondary acquired
t(3;12)(q26;p13). Cells harboring the t(3;12) translocation were found to exhibit
a higher proliferative capacity than cells with pure trisomy 8, which is
consistent with the role of the ETV6/MDS1/EVI1 fusion transcript in the
development and progression of malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3919885
PMID: 24527086  [PubMed]


66. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2014 Jun-Aug;53(1-2):67-76. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.01.002.
Epub 2014 Feb 1.

The role of EVI1 in myeloid malignancies.

Glass C(1), Wilson M(1), Gonzalez R(1), Zhang Y(1), Perkins AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
School of Medicine, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester School of Medicine, Rochester, NY
14642, USA. Electronic address: archibald_perkins@urmc.rochester.edu.

The EVI1 oncogene at human chr 3q26 is rearranged and/or overexpressed in a
subset of acute myeloid leukemias and myelodysplasias. The EVI1 protein is a 135 
kDa transcriptional regulator with DNA-binding zinc finger domains. Here we
provide a critical review of the current state of research into the molecular
mechanisms by which this gene plays a role in myeloid malignancies. The major
pertinent cellular effects are blocking myeloid differentiation and preventing
cellular apoptosis, and several potential mechanisms for these phenomena have
been identified. Evidence supports a role for EVI1 in inducing cellular
quiescence, and this may contribute to the resistance to chemotherapy seen in
patients with neoplasms that overexpress EVI1. Another isoform, MDS1-EVI1 (or
PRDM3), encoded by the same locus as EVI1, harbors an N-terminal histone
methyltransferase(HMT) domain; experimental findings indicate that this protein
and its HMT activity are critical for the progression of a subset of AMLs, and
this provides a potential target for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24495476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Blood Cancer J. 2014 Jan 24;4:e179. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2013.76.

EVI1 expression in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia is not restricted to
MLL and BCR/ABL rearrangements and is influenced by age.

Stevens A(1), Hanson D(1), de Leonibus C(1), Whatmore A(1), Donn R(2), White
DJ(3), Liu J(4), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(5), Saha V(6), Clayton PE(1), Meyer
S(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital, Manchester, UK [2] Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
University of Manchester, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(2)1] Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Royal 
Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK [2] The Centre for Musculoskeletal
Research, Manchester, UK. (3)1] Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
University of Manchester, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK
[2] Stem Cell and Leukaemia Proteomics Laboratory, Manchester, UK. (4)1]
Children's Cancer Group, Manchester, UK [2] Institute for Cancer Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (5)Department of Pediatric Hematology
and Oncology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
(6)1] Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Royal 
Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK [2] Children's Cancer Group,
Manchester, UK [3] Institute for Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK [4] Tata Translational Cancer Research Centre, Kolkata, India.
(7)1] Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Royal 
Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK [2] Stem Cell and Leukaemia
Proteomics Laboratory, Manchester, UK [3] Institute for Cancer Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK [4] Department of Paediatric Oncology,
Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK [5] Young Oncology Unit, The
Christie NHS foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.

PMCID: PMC3913945
PMID: 24464103  [PubMed]


68. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 Nov;55(11):2532-7. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.878460. Epub
2014 Feb 24.

Myeloid neoplasm with t(3;8)(q26;q24): report of six cases and review of the
literature.

Xu X(1), Su M, Levy NB, Mohtashamian A, Monaghan S, Kaur P, Zaremba C, Garcia R, 
Broome HE, Dell'Aquila ML, Wang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis ,
St. Louis, MO , USA.

Balanced translocation between chromosomes 3q26 and 8q24 is a very rare event.
Here we report six patients with t(3;8)(q26;q24) either as a sole or as a part of
genetic abnormalities. Five of the six patients were men with ages ranging from
41 to 84 years old. One patient had a long history of granulocyte colony
stimulating factor (G-CSF) treatment. Three of the patients were initially
diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia, two with myelodysplastic syndrome and one 
with chronic myelogenous leukemia with blast crisis. The peripheral blood in all 
patients showed severe to moderate anemia; one had absolute neutropenia, one with
neutrophilia; four had thrombocytopenia, two with thrombocytosis. The bone
marrows from all patients showed dysmegakaryopoiesis with additional erythroid
(three patients) and granulocytic (two patients) dysplasia. Cytogenetics revealed
t(3;8)(q26;q24) as the sole abnormality in three patients. The majority of
patients (4/6) had a poor clinical course, with an average survival of 10 months.

PMID: 24397594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Feb;53(2):117-28. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22124. Epub
2013 Nov 5.

The role of topoisomerase II beta on breakage and proximity of RUNX1 to partner
alleles RUNX1T1 and EVI1.

Smith KA(1), Cowell IG, Zhang Y, Sondka Z, Austin CA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Rearrangements involving the RUNX1 gene account for approximately 15% of balanced
translocations in therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML) patients and are
one of the most common genetic abnormalities observed in t-AML. Drugs targeting
the topoisomerase II (TOP2) enzyme are implicated in t-AML; however, the
mechanism is not well understood and to date a single RUNX1-RUNX1T1 t-AML
breakpoint junction sequence has been published. Here we report an additional
five breakpoint junction sequences from t-AML patients with the RUNX1- RUNX1T1
translocation. Using a leukemia cell line model, we show that TOP2 beta (TOP2B)
is required for induction of RUNX1 chromosomal breaks by the TOP2 poison
etoposide and that, while TOP2 alpha (TOP2A) and TOP2B proteins are both present 
on RUNX1 and RUNX1T1 chromatin, only the TOP2B enrichment reached significance
following etoposide exposure at a region on RUNX1 where translocations occur.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that TOP2B influences the separation between RUNX1
and two translocation partners (RUNX1T1 and EVI) in the nucleus of lymphoid
cells. Specifically, we identified a TOP2B-dependent increase in the number of
nuclei displaying juxtaposed RUNX1 and RUNX1T1 loci following etoposide
treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24327541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Bone. 2014 Mar;60:148-61. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.11.020. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Deletion of Mecom in mouse results in early-onset spinal deformity and
osteopenia.

Juneja SC(1), Vonica A(2), Zeiss C(3), Lezon-Geyda K(4), Yatsula B(5), Sell
DR(6), Monnier VM(7), Lin S(8), Ardito T(9), Eyre D(10), Reynolds D(11), Yao
Z(12), Awad HA(13), Yu H(14), Wilson M(15), Honnons S(16), Boyce BF(17), Xing
L(18), Zhang Y(19), Perkins AS(20).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, USA; Department of Orthopedics, University of Rochester Medical
Center, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Rochester
Medical Center, USA. Electronic address: sjuneja.phd@gmail.com. (2)Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, USA.
Electronic address: alin_vonica@urmc.rochester.edu. (3)Case Western Reserve
University, USA. Electronic address: caroline.zeiss@yale.edu. (4)Department of
Pathology, Yale University, USA. Electronic address:
kimberly.lezon-geyda@yale.edu. (5)Department of Pathology, Yale University, USA. 
Electronic address: bogdan.yatsula@yale.edu. (6)Case Western Reserve University, 
USA. Electronic address: drs7@cwru.edu. (7)Case Western Reserve University, USA. 
Electronic address: vmm3@cwru.edu. (8)Department of Pathology, Yale University,
USA. Electronic address: sharon.lin@yale.edu. (9)Department of Pathology, Yale
University, USA. Electronic address: thomas.ardito@yale.edu. (10)University of
Washington, Seattle, USA. Electronic address: deyre@u.washington.edu.
(11)Department of Orthopedics, University of Rochester Medical Center, USA.
Electronic address: david_reynolds@urmc.rochester.edu. (12)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, USA.
Electronic address: zhenqiang_yao@urmc.rochester.edu. (13)Department of
Orthopedics, University of Rochester Medical Center, USA; Department of
Biomedical Engineering, University of Rochester Medical Center, USA. Electronic
address: hani_awad@urmc.rochester.edu. (14)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, USA. Electronic address:
yhb3508@163.com. (15)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University 
of Rochester Medical Center, USA. Electronic address:
michael_wilson@urmc.rochester.edu. (16)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, USA. Electronic address:
sylvie.honnons@gmail.com. (17)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Rochester Medical Center, USA. Electronic address:
brendan_boyce@urmc.rochester.edu. (18)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, USA. Electronic address:
lianping_xing@urmc.rochester.edu. (19)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, USA. Electronic address:
yi_zhang@urmc.rochester.edu. (20)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Rochester Medical Center, USA. Electronic address:
archibald_perkins@urmc.rochester.edu.

Recent studies have indicated a role for a MECOM allele in susceptibility to
osteoporotic fractures in humans. We have generated a mutation in Mecom in mouse 
(termed ME(m1)) via lacZ knock-in into the upstream transcription start site for 
the gene, resulting in disruption of Mds1 and Mds1-Evi1 transcripts, but not of
Evi1 transcripts. We demonstrate that ME(m1/m1) mice have severe kyphoscoliosis
that is reminiscent of human congenital or primary kyphoscoliosis. ME(m1/m1) mice
appear normal at birth, but by 2weeks, they exhibit a slight lumbar lordosis and 
narrowed intervertebral space. This progresses to severe lordosis with disc
collapse and synostosis, together with kyphoscoliosis. Bone formation and
strength testing show that ME(m1/m1) mice have normal bone formation and
composition but are osteopenic. While endochondral bone development is normal, it
is markedly dysplastic in its organization. Electron micrographs of the 1week
postnatal intervertebral discs reveals marked disarray of collagen fibers,
consistent with an inherent weakness in the non-osseous connective tissue
associated with the spine. These findings indicate that lack of ME leads to a
complex defect in both osseous and non-osseous musculoskeletal tissues, including
a marked vertebral osteopenia, degeneration of the IVD, and disarray of
connective tissues, which is likely due to an inherent inability to establish
and/or maintain components of these tissues.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4440591
PMID: 24316420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 1;386(1):111-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.11.021. Epub 2013
Dec 3.

Zebrafish nephrogenesis is regulated by interactions between retinoic acid,
mecom, and Notch signaling.

Li Y(1), Cheng CN(1), Verdun VA(1), Wingert RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, 100 Galvin Life
Sciences, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, 100 Galvin Life Sciences, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.
Electronic address: rwingert@nd.edu.

The zebrafish pronephros provides a conserved model to study kidney development, 
in particular to delineate the poorly understood processes of how nephron segment
pattern and cell type choice are established. Zebrafish nephrons are divided into
distinct epithelial regions that include a series of proximal and distal tubule
segments, which are comprised of intercalated transporting epithelial cells and
multiciliated cells (MCC). Previous studies have shown that retinoic acid (RA)
regionalizes the renal progenitor field into proximal and distal domains and that
Notch signaling later represses MCC differentiation, but further understanding of
these pathways has remained unknown. The transcription factor mecom (mds1/evi1
complex) is broadly expressed in renal progenitors, and then subsequently marks
the distal tubule. Here, we show that mecom is necessary to form the distal
tubule and to restrict both proximal tubule formation and MCC fate choice. We
found that mecom and RA have opposing roles in patterning discrete proximal and
distal segments. Further, we discovered that RA is required for MCC formation,
and that one mechanism by which RA promotes MCC fate choice is to inhibit mecom. 
Next, we determined the epistatic relationship between mecom and Notch signaling,
which limits MCC fate choice by lateral inhibition. Abrogation of Notch signaling
with the <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor DAPT revealed that Notch and mecom did not have
additive effects in blocking MCC formation, suggesting that they function in the 
same pathway. Ectopic expression of the Notch signaling effector, Notch
intracellular domain (NICD), rescued the expansion of MCCs in mecom morphants,
indicating that mecom acts upstream to induce Notch signaling. These findings
suggest a model in which mecom and RA arbitrate proximodistal segment domains,
while MCC fate is modulated by a complex interplay in which RA inhibition of
mecom, and mecom promotion of Notch, titrates MCC number. Taken together, our
studies have revealed several essential and novel mechanisms that control
pronephros development in the zebrafish.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3920184
PMID: 24309209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Surg Pathol Clin. 2013 Dec;6(4):677-92. doi: 10.1016/j.path.2013.08.007. Epub
2013 Oct 21.

Myeloid Neoplasms with inv(3)(q21q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21;q26.2).

Rogers HJ(1), Hsi ED(2).

Author information: 
(1)Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address:
rogersj5@ccf.org. (2)Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with inv(3)(q21q26.2)/t(3;3)(q21;q26.2)
[inv3/t(3;3)] is a distinct entity under the subgroup of AMLs with recurrent
genetic abnormalities in the 2008 World Health Organization classification.
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with inv3/t(3;3) has a high risk of progression to
AML. AML and MDS with inv3/t(3;3) have a similarly aggressive clinical course
with short overall survival (OS) and are commonly refractory to therapy. In this 
article, clinical and pathologic features and prognosis in AML and MDS with
inv3/t(3;3) are reviewed, and other myeloid neoplasms with similar dysplastic
features to be differentiated from AML and MDS with inv3/t(3;3) are discussed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26839193  [PubMed]


73. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003772. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003772. Epub 2013 Sep 
5.

Cell interactions and patterned intercalations shape and link epithelial tubes in
C. elegans.

Rasmussen JP(1), Feldman JL, Reddy SS, Priess JR.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of 
America ; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland, United States
of America ; Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

Many animal organs are composed largely or entirely of polarized epithelial
tubes, and the formation of complex organ systems, such as the digestive or
vascular systems, requires that separate tubes link with a common polarity. The
Caenorhabditis elegans digestive tract consists primarily of three interconnected
tubes-the pharynx, valve, and intestine-and provides a simple model for
understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms used to form and connect
epithelial tubes. Here, we use live imaging and 3D reconstructions of developing 
cells to examine tube formation. The three tubes develop from a pharynx/valve
primordium and a separate intestine primordium. Cells in the pharynx/valve
primordium polarize and become wedge-shaped, transforming the primordium into a
cylindrical cyst centered on the future lumenal axis. For continuity of the
digestive tract, valve cells must have the same, radial axis of apicobasal
polarity as adjacent intestinal cells. We show that intestinal cells contribute
to valve cell polarity by restricting the distribution of a polarizing cue,
laminin. After developing apicobasal polarity, many pharyngeal and valve cells
appear to explore their neighborhoods through lateral, actin-rich lamellipodia.
For a subset of cells, these lamellipodia precede more extensive intercalations
that create the valve. Formation of the valve tube begins when two valve cells
become embedded at the left-right boundary of the intestinal primordium. Other
valve cells organize symmetrically around these two cells, and wrap partially or 
completely around the orthogonal, lumenal axis, thus extruding a small valve tube
from the larger cyst. We show that the transcription factors DIE-1 and
EGL-43/EVI1 regulate cell intercalations and cell fates during valve formation,
and that the Notch pathway is required to establish the proper boundary between
the pharyngeal and valve tubes.

PMCID: PMC3764189
PMID: 24039608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Blood. 2013 Oct 17;122(16):2888-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-453662. Epub 2013 
Sep 10.

Essential role of PR-domain protein MDS1-EVI1 in MLL-AF9 leukemia.

Zhang Y(1), Owens K, Hatem L, Glass CH, Karuppaiah K, Camargo F, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY; and.

A subgroup of leukemogenic mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion proteins (MFPs)
including MLL-AF9 activates the Mecom locus and exhibits extremely poor clinical 
prognosis. Mecom encodes EVI1 and MDS1-EVI1 (ME) proteins via alternative
transcription start sites; these differ by the presence of a PRDI-BF1-RIZ1 (PR)
domain with histone methyltransferase activity in the ME isoform. Using an
ME-deficient mouse, we show that ME is required for MLL-AF9-induced
transformation both in vitro and in vivo. And, although Nup98-HOXA9, MEIS1-HOXA9,
and E2A-Hlf could transform ME-deficient cells, both MLL-AF9 and MLL-ENL were
ineffective, indicating that the ME requirement is specific to MLL fusion
leukemia. Further, we show that the PR domain is essential for MFP-induced
transformation. These studies clearly indicate an essential role of PR-domain
protein ME in MFP leukemia, suggesting that ME may be a novel target for
therapeutic intervention for this group of leukemias.

PMCID: PMC3799001
PMID: 24021671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2013 Aug;54(8):749-58.

[The shortest isoform of C/EBPß, Liver inhibitory protein (LIP), collaborates
with Evi1 to induce AML in a mouse BMT model].

[Article in Japanese]

Watanabe-Okochi N, Yoshimi A, Sato T, Ikeda T, Kumano K, Taoka K, Satoh Y,
Shinohara A, Tsuruta T, Masuda A, Yokota H, Yatomi Y, Takahashi K, Kitaura J,
Kitamura T, Kurokawa M.

PMID: 24005435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Aug;21(4):821-9. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.04.002.

Rapid detection of AML1 associated fusion genes in patients with adult acute
myeloid leukemia and its clinical significance.

Jiang MM(1), Gao L, Jing Y, Ding Y, Xu YY, Zhou MH, Ma C, Wang N, Wang W, Han XP,
Li HH, Wang QS, Wang LL, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China;
Medical School, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

This study was aimed to detect the expression of AML1 fusion genes in the
patients with adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and further to investigate their
association with the progression and prognosis of AML. Bone marrow samples were
collected from 168 patients with de novo adult AML, and the expression of AML1
ETO, AML1-EVI1, AML1-MDS1, AML1-MTG16, AML1-PRDM16, AML1-LRP16, AML1-CLCA2 and
AML1-PRDX4 was analyzed by a novel multiplex nested RT-PCR. Positive samples and 
minimal residual disease were further examined by real-time fluorescent
quantitative PCR. The results showed that the AML1 fusion genes were found in
10.7% (18/168) patients. Among them, AML1-ETO in 12 (7.1%) cases were detected,
AML1-EVI1 in 2 cases (1.2%), and AML1-MDS1, AML1-MTG16, AML1-PRDM16, and
AML1-CLCA2 in 1 case (0.6%) each were detected. Among the patients with AML1-ETO,
10 patients (10/12, 83.33%) achieved complete remission (CR) after one cycle of
chemotherapy, while 2 patients achieved CR after 2 cycles of chemotherapy. The 2 
patients with AML1-EVI1 failed to achieve CR after one cycle of chemotherapy.
Patients with AML1-MDS1, AML1-MTG16, AML1-PRDM16, or AML1-CACL2 did not achieve
CR after one cycle of chemotherapy. It is concluded that AML1 fusion genes are
more frequent and can provide the molecular markers for diagnostics and prognosis
evaluation of AML and for monitoring MRD.

PMID: 23998567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 30;110(31):E2885-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1309310110. Epub 2013 Jul 15.

EVI1 oncoprotein interacts with a large and complex network of proteins and
integrates signals through protein phosphorylation.

Bard-Chapeau EA(1), Gunaratne J, Kumar P, Chua BQ, Muller J, Bard FA, Blackstock 
W, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Group, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore
138673.

Ecotropic viral integration site-1 (EVI1) is an oncogenic zinc finger
transcription factor whose expression is frequently up-regulated in myeloid
leukemia and epithelial cancers. To better understand the mechanisms underlying
EVI1-associated disease, we sought to define the EVI1 interactome in cancer
cells. By using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture
(SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics, we could confidently assign 78 proteins as
EVI1-interacting partners for FLAG-tagged EVI1. Subsequently, we showed that 22
of 27 tested interacting proteins could coimmunoprecipitate with endogenous EVI1 
protein, which represented an 81.5% validation rate. Additionally, by comparing
the stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) data with
high-throughput yeast two hybrid results, we showed that five of these proteins
interacted directly with EVI1. Functional classification of EVI1-interacting
proteins revealed associations with cellular transcription machinery; modulators 
of transcription; components of WNT, TGF-ß, and RAS pathways; and proteins
regulating DNA repair, recombination, and mitosis. We also identified EVI1
phosphorylation sites by MS analysis and showed that Ser538 and Ser858 can be
phosphorylated and dephosphorylated by two EVI1 interactome proteins, casein
kinase II and protein phosphatase-1a. Finally, mutations that impair EVI1
phosphorylation at these sites reduced EVI1 DNA binding through its C-terminal
zinc finger domain and induced cancer cell proliferation. Collectively, these
combinatorial proteomic approaches demonstrate that EVI1 interacts with large and
complex networks of proteins, which integrate signals from various different
signaling pathways important for oncogenesis. Comprehensive analysis of the EVI1 
interactome has thus provided an important resource for dissecting the molecular 
mechanisms of EVI1-associated disease.

PMCID: PMC3732971
PMID: 23858473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Br J Haematol. 2013 Sep;162(5):670-7. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12444. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

High EVI1 expression is associated with MLL rearrangements and predicts decreased
survival in paediatric acute myeloid leukaemia: a report from the children's
oncology group.

Ho PA(1), Alonzo TA, Gerbing RB, Pollard JA, Hirsch B, Raimondi SC, Cooper T,
Gamis AS, Meshinchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98103, USA. pho@fhcrc.org

Ectopic viral integration site-1 (EVI1) is highly expressed in certain
cytogenetic subsets of adult acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), and has been
associated with inferior survival. We sought to examine the clinical and
biological associations of EVI1(high) , defined as expression in excess of normal
controls, in paediatric AML. EVI1 mRNA expression was measured via quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction in diagnostic specimens obtained from 206
patients. Expression levels were correlated with clinical features and outcome.
EVI1(high) was present in 58/206 (28%) patients. MLL rearrangements occurred in
40% of EVI1(high) patients as opposed to 12% of the EVI1(low/absent) patients (P 
< 0·001). No abnormalities of 3q26 were found in EVI1(high) patients by
conventional cytogenetic analysis, nor were cryptic 3q26 abnormalities detected
in a subset of patients screened by next-generation sequencing.
French-American-British class M7 was enriched in the EVI1(high) group, accounting
for 24% of these patients. EVI1(high) patients had significantly lower 5-year
overall survival from study entry (51% vs. 68%, P = 0·015). However, in
multivariate analysis including other established prognostic markers, EVI1
expression did not retain independent prognostic significance. EVI1 expression is
currently being studied in a larger cohort of patients enrolled on subsequent
Children's Oncology Group trials, to determine if EVI1(high) has prognostic value
in MLL-rearranged or intermediate-risk subsets.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3754879
PMID: 23826732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 27;8(6):e67134. Print 2013.

Global Identification of EVI1 Target Genes in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Glass C(1), Wuertzer C, Cui X, Bi Y, Davuluri R, Xiao YY, Wilson M, Owens K,
Zhang Y, Perkins A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America.

The ecotropic virus integration site 1 (EVI1) transcription factor is associated 
with human myeloid malignancy of poor prognosis and is overexpressed in 8-10% of 
adult AML and strikingly up to 27% of pediatric MLL-rearranged leukemias. For the
first time, we report comprehensive genomewide EVI1 binding and whole
transcriptome gene deregulation in leukemic cells using a combination of ChIP-Seq
and RNA-Seq expression profiling. We found disruption of terminal myeloid
differentiation and cell cycle regulation to be prominent in EVI-induced
leukemogenesis. Specifically, we identified EVI1 directly binds to and
downregulates the master myeloid differentiation gene Cebpe and several of its
downstream gene targets critical for terminal myeloid differentiation. We also
found EVI1 binds to and downregulates Serpinb2 as well as numerous genes involved
in the Jak-Stat signaling pathway. Finally, we identified decreased expression of
several ATP-dependent P2X purinoreceptors genes involved in apoptosis mechanisms.
These findings provide a foundation for future study of potential therapeutic
gene targets for EVI1-induced leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3694976
PMID: 23826213  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


80. G3 (Bethesda). 2013 Aug 7;3(8):1363-74. doi: 10.1534/g3.113.006999.

Caenorhabditis elegans histone deacetylase hda-1 is required for morphogenesis of
the vulva and LIN-12/Notch-mediated specification of uterine cell fates.

Ranawade AV(1), Cumbo P, Gupta BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1 Canada.

Chromatin modification genes play crucial roles in development and disease. In
Caenorhabditis elegans, the class I histone deacetylase family member hda-1, a
component of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation complex, has been shown 
to control cell proliferation. We recovered hda-1 in an RNA interference screen
for genes involved in the morphogenesis of the egg-laying system. We found that
hda-1 mutants have abnormal vulva morphology and vulval-uterine connections
(i.e., no uterine-seam cell). We characterized the vulval defects by using cell
fate-specific markers and found that hda-1 is necessary for the specification of 
all seven vulval cell types. The analysis of the vulval-uterine connection defect
revealed that hda-1 is required for the differentiation of the gonadal anchor
cell (AC), which in turn induces ventral uterine granddaughters to adopt p fates,
leading to the formation of the uterine-seam cell. Consistent with these results,
hda-1 is expressed in the vulva and AC. A search for hda-1 target genes revealed 
that fos-1 (fos proto-oncogene family) acts downstream of hda-1 in vulval cells, 
whereas egl-43 (evi1 proto-oncogene family) and nhr-67 (tailless homolog, NHR
family) mediate hda-1 function in the AC. Furthermore, we showed that AC
expression of hda-1 plays a crucial role in the regulation of the lin-12/Notch
ligand lag-2 to specify p cell fates. These results demonstrate the pivotal role 
of hda-1 in the formation of the vulva and the vulval-uterine connection. Given
that hda-1 homologs are conserved across the phyla, our findings are likely to
provide a better understanding of HDAC1 function in development and disease.

PMCID: PMC3737176
PMID: 23797102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 12;8(6):e66510. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066510. Print 2013.

Phosphorylation of the leukemic oncoprotein EVI1 on serine 196 modulates DNA
binding, transcriptional repression and transforming ability.

White DJ(1), Unwin RD, Bindels E, Pierce A, Teng HY, Muter J, Greystoke B,
Somerville TD, Griffiths J, Lovell S, Somervaille TC, Delwel R, Whetton AD, Meyer
S.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Leukaemia Proteomics Laboratory, University of Manchester,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.

The EVI1 (ecotropic viral integration site 1) gene at 3q26 codes for a
transcriptional regulator with an essential role in haematopoiesis.
Overexpression of EVI1 in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is frequently associated 
with 3q26 rearrangements and confers extremely poor prognosis. EVI1 mediates
transcriptional regulation, signalling, and epigenetic modifications by
interacting with DNA, proteins and protein complexes. To explore to what extent
protein phosphorylation impacts on EVI1 functions, we analysed endogenous EVI1
protein from a high EVI1 expressing Fanconi anaemia (FA) derived AML cell line.
Mass spectrometric analysis of immunoprecipitated EVI1 revealed phosphorylation
at serine 196 (S196) in the sixth zinc finger of the N-terminal zinc finger
domain. Mutated EVI1 with an aspartate substitution at serine 196 (S196D), which 
mimics serine phosphorylation of this site, exhibited reduced DNA-binding and
transcriptional repression from a gene promotor selectively targeted by the
N-terminal zinc finger domain. Forced expression of the S196D mutant
significantly reduced EVI1 mediated transformation of Rat1 fibroblasts. While
EVI1-mediated serial replating of murine haematopoietic progenitors was
maintained by EVI1-S196D, this was associated with significantly higher
Evi1-trancript levels compared with WT-EVI1 or EVI1-S196A, mimicking S196
non-phosphorylated EVI1. These data suggest that EVI1 function is modulated by
phosphorylation of the first zinc finger domain.

PMCID: PMC3680417
PMID: 23776681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 Apr;55(4):954-6. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.815350. Epub 2013
Jul 24.

EVI1 targets platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule and up-regulates its
expression in chronic myeloid leukemia.

Pradhan AK(1), Chakraborty S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences , Bhubaneswar , India.

PMID: 23772643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1833(10):2357-68. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.06.003. Epub 2013 Jun 13.

SUMO1 negatively regulates the transcriptional activity of EVI1 and significantly
increases its co-localization with EVI1 after treatment with arsenic trioxide.

Singh S(1), Pradhan AK, Chakraborty S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Life Sciences,
Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India.

Aberrant expression of the proto-oncogene EVI1 (ecotropic virus integration
site1) has been implicated not only in myeloid or lymphoid malignancies but also 
in colon, ovarian and breast cancers. Despite its importance in oncogenesis, the 
regulatory factors and mechanisms that potentiate the function of EVI1 and its
consequences are partially known. Here we demonstrated that EVI1 is
post-translationally modified by SUMO1 at lysine residues 533, 698 and 874.
Although both EVI1 and SUMO1 were found to co-localize in nuclear speckles, the
sumoylation mutant of EVI1 failed to co-localize with SUMO1. Sumoylation
abrogated the DNA binding efficiency of EVI1 and also affected EVI1 mediated
transactivation. The SUMO ligase PIASy was found to play a bi-directional role on
EVI1, PIASy enhanced EVI1 sumoylation and augmented sumoylated EVI1 mediated
repression. PIASy was also found to interact with EVI1 and impaired EVI1
transcriptional activity independent of its ligase activity. Arsenic trioxide
(ATO) known to act as an antileukemic agent for acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) not only enhanced EVI1 sumoylation but also enhanced the co-localization of
EVI1 and SUMO1 in nuclear bodies distinct from PML nuclear bodies. ATO treatment 
also affected the Bcl-xL protein expression in EVI1 positive cell line. Thus, the
results showed that arsenic treatment enhanced EVI1 sumoylation, deregulated
Bcl-xL, which eventually may induce apoptosis in EVI1 positive cancer cells. The 
study for the first time explores and reports sumoylation of EVI1, which plays an
essential role in regulating its function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23770046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Mol Med. 2013 Sep;32(3):532-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1417. Epub 2013 Jun
12.

Epigenetic aberrations in myeloid malignancies (Review).

Takahashi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Kitasato University School of Allied Health Sciences; 
Division of Molecular Hematology, Kitasato University Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-0373, Japan.

The development of novel technologies, such as massively parallel DNA sequencing,
has led to the identification of several novel recurrent gene mutations, such as 
DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt)3a, ten-eleven-translocation oncogene family member 2
(TET2), isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)1/2, additional sex comb-like 1 (ASXL1),
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and ubiquitously transcribed tetratricopeptide
repeat X chromosome (UTX) mutations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and other
myeloid malignancies. These findings strongly suggest a link between recurrent
genetic alterations and aberrant epigenetic regulations, resulting from an
abnormal DNA methylation and histone modification status. This review focuses on 
the current findings of aberrant epigenetic signatures by these newly described
genetic alterations. Moreover, epigenetic aberrations resulting from
transcription factor aberrations, such as mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)
rearrangement, ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) overexpression,
chromosomal translocations and the downregulation of PU.1 are also described.

PMID: 23760684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncogene. 2014 May 8;33(19):2454-63. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.204. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

EVI1 oncogene promotes KRAS pathway through suppression of microRNA-96 in
pancreatic carcinogenesis.

Tanaka M(1), Suzuki HI(2), Shibahara J(1), Kunita A(1), Isagawa T(3), Yoshimi
A(4), Kurokawa M(4), Miyazono K(2), Aburatani H(5), Ishikawa S(1), Fukayama M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of
Molecular Pathology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of
Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. (5)Genome Science Division, RCAST, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Despite frequent KRAS mutation, the early molecular mechanisms of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) development have not been fully elucidated. By
tracking a potential regulator of another feature of PDAC precursors, acquisition
of foregut or gastric epithelial gene signature, we herein report that aberrant
overexpression of ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) oncoprotein, which is
usually absent in normal pancreatic duct, is a widespread marker across the full 
spectrum of human PDAC precursors and PDAC. In pancreatic cancer cells, EVI1
depletion caused remarkable inhibition of cell growth and migration, indicating
its oncogenic roles. Importantly, we found that EVI1 upregulated KRAS expression 
through suppression of a potent KRAS suppressor, miR-96, in pancreatic cancer
cells. Collectively, the present findings suggest that EVI1 overexpression and
KRAS mutation converge on activation of the KRAS pathway in early phases of
pancreatic carcinogenesis and propose EVI1 and/or miR-96 as early markers and
therapeutic targets in this dismal disease.

PMID: 23752186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;45(8):1568-76. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.04.032. Epub 2013 May 9.

EVI1 targets <U+0394>Np63 and upregulates the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p21
independent of p53 to delay cell cycle progression and cell proliferation in
colon cancer cells.

Nayak KB(1), Kuila N, Das Mohapatra A, Panda AK, Chakraborty S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Life Sciences, Nalco 
Square, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.

Several lines of evidence suggest that specific transcriptional events are
involved in cell cycle, proliferation and differentiation processes; however,
their deregulation by proto-oncogenes are involved in the development of leukemia
and tumors. One such proto-oncogene is ecotropic viral integration site I which
can differentially effect cell cycle progression and proliferation, in cell types
of different origin. Our data for the first time shows that ecotropic viral
integration site I binds to <U+0394>Np63 promoter element directly and down regulates
its expression. Down regulation of <U+0394>Np63 induces the expression of p21 in HT-29
cells and also in colon carcinoma cells that do not express p53 including patient
samples expressing low level of p53, that eventually delay cell cycle progression
at G0/G1 phase. Concomitant silencing of ecotropic viral integration site I from 
the cells or introduction of <U+0394>Np63 to the cells significantly rescued this
phenotype, indicating the growth defect induced by <U+0394>Np63 deficiency to be, at
least in part, attributable to ecotropic viral integration site I function. The
mutual regulation between ecotropic viral integration site I and <U+0394>Np63 may
constitute a novel axis which might affect the downstream pathways in cells that 
do not express functional p53.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Ann Hematol. 2013 Dec;92(12):1713-5. doi: 10.1007/s00277-013-1750-0. Epub 2013
Apr 19.

Marked thrombocytosis and dysmegakaryopoiesis in acute myeloid leukemia with
t(2;3)(p22;q26.2) and EVI1 rearrangement.

Yamamoto K(1), Okamura A, Sanada Y, Yakushijin K, Matsuoka H, Minami H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology/Hematology, Department of Medicine, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe,
650-0017, Japan, kyamamo@med.kobe-u.ac.jp.

PMID: 23604431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Blood. 2013 May 16;121(20):4142-55. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-368654. Epub 2013 
Apr 1.

The shortest isoform of C/EBPß, liver inhibitory protein (LIP), collaborates with
Evi1 to induce AML in a mouse BMT model.

Watanabe-Okochi N(1), Yoshimi A, Sato T, Ikeda T, Kumano K, Taoka K, Satoh Y,
Shinohara A, Tsuruta T, Masuda A, Yokota H, Yatomi Y, Takahashi K, Kitaura J,
Kitamura T, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Universityof
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) is one of the master regulators in the 
development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome. High
expression of Evi1 is found in 10% of patients with AML and indicates a poor
outcome. Several recent studies have indicated that Evi1 requires collaborative
factors to induce AML. Therefore, the search for candidate factors that
collaborate with Evi1 in leukemogenesis is one of the key issues in uncovering
the mechanism of Evi1-related leukemia. Previously, we succeeded in making a
mouse model of Evi1-related leukemia using a bone marrow transplantation (BMT)
system. In the Evi1-induced leukemic cells, we identified frequent retroviral
integrations near the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) gene and
overexpression of its protein. These findings imply that C/EBPß is a candidate
gene that collaborates with Evi1 in leukemogenesis. Cotransduction of Evi1 and
the shortest isoform of C/EBPß, liver inhibitory protein (LIP), induced AML with 
short latencies in a mouse BMT model. Overexpression of LIP alone also induced
AML with longer latencies. However, excision of all 3 isoforms of C/EBPß
(LAP*/LAP/LIP) did not inhibit the development of Evi1-induced leukemia.
Therefore, isoform-specific intervention that targets LIP is required when we
consider C/EBPß as a therapeutic target.

PMID: 23547050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Oncol. 2013 Jun;7(3):647-68. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.02.008. Epub 2013 Mar
5.

EVI1 splice variants modulate functional responses in ovarian cancer cells.

Dutta P(1), Bui T, Bauckman KA, Keyomarsi K, Mills GB, Nanjundan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA.

Amplification of 3q26.2, found in many cancer lineages, is a frequent and early
event in ovarian cancer. We previously defined the most frequent region of copy
number increase at 3q26.2 to EVI1 (ecotropic viral integration site-1) and MDS1
(myelodysplastic syndrome 1) (aka MECOM), an observation recently confirmed by
the cancer genome atlas (TCGA). MECOM is increased at the DNA, RNA, and protein
level and likely contributes to patient outcome. Herein, we report that EVI1 is
aberrantly spliced, generating multiple variants including a Del(190-515) variant
(equivalent to previously reported) expressed in >90% of advanced stage serous
epithelial ovarian cancers. Although EVI1(Del190-515) lacks ~70% of exon 7, it
binds CtBP1 as well as SMAD3, important mediators of TGFß signaling, similar to
wild type EVI1. This contrasts with EVI1 1-268 which failed to interact with
CtBP1. Interestingly, the EVI1(Del190-515) splice variant preferentially
localizes to PML nuclear bodies compared to wild type and EVI1(Del427-515). While
wild type EVI1 efficiently repressed TGFß-mediated AP-1 (activator protein-1) and
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) promoters, EVI1(Del190-515) elicited a 
slight increase in both promoter activities. Expression of EVI1 and
EVI1(Del427-515) (but not EVI1(Del190-515)) in OVCAR8 ovarian cancer cells
increased cyclin E1 LMW expression and cell cycle progression. Furthermore,
knockdown of specific EVI1 splice variants (both MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1(Del190-515)) 
markedly increased claudin-1 mRNA and protein expression in HEY ovarian and
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Changes in claudin-1 were associated with
alterations in specific epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers concurrent with
reduced migratory potential. Collectively, EVI1 is frequently aberrantly spliced 
in ovarian cancer with specific forms eliciting altered functions which could
potentially contribute to ovarian cancer pathophysiology.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3805042
PMID: 23517670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 2;110(14):5594-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1302645110. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Critical role of miR-9 in myelopoiesis and EVI1-induced leukemogenesis.

Senyuk V(1), Zhang Y, Liu Y, Ming M, Premanand K, Zhou L, Chen P, Chen J, Rowley 
JD, Nucifora G, Qian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, and Cancer Research Center, University of Illinois,
Chicago, IL 60621, USA.

MicroRNA-9 (miR-9) is emerging as a critical regulator of organ development and
neurogenesis. It is also deregulated in several types of solid tumors; however,
its role in hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis is not yet known. Here we show that 
miR-9 is detected in hematopoietic stem cells and hematopoietic progenitor cells,
and that its expression increases during hematopoietic differentiation. Ectopic
expression of miR-9 strongly accelerates terminal myelopoiesis and promotes
apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Conversely, in hematopoietic progenitor cells,
the inhibition of miR-9 with a miRNA sponge blocks myelopoiesis. Ecotropic viral 
integration site 1 (EVI1), required for normal embryogenesis, is considered an
oncogene because its inappropriate up-regulation induces malignant transformation
in solid and hematopoietic cancers. Here we show that EVI1 binds to the promoter 
of miR-9-3, leading to DNA hypermethylation of the promoter and repression of
miR-9. Moreover, miR-9 expression reverses a myeloid differentiation block that
is induced by EVI1. Our findings indicate that EVI1, when inappropriately
expressed, delays or blocks myeloid differentiation at least in part by DNA
hypermethylation and down-regulation of miR-9. It was reported that Forkhead box 
class O genes (FoxOs) inhibit myeloid differentiation and prevent differentiation
of leukemia-initiating cells. Here we identify both FoxO1 and FoxO3 as direct
targets of miR-9 in hematopoietic cells and find that up-regulation of FoxO3
inhibits miR-9-induced myelopoiesis. These results reveal a unique role of miR-9 
in myelopoiesis and in the pathogenesis of EVI1-induced myeloid neoplasms and
provide insights into the epigenetic regulation of miR9 in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3619279
PMID: 23509296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2013 Mar 6;2(1):7. doi: 10.1186/2162-3619-2-7.

A standardized microarray assay for the independent gene expression markers in
AML: EVI1 and BAALC.

Brand J(1), van Vliet MH, de Best L, Valk PJ, Viëtor HE, Löwenberg B, van Beers
EH.

Author information: 
(1)Skyline Diagnostics BV, Rotterdam Science Tower, Marconistraat 16, 3029 AK,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. e.vanbeers@skyline-diagnostics.com.

High levels of BAALC, ERG, EVI1 and MN1 expression have been associated with
shorter overall survival in AML but standardized and clinically validated assays 
are lacking. We have therefore developed and optimized an assay for standardized 
detection of these prognostic genes for patients with intermediate cytogenetic
risk AML. In a training set of 147 intermediate cytogenetic risk cases we
performed cross validations at 5 percentile steps of expression level and
observed a bimodal significance profile for BAALC expression level and unimodal
significance profiles for ERG and MN1 levels with no statistically significant
cutoff points near the median expression level of BAALC, ERG or MN1. Of the
possible cutoff points for expression levels of BAALC, ERG and MN1, just the 30th
and 75th percentile of BAALC expression level and the 30th percentile of MN1
expression level cutoff points showed clinical significance. Of these only the
30th percentile of BAALC expression level reproduced in an independent
verification (extended training) data set of 242 cytogenetically normal AML cases
and successfully validated in an external cohort of 215 intermediate cytogenetic 
risk AML cases. Finally, we show independent prognostic value for high EVI1 and
low BAALC in multivariate analysis with other clinically relevant molecular AML
markers. We have developed a highly standardized molecular assay for the
independent gene expression markers EVI1 and BAALC.

PMCID: PMC3605258
PMID: 23497432  [PubMed]


92. Leukemia. 2013 Aug;27(8):1637-49. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.75. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Maintenance of the hematopoietic stem cell pool in bone marrow niches by
EVI1-regulated GPR56.

Saito Y(1), Kaneda K, Suekane A, Ichihara E, Nakahata S, Yamakawa N, Nagai K,
Mizuno N, Kogawa K, Miura I, Itoh H, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor and Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Medical Science,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.

Acute myeloid leukemia with high ecotropic viral integration site-1 expression
(EVI1(high) AML) is classified as a refractory type of leukemia with a poor
prognosis. To provide new insights into the prevention and treatment of this
disease, we identified the high expression of EVI1-regulated G protein-coupled
receptor 56 (GPR56), and the association of high cell adhesion and antiapoptotic 
activities in EVI1(high) AML cells. Knockdown of GPR56 expression decreased the
cellular adhesion ability through inactivation of RhoA signaling, resulting in a 
reduction of cellular growth rates and enhanced apoptosis. Moreover, in
Gpr56(-/-) mice, the number of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) was significantly 
decreased in the bone marrow (BM) and, conversely, was increased in the spleen,
liver and peripheral blood. The number of Gpr56(-/-) HSC progenitors in the
G0/G1-phase was significantly reduced and was associated with impaired cellular
adhesion. Finally, the loss of GPR56 function resulted in a reduction of the in
vivo repopulating ability of the HSCs. In conclusion, GPR56 may represent an
important GPCR for the maintenance of HSCs by acting as a co-ordinator of
interactions with the BM osteosteal niche; furthermore, this receptor has the
potential to become a novel molecular target in EVI1(high) leukemia.

PMID: 23478665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Blood. 2013 Apr 25;121(17):3434-46. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-06-434423. Epub 2013 
Mar 7.

RUNX1/AML1 mutant collaborates with BMI1 overexpression in the development of
human and murine myelodysplastic syndromes.

Harada Y(1), Inoue D, Ding Y, Imagawa J, Doki N, Matsui H, Yahata T, Matsushita
H, Ando K, Sashida G, Iwama A, Kitamura T, Harada H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Information Registry, Research Institute for Radiation
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

RUNX1/AML1 mutations have been identified in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs). In
a mouse bone marrow transplantation model, a RUNX1 mutant, D171N, was shown to
collaborate with Evi1 in the development of MDSs; however, this is rare in
humans. Using enforced expression in human CD34(+) cells, we showed that the
D171N mutant, the most frequent target of mutation in the RUNX1 gene, had an
increased self-renewal capacity, blocked differentiation, dysplasia in all 3
lineages, and tendency for immaturity, but no proliferation ability. BMI1
overexpression was observed in CD34(+) cells from the majority of MDS patients
with RUNX1 mutations, but not in D171N-transduced human CD34(+) cells.
Cotransduction of D171N and BMI1 demonstrated that BMI1 overexpression conferred 
proliferation ability to D171N-transduced cells in both human CD34(+) cells and a
mouse bone marrow transplantation model. Stepwise transduction of D171N followed 
by BMI1 in human CD34(+) cells resulted in long-term proliferation with a
retained CD34(+) cell fraction, which is quite similar to the phenotype in
patients with higher-risk MDSs. Our results indicate that BMI1 overexpression is 
one of the second hit partner genes of RUNX1 mutations that contribute to the
development of MDSs.

PMID: 23471304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56308. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056308. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

EVI1 inhibits apoptosis induced by antileukemic drugs via upregulation of
CDKN1A/p21/WAF in human myeloid cells.

Rommer A(1), Steinmetz B, Herbst F, Hackl H, Heffeter P, Heilos D, Filipits M,
Steinleitner K, Hemmati S, Herbacek I, Schwarzinger I, Hartl K, Rondou P, Glimm
H, Karakaya K, Krämer A, Berger W, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Overexpression of ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) is associated with
aggressive disease in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Despite of its clinical
importance, little is known about the mechanism through which EVI1 confers
resistance to antileukemic drugs. Here, we show that a human myeloid cell line
constitutively overexpressing EVI1 after infection with a retroviral vector
(U937_EVI1) was partially resistant to etoposide and daunorubicin as compared to 
empty vector infected control cells (U937_vec). Similarly, inducible expression
of EVI1 in HL-60 cells decreased their sensitivity to daunorubicin. Gene
expression microarray analyses of U937_EVI1 and U937_vec cells cultured in the
absence or presence of etoposide showed that 77 and 419 genes were regulated by
EVI1 and etoposide, respectively. Notably, mRNA levels of 26 of these genes were 
altered by both stimuli, indicating that EVI1 regulated genes were strongly
enriched among etoposide regulated genes and vice versa. One of the genes that
were induced by both EVI1 and etoposide was CDKN1A/p21/WAF, which in addition to 
its function as a cell cycle regulator plays an important role in conferring
chemotherapy resistance in various tumor types. Indeed, overexpression of CDKN1A 
in U937 cells mimicked the phenotype of EVI1 overexpression, similarly conferring
partial resistance to antileukemic drugs.

PMCID: PMC3572987
PMID: 23457546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Front Pharmacol. 2013 Feb 12;4:9. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2013.00009. eCollection
2013.

Monitoring Response and Resistance to the Novel Arsenical Darinaparsin in an AML 
Patient.

Nielsen TH(1), Johnson N, Garnier N, Kwan S, Yao L, Cocolakis E, Hébert J, Morgan
RA, Paquet E, Callahan KP, Jordan CT, Assouline S, Miller WH Jr, Mann KK.

Author information: 
(1)Segal Cancer Center, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill
University Montréal, QC, Canada.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with inversion of chromosome 3 is characterized by
overexpression of EVI1 and carries a dismal prognosis. Arsenic-containing
compounds have been described to be efficacious in malignancies overexpressing
EVI1. Here, we describe a case of AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2) treated with the
organic arsenical darinaparsin. Using a "personalized medicine approach," two
different arsenicals were screened for anti-leukemic effect against the patient's
cells ex vivo. The most promising compound, darinaparsin, was selected for in
vivo treatment. Clinical effect was almost immediate, with a normalization of
temperature, a stabilization of white blood cell (WBC) counts and an increased
quality of life. Longitudinal monitoring of patient response and resistance
incorporating significant correlative studies on patient-derived blood samples
over the two cycles of darinaparsin given to this patient allowed us to evaluate 
potential mechanisms of response and resistance. The anti-leukemic effects of
darinaparsin correlated with inhibition of the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and
production of the inflammatory cytokine IL-8. Emergence of resistance was
suspected during treatment cycle 2 and supported by xenograft studies in nude
mice. Darinaparsin resistance correlated with an attenuation of the effect of
treatment on the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. The results from this patient
indicate that darinaparsin may be a good treatment option for inv(3) AML and that
inhibition of the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway may be predictive of response.
Longitudinal monitoring of disease response as well as several correlative
parameters allowed for the generation of novel correlations and predictors of
response to experimental therapy in a heavily pretreated patient.

PMCID: PMC3570070
PMID: 23408639  [PubMed]


96. J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Apr;11(4):593-604. doi: 10.1111/jth.12131.

Transcription factors in late megakaryopoiesis and related platelet disorders.

Tijssen MR(1), Ghevaert C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, UK.

Cell type-specific transcription factors regulate the repertoire of genes
expressed in a cell and thereby determine its phenotype. The differentiation of
megakaryocytes, the platelet progenitors, from hematopoietic stem cells is a
well-known process that can be mimicked in culture. However, the efficient
formation of platelets in culture remains a challenge. Platelet formation is a
complicated process including megakaryocyte maturation, platelet assembly and
platelet shedding. We hypothesize that a better understanding of the
transcriptional regulation of this process will allow us to influence it such
that sufficient numbers of platelets can be produced for clinical applications.
After an introduction to gene regulation and platelet formation, this review
summarizes the current knowledge of the regulation of platelet formation by the
transcription factors EVI1, GATA1, FLI1, NFE2, RUNX1, SRF and its co-factor MKL1,
and TAL1. Also covered is how some platelet disorders including
myeloproliferative neoplasms, result from disturbances of the transcriptional
regulation. These disorders give us invaluable insights into the crucial role
these transcription factors play in platelet formation. Finally, there is
discussion of how a better understanding of these processes will be needed to
allow for efficient production of platelets in vitro.

© 2013 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMCID: PMC3824237
PMID: 23311859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Assoc Genet Technol. 2013;39(4):190-4.

MLL Rearrangment and EVI1 Deletion in BCR/ABL1 Positive Chronic Myeloid Leukemia.

Ivanov A(1), Sukhanova M(1), Raul T(1), Borinets O(1), Hui W(1), Aggarwal V(1),
Raca G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Cytogenetics, Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

We present unusual cytogenetic findings in a 65-year-old female with blast phase 
(BC) of Philadelphia chromosome positive chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
Chromosome analysis revealed two related abnormal clones, one characterized by a 
t(9;22)(q34;q11.2), and the other showing a t(11;19)(q23;p13.1) in addition to
the t(9;22)(q34;q11). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) testing confirmed
that the t(11;19) involved the MLL gene on 11q23. High-density whole-genome SNP
array analysis of leukemia cells showed a number of submicroscopic copy number
abnormalities, including a deletion of the MECOM (MDS1 and EVI1 complex locus
protein EVI1) gene at 3q26. Clinical course was aggressive, and the patient
failed to respond to both imatinib and dasatinib despite the absence of
resistance-associated mutations in the BCR/ABL1 gene. To our knowledge, the
combination of a t(9;22) with t(11;19)(q23;p13.1) has only been reported in one
case, while a deletion of the EVI1 gene has never been reported in CML.

PMID: 26030291  [PubMed]


98. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051527. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

High DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B levels: a poor prognostic marker in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Hayette S(1), Thomas X, Jallades L, Chabane K, Charlot C, Tigaud I, Gazzo S,
Morisset S, Cornillet-Lefebvre P, Plesa A, Huet S, Renneville A, Salles G,
Nicolini FE, Magaud JP, Michallet M.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hématologie Biologique, Centre Hospitalier Lyon-Sud, Pierre-Bénite
France, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. sandrine.hayette@chu-lyon.fr

It has been recently shown that DNA methyl transferase overexpression is
correlated with unfavourable prognosis in human malignancies while methylation
deregulation remains a hallmark that defines acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The
oncogenic transcription factor EVI1 is involved in methylation deregulation and
its overexpression plays a major role for predicting an adverse outcome.
Moreover, the identification of DNMT3A mutations in AML patients has recently
been described as a poor prognostic indicator. In order to clarify relationship
between these key actors in methylation mechanisms and their potential impact on 
patient outcomes, we analysed 195 de novo AML patients for the expression of
DNMT3A, 3B (and its non-catalytic variant 3B(NC)) and their correlations with the
outcome and the expression of other common prognostic genetic biomarkers (EVI1,
NPM1, FLT3ITD/TKD and MLL) in adult AML. The overexpression of DNMT3B/3B(NC) is
(i) significantly correlated with a shorter overall survival, and (ii) inversely 
significantly correlated with event-free survival and DNMT3A expression level.
Moreover, multivariate analysis showed that a high expression level of
DNMT3B/3B(NC) is statistically a significant independent poor prognostic
indicator. This study represents the first report showing that the overexpression
of DNMT3B/3B(NC) is an independent predictor of poor survival in AML. Its
quantification should be implemented to the genetic profile used to stratify
patients for therapeutical strategies and should be useful to identify patients
who may benefit from therapy based on demethylating agents.

PMCID: PMC3519733
PMID: 23251566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Hematol. 2013 Jan;97(1):83-91. doi: 10.1007/s12185-012-1232-5. Epub 2012
Dec 19.

Fadd and Skp2 are possible downstream targets of RUNX1-EVI1.

Maki K(1), Sugita F, Nakamura Y, Sasaki K, Mitani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Dokkyo Medical University School of
Medicine, 880 Kitakobayashi, Mibu-machi, Shimotsuga-gun, Tochigi, Japan.

RUNX1-EVI1 generated by t(3;21) is a causative gene in the leukemic
transformation of chronic hematopoietic stem cell tumors. Recruitment of histone 
deacetylase via carboxyl terminal-binding protein by RUNX1-EVI1 results in
transcriptional dysregulation in target genes of wild-type RUNX1, leading to
differentiation block and apoptotic prevention of myeloid precursor cells. In the
present study using mouse primary hematopoietic cells, we confirmed that
RUNX1-EVI1 enhances replating activity of hematopoietic colonies and represses
differentiation along the myeloid lineage under treatment with granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor. We then observed that these biological effects of
RUX1-EVI1 are canceled by the treatment of histone deacetylase inhibitors,
trichostatin A and valproic acid. To identify target genes whose expression is
suppressed by RUNX1-EVI1, we compared the expression profiles of apoptosis and
cell-cycle-related genes in control and RUNX1-EVI1-expressing cells, and in
RUNX1-EVI1-expressing cells with and without treatment with histone deacetylase
inhibitors. Notably, the expression of three genes, Fadd, Skp2 and CD40lg, was
found to be suppressed in RUNX1-EVI1-expressing cells and to be recovered on
treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors. Considering that these genes have 
some RUNX1-binding sites, they may be direct or indirect targets of RUNX1-EVI1,
and changes in their expression may play some role in leukemogenesis by
RUNX1-EVI1.

PMID: 23250858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Leukemia. 2013 Apr;27(4):852-60. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.363. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

Cell of origin determines clinically relevant subtypes of MLL-rearranged AML.

Krivtsov AV(1), Figueroa ME, Sinha AU, Stubbs MC, Feng Z, Valk PJ, Delwel R,
Döhner K, Bullinger L, Kung AL, Melnick AM, Armstrong SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)-fusion proteins can induce acute myeloid leukemias
(AMLs) from either hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) or granulocyte-macrophage
progenitors (GMPs), but it remains unclear whether the cell of origin influences 
the biology of the resultant leukemia. MLL-AF9-transduced single HSCs or GMPs
could be continuously replated, but HSC-derived clones were more likely than
GMP-derived clones to initiate AML in mice. Leukemia stem cells derived from
either HSCs or GMPs had a similar immunophenotype consistent with a maturing
myeloid cell (LGMP). Gene expression analyses demonstrated that LGMP inherited
gene expression programs from the cell of origin including high-level Evi-1
expression in HSC-derived LGMP. The gene expression signature of LGMP derived
from HSCs was enriched in poor prognosis human MLL-rearranged AML in three
independent data sets. Moreover, global 5'-mC levels were elevated in HSC-derived
leukemias as compared with GMP-derived leukemias. This mirrored a difference seen
in 5'-mC between MLL-rearranged human leukemias that are either EVI1 positive or 
EVI1 negative. Finally, HSC-derived leukemias were more resistant to chemotherapy
than GMP-derived leukemias. These data demonstrate that the cell of origin
influences the gene expression profile, the epigenetic state and the drug
response in AML, and that these differences can account for clinical
heterogeneity within a molecularly defined group of leukemias.

PMCID: PMC4693300
PMID: 23235717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Leukemia. 2013 Apr;27(5):1127-38. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.355. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Activation of Evi1 inhibits cell cycle progression and differentiation of
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Kustikova OS(1), Schwarzer A, Stahlhut M, Brugman MH, Neumann T, Yang M, Li Z,
Schambach A, Heinz N, Gerdes S, Roeder I, Ha TC, Steinemann D, Schlegelberger B, 
Baum C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, Hannover, Germany.

The transcription factor Evi1 has an outstanding role in the formation and
transformation of hematopoietic cells. Its activation by chromosomal
rearrangement induces a myelodysplastic syndrome with progression to acute
myeloid leukemia of poor prognosis. Similarly, retroviral insertion-mediated
upregulation confers a competitive advantage to transplanted hematopoietic cells,
triggering clonal dominance or even leukemia. To study the molecular and
functional response of primary murine hematopoietic progenitor cells to the
activation of Evi1, we established an inducible lentiviral expression system.
EVI1 had a biphasic effect with initial growth inhibition and retarded myeloid
differentiation linked to enhanced survival of myeloblasts in long-term cultures.
Gene expression microarray analysis revealed that within 24<U+2009>h EVI1 upregulated
'stemness' genes characteristic for long-term hematopoietic stem cells (Aldh1a1, 
Abca1, Cdkn1b, Cdkn1c, Epcam, among others) but downregulated genes involved in
DNA replication (Cyclins and their kinases, among others) and DNA repair
(including Brca1, Brca2, Rad51). Cell cycle analysis demonstrated EVI1's
anti-proliferative effect to be strictly dose-dependent with accumulation of
cells in G0/G1, but preservation of a small fraction of long-term proliferating
cells. Although confined to cultured cells, our study contributes to new
hypotheses addressing the mechanisms and molecular targets involved in
preleukemic clonal dominance or leukemic transformation by Evi1.

PMID: 23212151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Anticancer Res. 2012 Nov;32(11):4883-9.

EVI1 and MDS1/EVI1 expression during primary human hematopoietic progenitor cell 
differentiation into various myeloid lineages.

Steinleitner K(1), Rampetsreiter P, Köffel R, Ramanathan G, Mannhalter C, Strobl 
H, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20,
1090 Wien, Austria.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Overexpression of ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1)
is associated with aggressive disease in myeloid leukemia. We therefore studied
its expression and function in cluster of differentiation 34-positive (CD34(+))
primary human hematopoietic progenitor cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CD34(+) cells were differentiated into various myeloid
lineages using the appropriate cytokines. EVI1 expression was measured by
quantitative real time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) 
and intranuclear fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Experimental
manipulation of EVI1 levels was achieved using retroviral infection.
RESULTS: EVI1 mRNA and its variant myelodysplastic syndrome 1 (MDS1)/EVI1, which 
gives rise to a partially antagonistic protein, were detectable in CD34(+) cells,
but their levels declined rapidly during differentiation into the granulocyte,
monocyte, dendritic, erythroid, and megakaryocyte lineages. Similarly, EVI1
protein levels decreased during myeloid differentiation. Attempts to
experimentally express EVI1 in CD34(+) and U937 cells indicated that ectopic
expression of EVI1 may cause growth arrest, apoptosis and/or senescence of human 
hematopoietic cells.
CONCLUSION: EVI1 is expressed in human hematopoietic progenitor cells, but is
down-regulated during differentiation. Ectopic expression of EVI1 may activate
cellular safeguards against oncogene activation.

PMCID: PMC3605800
PMID: 23155256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Int J Hematol. 2012 Dec;96(6):806-9. doi: 10.1007/s12185-012-1185-8. Epub 2012
Oct 9.

Acquired EVI1 rearrangement involved in the transformation from 5q- syndrome to
pre-B lymphocytic leukemia in a Chinese patient.

Liu D(1), Chen S, Pan J, Zhu M, Wu N, Zhu F, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Jiangsu Institute of
Hematology, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006, People's Republic of China.
liudd_2006@126.com

The anomalous EVI1 rearrangements/t(3;3)(q21;q26) is more frequently found in
myelocytic malignancies. 5q- syndrome is a newly defined subtype of
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) first proposed by the World Health Organization in
2001. Cases of acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) with 5q- anomaly or t(3;3)/EVI1
rearrangement have rarely been reported. We report a rare 5q- syndrome case which
ultimately transformed to acute lymphocytic leukemia accompanied by a secondary
cytogenetic anomaly of t(3;3)(q21;q26) and EVI1 rearrangement around 3 years
after the diagnosis of 5q- syndrome. This rare case suggests that the 5q- clone
of MDS may originate from a multipotent cell with a capacity to differentiate
toward both myeloid and lymphoid lineages. It also indicates that although the
t(3;3)/EVI1 rearrangement is mostly related to myelocytic neoplasms, the
t(3;3)/EVI1-rearrangement may also play an important role in the development of
ALL. The results of the necessary tests must be analyzed sufficiently prior to
making a final diagnosis.

PMID: 23054648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell Cycle. 2012 Nov 1;11(21):3915. doi: 10.4161/cc.22392. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

New functions for ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1), an oncogene causing 
aggressive malignant disease.

Wieser R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. rotraud.wieser@meduniwien.ac.at

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Sep 15;11(18):3492-503.

PMCID: PMC3507483
PMID: 23032258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jan 1;31(1):95-103. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.41.5505. Epub 2012
Sep 24.

Deregulated expression of EVI1 defines a poor prognostic subset of MLL-rearranged
acute myeloid leukemias: a study of the German-Austrian Acute Myeloid Leukemia
Study Group and the Dutch-Belgian-Swiss HOVON/SAKK Cooperative Group.

Gröschel S(1), Schlenk RF, Engelmann J, Rockova V, Teleanu V, Kühn MW, Eiwen K,
Erpelinck C, Havermans M, Lübbert M, Germing U, Schmidt-Wolf IG, Beverloo HB,
Schuurhuis GJ, Ossenkoppele GJ, Schlegelberger B, Verdonck LF, Vellenga E,
Verhoef G, Vandenberghe P, Pabst T, Bargetzi M, Krauter J, Ganser A, Valk PJ,
Löwenberg B, Döhner K, Döhner H, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the prognostic value of ecotropic viral integration 1 gene
(EVI1) overexpression in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with MLL gene
rearrangements.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We identified 286 patients with AML with t(11q23) enrolled 
onto German-Austrian Acute Myeloid Leukemia Study Group and Dutch-Belgian-Swiss
Hemato-Oncology Cooperative Group prospective treatment trials. Material was
available from 177 AML patients for EVI1 expression analysis.
RESULTS: We divided 286 MLL-rearranged AMLs into three subgroups:
t(9;11)(p22;q23) (44.8%), t(6;11)(q27;q23) (14.7%), and t(v;11q23) (40.5%). EVI1 
overexpression (EVI1(+)) was found in 45.8% of all patients with t(11q23), with
t(6;11) showing the highest frequency (83.9%), followed by t(9;11) at 40.0%, and 
t(v;11q23) at 34.8%. Concurrent gene mutations were rare or absent in all three
subgroups. Within all t(11q23) AMLs, EVI1(+) was the sole prognostic factor,
predicting for inferior overall survival (OS; hazard ratio [HR], 2.06; P = .003),
relapse-free survival (HR, 2.28; P = .002), and event-free survival (HR, 1.79; P 
= .009). EVI1(+) AMLs with t(11q23) in first complete remission (CR) had a
significantly better outcome after allogeneic transplantation compared with other
consolidation therapies (5-year OS, 54.7% v 0%; Mantel-Byar, P = .0006). EVI1(-) 
t(9;11) AMLs had lower WBC counts, more commonly FAB M5 morphology, and
frequently had additional trisomy 8 (39.6%; P < .001). Among t(9;11) AMLs,
EVI1(+) again was the sole independent adverse prognostic factor for survival.
CONCLUSION: Deregulated EVI1 expression defines poor prognostic subsets among AML
with t(11q23) and AML with t(9;11)(p22;q23). Patients with EVI1(+) MLL-rearranged
AML seem to benefit from allogeneic transplantation in first CR.

PMID: 23008312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Med Genet. 2012 Sep;49(9):598-600. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-100990.

Deletion of the 3q26 region including the EVI1 and MDS1 genes in a neonate with
congenital thrombocytopenia and subsequent aplastic anaemia.

Nielsen M(1), Vermont CL, Aten E, Ruivenkamp CA, van Herrewegen F, Santen GW,
Breuning MH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. m.nielsen@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Gene-targeting studies in mice have revealed a key role for EVI1
protein in the maintenance of haematopoiesis, and argue in favour of a gene
dosage requirement for EVI1 in the regulation of haematopoietic stem cells.
Furthermore, a fusion transcript of MDS1 and EVI1 has been shown to play a
critical role in maintaining long-term haematopoietic stem cell function.
Inappropriate activation of EVI1, usually due to a translocation, is a well known
and unfavourable change in several myeloid malignancies. It is not known whether 
haploinsufficiency of any of these genes leads to disease in humans.
METHODS: SNP array analysis in a patient with in a neonate with congenital
thrombocytopenia and subsequent aplastic anaemia
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We report for the first time a constitutional deletion
encompassing the EVI1 and MDS1 genes in a human, and argue that the deletion
causes congenital bone marrow failure in this patient.

PMID: 22972950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Hematol Oncol. 2012 Sep 10;5:53. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-5-53.

Arsenic trioxide and ascorbic acid interfere with the BCL2 family genes in
patients with myelodysplastic syndromes: an ex-vivo study.

Galimberti S(1), Guerrini F, Salvi F, Petrini I, Gioia D, Messa E, Palumbo GA,
Cilloni D, Petrini M, Levis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Transplant, New Advances in Medicine, Section of
Hematology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. sara.galimberti@med.unipi.it

BACKGROUND: Arsenic Trioxide (ATO) is effective in about 20% of patients with
myelodysplasia (MDS); its mechanisms of action have already been evaluated in
vitro, but the in vivo activity is still not fully understood. Since ATO induces 
apoptosis in in vitro models, we compared the expression of 93 apoptotic genes in
patients' bone marrow before and after ATO treatment. For this analysis, we
selected 12 patients affected by MDS who received ATO in combination with
Ascorbic Acid in the context of the Italian clinical trial NCT00803530, EudracT
Number 2005-001321-28.
METHODS: Real-time PCR quantitative assays for genes involved in apoptosis were
performed using TaqMan® Assays in 384-Well Microfluidic Cards "TaqMan® Human
Apoptosis Array".Quantitative RT-PCR for expression of EVI1 and WT1 genes was
also performed. Gene expression values (Ct) were normalized to the median
expression of 3 housekeeping genes present in the card (18S, ACTB and GAPDH).
RESULTS: ATO treatment induced up-regulation of some pro-apoptotic genes, such as
HRK, BAK1, CASPASE-5, BAD, TNFRSF1A, and BCL2L14 and down-regulation of ICEBERG. 
In the majority of cases with stable disease, apoptotic gene expression profile
did not change, whereas in cases with advanced MDS more frequently pro-apoptotic 
genes were up-regulated. Two patients achieved a major response: in the patient
with refractory anemia the treatment down-regulated 69% of the pro-apoptotic
genes, whereas 91% of the pro-apoptotic genes were up-regulated in the patient
affected by refractory anemia with excess of blasts-1. Responsive patients showed
a higher induction of BAD than those with stable disease. Finally, WT1 gene
expression was down-regulated by the treatment in responsive cases.
CONCLUSIONS: These results represent the basis for a possible association of ATO 
with other biological compounds able to modify the apoptotic pathways, such as
inhibitors of the BCL2 family.

PMCID: PMC3465246
PMID: 22964015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Oncotarget. 2012 Aug;3(8):824-32.

Development of gene expression-based risk score in cytogenetically normal acute
myeloid leukemia patients.

Bou Samra E(1), Klein B, Commes T, Moreaux J.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe d'études des transcriptomes, Université MONTPELLIER 2, Montpellier,
F-34197 France .

Patients with normal karyotype represent the single largest cytogenetic group of 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), with highly heterogeneous clinical and molecular
characteristics. In this study, we sought to determine new prognostic biomarkers 
in cytogenetically normal (CN)-AML patients. A gene expression (GE)-based risk
score was built, summing up the prognostic value of 22 genes whose expression is 
associated with a bad prognosis in a training cohort of 163 patients. GE-based
risk score allowed identifying a high-risk group of patients (53.4%) in two
independent cohorts of CN-AML patients. GE-based risk score and EVI1 gene
expression remained independent prognostic factors using multivariate Cox
analyses. Combining GE-based risk score with EVI1 gene expression allowed the
identification of three clinically different groups of patients in two
independent cohorts of CN-AML patients. Thus, GE-based risk score is powerful to 
predict clinical outcome for CN-AML patients and may provide potential
therapeutic advances.

PMCID: PMC3478459
PMID: 22910040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Cycle. 2012 Sep 15;11(18):3492-503. doi: 10.4161/cc.21801. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

Overexpression of EVI1 interferes with cytokinesis and leads to accumulation of
cells with supernumerary centrosomes in G0/1 phase.

Karakaya K(1), Herbst F, Ball C, Glimm H, Krämer A, Löffler H.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cooperation Unit Molecular Hematology/Oncology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ) and Department of Internal Medicine V, University of
Heidelberg; Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Nov 1;11(21):3915.

Ectopic viral integration site 1 (EVI1), a transcription factor frequently
overexpressed in myeloid neoplasias, has been implicated in the generation of
malignancy-associated centrosomal aberrations and chromosomal instability. Here, 
we sought to investigate the underlying cause of centrosome amplification in
EVI1-overexpressing cells. We found that overexpression of EVI1-HA in U2OS cells 
induced supernumerary centrosomes, which were consistently associated with
enlarged nuclei or binuclear cells. Live cell imaging experiments identified
cytokinesis failure as the underlying cause of this phenotype. In accordance with
previous reports, EVI1 overexpression induced a partial cell cycle arrest in G0/1
phase, accompanied by elevated cyclin D1 and p21 levels, reduced Cdk2 activity
and activation of the p53 pathway. Supernumerary centrosomes predominantly
occurred in resting cells, as identified by low levels of the proliferation
marker Ki-67, leading to the conclusion that they result from tetraploidization
after cytokinesis failure and are confined to G0/1-arrested tetraploid cells.
Depletion of p53 using siRNA revealed that further polyploidization of these
cells was inhibited by the p53-dependent tetraploidy checkpoint.

PMCID: PMC3467026
PMID: 22894935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Dec;51(12):1079-85. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21992. Epub
2012 Aug 8.

Three novel cytogenetically cryptic EVI1 rearrangements associated with increased
EVI1 expression and poor prognosis identified in 27 acute myeloid leukemia cases.

Haferlach C(1), Bacher U, Grossmann V, Schindela S, Zenger M, Kohlmann A, Kern W,
Haferlach T, Schnittger S.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany. claudia.haferlach@mll.com

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), increased ecotropic virus integration site 1
protein homolog (EVI1) gene expression is prognostically unfavorable. Subsets of 
cases show 3q26 rearrangements, such as inv(3)(q21q26)/t(3;3)(q21;q26),
frequently accompanied by chromosome 7 abnormalities. We investigated whether
cytogenetically cryptic EVI1 rearrangements may cause EVI1 overexpression in
myeloid malignancies without 3q26 abnormalities and investigated 983 patients
with AML (n = 606) or myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS; n = 377) with normal
karyotype (CN-AML/CN-MDS, n = 594) or chromosome 7 abnormalities (n = 389) for
EVI1 rearrangements using interphase FISH. We identified cytogenetically cryptic 
EVI1 rearrangements in 27 patients (19 AML, 8 MDS): inv(3)(p24q26) [n = 10];
t(3;21)(q26;q11) [n = 9]; and der(7)t(3;7)(q26;q21) [n = 8]. Elevated EVI1
expression was detected in nearly all cases with cryptic EVI1 rearrangements:
Median %EVI1/ABL1 was 92.8 (range: 29.8-146.1) in inv(3)(p24q26), 104.9
(41.4-176.3) in t(3;21)(q26;q11), and 101.8 (4.4-210.4) in der(7)t(3;7)(q26;q21).
This was similar to median %EVI1/ABL1 of 73.9 (range: 7.3-585.6) in an
independent cohort of inv(3)(q21q26)/t(3;3)(q21;q26) and 67.1 (2.3-410.7) in
other 3q26/EVI1 rearrangements. Healthy controls showed median EVI1 expression of
0.5 (range: 0.0-5.8). Using SNP microarray and sequencing analyses, the
breakpoints of der(7)t(3;7)(q26;q21) were assigned to CDK6 and centromeric of
EVI1, and of t(3;21)(q26;q11) to be within EVI1 and NRIP1. Median overall
survival in patients with cryptic EVI1 rearrangements was short, comparable to
patients with inv(3)(q21q26)/t(3;3)(q21;q26) or other EVI1 rearrangements.
Cryptic EVI1 rearrangements contribute to explain the clinical heterogeneity of
CN-AML and are associated with elevated EVI1 expression and an unfavorable
prognosis. Screening for cryptic EVI1 rearrangements by FISH may be particularly 
appropriate in CN-AML with elevated EVI1 expression or in AML/MDS patients with
chromosome 7 abnormalities.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22887804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Ann Hematol. 2012 Dec;91(12):1887-95. doi: 10.1007/s00277-012-1538-7. Epub 2012
Aug 9.

Simultaneous analysis of the expression of 14 genes with individual prognostic
value in myelodysplastic syndrome patients at diagnosis: WT1 detection in
peripheral blood adversely affects survival.

Santamaría C(1), Ramos F, Puig N, Barragán E, de Paz R, Pedro C, Insunza A, Tormo
M, Del Cañizo C, Diez-Campelo M, Xicoy B, Salido E, Sánchez del Real J, Hernández
M, Chillón C, Sanz GF, García-Sanz R, San Miguel JF, González M.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Hematología, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Paseo de San
Vicente, 58-182, Salamanca 37007, Spain. cmsantamaria@usal.es

Several studies have evaluated the prognostic value of the individual expression 
of certain genes in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). However, none 
of them includes their simultaneous analysis by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). We evaluated relative expression levels of 14 molecular markers
in 193 peripheral blood samples from untreated MDS patients using real-time PCR. 
Detectable WT1 expression levels, low TET2, and low IER3 gene expression were the
only markers showing in univariate analysis a poor prognostic value for all
treatment-free (TFS), progression-free (PFS), and overall survival (OS). In
multivariate analysis, molecular parameters associated with a shorter TFS were:
WT1 detection (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014), low TET2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002), and low IER3 expression
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025). WT1 detection (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006) and low TET2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006) expression were
associated with a shorter PFS when multivariate analysis was carried out by
including only molecular markers. Molecular values with an independent value in
OS were: WT1 detection (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003), high EVI1 expression (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001), and
undetectatable p15-CDKN2B (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.037). WT1 expressers were associated with
adverse clinical-biological features, high IPSS and WPSS scoring, and unfavorable
molecular expression profile. In summary, detectable WT1 expression levels, and
low TET2 and low IER3 expression in peripheral blood showed a strong association 
with adverse prognosis in MDS patients at diagnosis. However, WT1 was the only
molecular marker displaying an independent prognostic value in both OS and TFS.

PMID: 22875062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Oncogene. 2013 Jun 20;32(25):3028-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.329. Epub 2012 Jul
30.

Selection for Evi1 activation in myelomonocytic leukemia induced by hyperactive
signaling through wild-type NRas.

Wolf S(1), Rudolph C, Morgan M, Büsche G, Salguero G, Stripecke R, Schlegelberger
B, Baum C, Modlich U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Activation of NRas signaling is frequently found in human myeloid leukemia and
can be induced by activating mutations as well as by mutations in receptors or
signaling molecules upstream of NRas. To study NRas-induced leukemogenesis, we
retrovirally overexpressed wild-type NRas in a murine bone marrow transplantation
(BMT) model in C57BL/6J mice. Overexpression of wild-type NRas caused
myelomonocytic leukemias ~3 months after BMT in the majority of mice. A subset of
mice (30%) developed malignant histiocytosis similar to mice that received
mutationally activated NRas(G12D)-expressing bone marrow. Aberrant Ras signaling 
was demonstrated in cells expressing mutationally active or wild-type NRas, as
increased activation of Erk and Akt was observed in both models. However, more
NRas(G12D) were found to be in the activated, GTP-bound state in comparison with 
wild-type NRas. Consistent with observations reported for primary human
myelomonocytic leukemia cells, Stat5 activation was also detected in murine
leukemic cells. Furthermore, clonal evolution was detected in NRas
wild-type-induced leukemias, including expansion of clones containing activating 
vector insertions in known oncogenes, such as Evi1 and Prdm16. In vitro
cooperation of NRas and Evi1 improved long-term expansion of primary murine bone 
marrow cells. Evi1-positive cells upregulated Bcl-2 and may, therefore, provide
anti-apoptotic signals that collaborate with the NRas-induced proliferative
effects. As activation of Evi1 has been shown to coincide with NRAS mutations in 
human acute myeloid leukemia, our murine model recapitulates crucial events in
human leukemogenesis.

PMID: 22847614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Oncogene. 2013 Apr 18;32(16):2069-78. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.222. Epub 2012 Jun
11.

Functional characterization of the promoter region of the human EVI1 gene in
acute myeloid leukemia: RUNX1 and ELK1 directly regulate its transcription.

Maicas M(1), Vázquez I, Vicente C, García-Sánchez MA, Marcotegui N, Urquiza L,
Calasanz MJ, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Division of Oncology, CIMA, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain.

The EVI1 gene (3q26) codes for a transcription factor with important roles in
normal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis. High expression of EVI1 is a negative
prognostic indicator of survival in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) irrespective of 
the presence of 3q26 rearrangements. However, the only known mechanisms that lead
to EVI1 overexpression are 3q aberrations, and the MLL-ENL oncoprotein, which
activates the transcription of EVI1 in hematopoietic stem cells. Our aim was to
characterize the functional promoter region of EVI1, and to identify
transcription factors involved in the regulation of this gene. Generation of
seven truncated constructs and luciferase reporter assays allowed us to determine
a 318-bp region as the minimal promoter region of EVI1. Site-directed mutagenesis
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays identified RUNX1 and ELK1 as
putative transcription factors of EVI1. Furthermore, knockdown of RUNX1 and ELK1 
led to EVI1 downregulation, and their overexpression to upregulation of EVI1.
Interestingly, in a series of patient samples with AML at diagnosis, we found a
significant positive correlation between EVI1 and RUNX1 at protein level.
Moreover, we identified one of the roles of RUNX1 in the activation of EVI1
during megakaryocytic differentiation. EVI1 knockdown significantly inhibited the
expression of megakaryocytic markers after treating K562 cells with TPA, as
happens when knocking down RUNX1. In conclusion, we define the minimal promoter
region of EVI1 and demonstrate that RUNX1 and ELK1, two proteins with essential
functions in hematopoiesis, regulate EVI1 in AML. Furthermore, our results show
that one of the mechanisms by which RUNX1 regulates the transcription of EVI1 is 
by acetylation of the histone H3 on its promoter region. This study opens new
directions to further understand the mechanisms of EVI1 overexpressing leukemias.

PMID: 22689058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cancer Genet. 2012 May;205(5):255-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.02.003.

Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis with EVI1 amplification.

Grygalewicz B(1), Woroniecka R, Pastwinska A, Rygier J, Krawczyk P, Borg K,
Makuch-Lasica H, Patkowska E, Pienkowska-Grela B.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetic Laboratory, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Centre and
Institute, Warsaw, Poland. bgrygal@coi.waw.pl

EVI1 is located on chromosome 3q26 and is up-regulated mostly through an
inv(3)(q21q26) or t(3;3)(q21;q26). Chromosomal aberrations involving 3q26
comprise 1-2% of all acute myeloid leukemia (AML). These changes result in
overexpression of the EVI1 oncogene. EVI1 transcriptional activation has been
reported in up to 10% of AML patients, even in the absence of 3q26 changes, and
is an independent indicator of adverse prognosis. Rearrangements of the EVI1
locus are often associated with monosomy 7. We present a case of acute
panmyelosis with myelofibrosis with a unique EVI1 amplification within a
derivative 8 chromosome, characterized by karyotyping and fluorescence in situ
hybridization, conventional high resolution comparative genomic hybridization, as
well as by gene expression studies. We conclude that EVI1 overexpression as a
consequence of EVI1 gene amplification causes similar biological effects to the
changes caused by the typical 3q26 aberrations such as an inv(3)(q21q26) or
t(3;3)(q21;q26) with EVI1 gene rearrangements.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22682625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;891:341-70. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-873-3_16.

Monitoring for potential adverse effects of prenatal gene therapy: genotoxicity
analysis in vitro and on small animal models ex vivo and in vivo.

Themis M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy and Genotoxicity Research Group, Brunel University, London, UK.
Michael.Themis@brunel.ac.uk

Gene delivery by integrating vectors has the potential to cause genotoxicity in
the host by insertional mutagenesis (IM). Previously, the risk of IM by
replication incompetent retroviral vectors was believed to be small. However, the
recent observation of leukaemic events due to gamma retroviral vector insertion
and activation of the LMO-2 proto-oncogene in patients enrolled in the French and
British gene therapy trials for X-SCID demonstrates the need to understand vector
associated genotoxicity in greater detail. These findings have led to the
development of in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo assays designed to predict
genotoxic risk and to further our mechanistic understanding of this process at
the molecular level. In vitro assays include transformation of murine
haematopoietic stem cells by integrating retroviral (RV) or lentiviral (LV)
vectors and measurement of cell survival resulting from transformation due to
integration mainly into the Evi1 oncogene. Ex vivo assays involve harvesting
haematopoietic stem cells from mice followed by gene transfer and re-infusion of 
RV or LV infected cells to reconstitute the immune system. Insertional
mutagenesis is then determined by analysis of clonally dominant populations of
cells. The latter model has also been made highly sensitive using cells from mice
predisposed to oncogenesis by lack of the P53 and Rb pathways. Our investigations
on fetal gene therapy discovered a high incidence of liver tumour development
that appears to be associated with vector insertions into cancer-related genes.
Many genes involved in growth and differentiation are actively transcribed in
early developmental and are therefore in an open chromatin configuration, which
favours provirus insertion. Some of these genes are known oncogenes or
anti-oncogenes and are not usually active during adulthood. We found that in
utero injection of primate HIV-1, HR'SIN-cPPT-S-FIX-W does not result in
oncogenesis as opposed to administration of non-primate equine infectious anaemia
virus (EIAV), SMART 2 lentivirus vectors and, most recently, the non-primate
pLIONhAATGFP (FIV) vector, which both give rise to high frequency hepatocellular 
carcinoma. The peculiar integration pattern into cancer-related genes observed in
this model makes the fetal mouse a sensitive tool, not only to investigate
long-term vector-mediated gene expression, but also vector safety in an in vivo
system with minimal immunological interference. The identification of distinct
differences in genotoxic outcome between the applied vector systems i.e. EIAV or 
FIV vectors versus HIV may indicate a particular biosafety profile of the
HIV-1-based vector, which renders it potentially suitable for safe prenatal gene 
therapy.

PMID: 22648780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Oncogene. 2013 Apr 11;32(15):1978-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.204. Epub 2012 May
28.

AML1-ETO targets and suppresses cathepsin G, a serine protease, which is able to 
degrade AML1-ETO in t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia.

Jin W(1), Wu K, Li YZ, Yang WT, Zou B, Zhang F, Zhang J, Wang KK.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTU-SM),
Shanghai, China.

Although the significance of cathepsin G (CTSG) in host defense has been
intensively investigated, little is known about its potential roles in
granulopoiesis or leukemogenesis. We report here that CTSG is directly targeted
and suppressed by AML1-ETO in t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Luciferase
assays demonstrate that the CTSG promoter is strongly transactivated by AML1 and 
the AML1-dependent transactivation is suppressed by AML1-ETO. We also define a
novel regulatory mechanism by which AML1-ETO-mediated transrepression requires
both AML1-ETO and AML1 binding at adjacent sites, instead of the replacement of
AML1 by AML1-ETO, and wild-type AML1 binding is a prerequisite for the repressive
effect caused by AML1-ETO. Further evidence shows that CTSG, as a hematopoietic
serine protease, can degrade AML1-ETO both in vitro and in vivo. Restoration of
CTSG induces partial differentiation, growth inhibition and apoptosis in
AML1-ETO-positive cells. In addition to t(8;21) AML, CTSG downregulation is
observed in AML patients with other cytogenetic/genetic abnormalities that
potentially interrupt normal AML1 function, that is, inv(16) and EVI1
overexpression. Thus, the targeting and suppression of CTSG by AML1-ETO in
t(8;21) AML may provide a mechanism for leukemia cells to escape from the
intracellular surveillance system by preventing degradation of foreign proteins.

PMID: 22641217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Exp Hematol. 2012 Sep;40(9):724-737.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.05.007. Epub
2012 May 24.

CML cells expressing the TEL/MDS1/EVI1 fusion are resistant to imatinib-induced
apoptosis through inhibition of BAD, but are resensitized with ABT-737.

Shimada K(1), Tomita A, Minami Y, Abe A, Hind CK, Kiyoi H, Cragg MS, Naoe T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Research, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.
kshimada@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Chronic myeloid leukemia is the first disease in which the potential of molecular
targeted therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) was realized. Despite
this success, a proportion of patients, particularly with advanced disease, are, 
or become, resistant to this treatment. Overcoming resistance and uncovering the 
underlying mechanisms is vital for further improvement of clinical outcomes. Here
we report the identification, development, and characterization of a novel
chronic myeloid leukemia cell line carrying the additional chromosomal aberration
t(3;12)(q26;p13) resulting in expression of the TEL/MDS1/EVI1 fusion protein,
which is resistant to TKIs. Resistance to TKIs was overcome by the
co-administration of the BH3-mimetic, ABT-737. In addition, application of
EVI1-specific small interfering RNA decreased expression of the TEL/MDS1/EVI1
fusion, reduced resistance to imatinib, and increased sensitivity to ABT-737.
Subsequent studies revealed a role for the BH3-only protein BAD, probably via a
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT-dependent pathway, as pharmacological inhibition of
AKT could also resensitize cells to death from TKIs. These findings indicate a
novel pathway of TKI resistance regulated by EVI1 proteins and provide a
promising means for overcoming resistance in chronic myeloid leukemia and other
hematological malignancies displaying EVI1 overexpression.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22634393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 15;188(12):6371-80. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103527. Epub 2012 
May 11.

EVI1 acts as an inducible negative-feedback regulator of NF-<U+03BA>B by inhibiting p65 
acetylation.

Xu X(1), Woo CH, Steere RR, Lee BC, Huang Y, Wu J, Pang J, Lim JH, Xu H, Zhang W,
Konduru AS, Yan C, Cheeseman MT, Brown SD, Li JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Inflammation is a hallmark of many important human diseases. Appropriate
inflammation is critical for host defense; however, an overactive response is
detrimental to the host. Thus, inflammation must be tightly regulated. The
molecular mechanisms underlying the tight regulation of inflammation remain
largely unknown. Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1), a proto-oncogene and 
zinc finger transcription factor, plays important roles in normal development and
leukemogenesis. However, its role in regulating NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent inflammation
remains unknown. In this article, we show that EVI1 negatively regulates
nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae- and TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
inflammation in vitro and in vivo. EVI1 directly binds to the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit
and inhibits its acetylation at lysine 310, thereby inhibiting its DNA-binding
activity. Moreover, expression of EVI1 itself is induced by nontypeable
Haemophilus influenzae and TNF-a in an NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent manner, thereby unveiling 
a novel inducible negative feedback loop to tightly control NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
inflammation. Thus, our study provides important insights into the novel role for
EVI1 in negatively regulating NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent inflammation, and it may also shed 
light on the future development of novel anti-inflammatory strategies.

PMCID: PMC3370108
PMID: 22581859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Blood. 2012 May 3;119(18):4335-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-02-405019.

Improved classification of MLL-AF9-positive acute myeloid leukemia patients based
on BRE and EVI1 expression.

Noordermeer SM, Monteferrario D, Sanders MA, Bullinger L, Jansen JH, van der
Reijden BA.

PMID: 22555662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Blood. 2012 Jun 14;119(24):5838-49. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-11-393827. Epub 2012 
May 2.

EVI1 is critical for the pathogenesis of a subset of MLL-AF9-rearranged AMLs.

Bindels EM(1), Havermans M, Lugthart S, Erpelinck C, Wocjtowicz E, Krivtsov AV,
Rombouts E, Armstrong SA, Taskesen E, Haanstra JR, Beverloo HB, Döhner H, Hudson 
WA, Kersey JH, Delwel R, Kumar AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

The proto-oncogene EVI1 (ecotropic viral integration site-1), located on
chromosome band 3q26, is aberrantly expressed in human acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) with 3q26 rearrangements. In the current study, we showed, in a large AML
cohort carrying 11q23 translocations, that ~ 43% of all mixed lineage leukemia
(MLL)-rearranged leukemias are EVI1(pos). High EVI1 expression occurs in AMLs
expressing the MLL-AF6, -AF9, -AF10, -ENL, or -ELL fusion genes. In addition, we 
present evidence that EVI1(pos) MLL-rearranged AMLs differ molecularly,
morphologically, and immunophenotypically from EVI1(neg) MLL-rearranged
leukemias. In mouse bone marrow cells transduced with MLL-AF9, we show that
MLL-AF9 fusion protein maintains Evi1 expression on transformation of Evi1(pos)
HSCs. MLL-AF9 does not activate Evi1 expression in MLL-AF9-transformed
granulocyte macrophage progenitors (GMPs) that were initially Evi1(neg).
Moreover, shRNA-mediated knockdown of Evi1 in an Evi1(pos) MLL-AF9 mouse model
inhibits leukemia growth both in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that Evi1 provides
a growth-promoting signal. Using the Evi1(pos) MLL-AF9 mouse leukemia model, we
demonstrate increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents on reduction of Evi1
expression. We conclude that EVI1 is a critical player in tumor growth in a
subset of MLL-rearranged AMLs.

PMCID: PMC3382941
PMID: 22553314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Ther. 2010 Sep;18(9):1633-9. doi: 10.1038/mt.2010.117. Epub 2010 Jun 22.

Ex vivo expansion of retrovirally transduced primate CD34+ cells results in
overrepresentation of clones with MDS1/EVI1 insertion sites in the myeloid
lineage after transplantation.

Sellers S(1), Gomes TJ, Larochelle A, Lopez R, Adler R, Krouse A, Donahue RE,
Childs RW, Dunbar CE.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-1290, USA.

Activation of proto-oncogenes by retroviral insertion is an important issue
delaying clinical development of gene therapy. We have reported the nonrandom
persistence of hematopoietic clones with vector insertions within the MDS1/EVI1
locus following transplantation of rhesus macaques. We now ask whether prolonged 
culture of transduced CD34(+) cells before transplantation selects for clones
with insertions in the MDS1/EVI11 or other proto-oncogene loci. CD34(+) cells
were transduced with standard retroviral vectors for 4 days and then continued in
culture for an additional 6 days before transplantation. A 15% of insertions
identified in granulocytes 6 months post-transplant were in MDS1/EVI11,
significantly increased compared to the frequency in animals transplanted with
cells immediately following transduction. MDS1/EVI1 clones became more dominant
over time post-transplantation in one animal that was followed long term,
accompanied by an increased overall copy number of vector-containing
granulocytes, with one MDS1/EVI1 clone eventually accounting for 100% of
transduced granulocytes and marrow colony-forming unit (CFU). This vector
insertion increased the expression of Evi1 mRNA. There was no overrepresentation 
of MDS1/EVI1 insertions contributing to lymphoid lineages. Strategies involving
prolonged ex vivo expansion of transduced cells may increase the risk of
genotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC2956935
PMID: 20571542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Am J Hematol. 2010 Aug;85(8):569-74. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21746.

Development of a dual-color, double fusion FISH assay to detect RPN1/EVI1 gene
fusion associated with inv(3), t(3;3), and ins(3;3) in patients with
myelodysplasia and acute myeloid leukemia.

Shearer BM(1), Sukov WR, Flynn HC, Knudson RA, Ketterling RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Division of Laboratory
Genetics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Approximately 2-3% of adult patients with acute myeloid leukemia harbor a
rearrangement of RPN1 (at 3q21) and EVI1 (at 3q26.2) as inv(3)(q21q26.2),
t(3;3)(q21;q26.2), or ins(3;3)(q26.2;q21q26.2). The most recent World Health
Organization (WHO) classification has designated AML with inv(3) or t(3;3) and
associated RPN1/EVI1 fusion, as a distinct AML subgroup associated with an
unfavorable prognosis. We have created a dual color, double fusion fluorescence
in situ hybridization (D-FISH) assay to detect fusion of the RPN1 and EVI1 genes.
A blinded investigation was performed using 30 normal bone marrow samples and 51 
bone marrow samples from 17 patients with inv(3)(q21q26.2), 11 patients with
t(3;3)(q21;q26.2), and one patient with ins(3;3)(q26.2;q21q26.2) previously
defined by chromosome analysis. The unblinded results indicated abnormal
RPN1/EVI1 fusion results in 30 (97%) of 31 samples from the inv(3)(q21q26.2)
group including seven bone marrow samples for which chromosome analysis was
unsuccessful or failed to detect an inv(3)(q21q26.2). Abnormal FISH results were 
detected in 14 (88%) of 16 samples with t(3;3)(q21;q26.2) and in the sole sample 
with an ins(3;3)(q26.2;q21q26.2). All 30 negative controls were normal and were
used to establish a normal cutoff of 0.6% for the typical abnormal D-FISH signal 
pattern. Overall, this D-FISH assay was more accurate than chromosome analysis
and based on the normal cutoff of 0.6%, this assay can be used for minimal
residual disease detection and disease monitoring in patients with RPN1/EVI1
fusion.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20556821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Gene Med. 2010 Jul;12(7):596-603. doi: 10.1002/jgm.1474.

In vivo expansion of MDR1-transduced cells accompanied by a post-transplantation 
chemotherapy regimen with mitomycin C and methotrexate.

Mitsuhashi J(1), Hosoyama H, Tsukahara S, Katayama K, Noguchi K, Ito Y, Hatake K,
Aiba K, Takahashi S, Sugimoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemotherapy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: A recurrent breast cancer patient received high-dose chemotherapy, a 
transplant of multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1)-transduced cells and four different
protocols of post-transplantation chemotherapy. We report the analysis of
MDR1-transduced cells in this patient.
METHODS: MDR1 transgene levels in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of the
patient were evaluated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Retroviral integration
sites of the MDR1-transduced cells were identified by linear
amplification-mediated (LAM)-PCR.
RESULTS: Twelve days after transplantation, approximately 1% of the peripheral
blood mononuclear cells were MDR1 transgene-positive. The transgene levels
decreased quickly, and were at low levels until day 504. A remarkable increase in
MDR1 transgene-positive cells was observed on day 532, during combination
chemotherapy with mitomycin C and methotrexate. Using LAM-PCR, 31 MDR1-transduced
clones were identified, and eight of these were long-life clones that survived
for more than 500 days. Among the 31 clones, ten had a retroviral integration
site near genes listed in the Retroviral Tagged Cancer Gene (RTCG) Database. Two 
long-life clones, N-30 and N-31, had retroviral integration sites within the
MDS1-EVI1 locus. Another two long-life clones had integration sites close to
PRDM16 or CUEDC1.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that MDR1-transduced cells were enriched in
vivo by an MDR1 substrate, mitomycin C. The possible activation of EVI1 or other 
RTCGs by retroviral insertion may have affected the survival and persistence of a
proportion of the transduced cells.

Copyright (c) 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20533531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Int J Hematol. 2010 Jun;91(5):753-7. doi: 10.1007/s12185-010-0618-5. Epub 2010
Jun 8.

Evi-1 as a critical regulator of leukemic cells.

Goyama S(1), Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

Ecotropic viral integration site-1 (EVI-1) has been recognized as one of the
dominant oncogenes associated with murine and human myeloid leukemia. Recent
clinical studies demonstrated that high EVI-1 expression was an independent
negative prognostic indicator of survival in leukemia patients. In addition,
gene-targeting studies in mice reveal that Evi-1 is preferentially expressed in
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and plays an essential role in
proliferation/maintenance of HSCs. Proteins associated with EVI-1, signaling
pathways regulated by EVI-1, and downstream mediators of EVI-1 transcriptional
regulation have been described and characterized. In this study, we summarize
current knowledge regarding biochemical properties and biological functions of
EVI-1, which provides a foundation for the development of novel therapeutic
strategies.

PMID: 20532840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nat Genet. 2010 Jul;42(7):599-603. doi: 10.1038/ng.601. Epub 2010 May 30.

A genome-wide association study of nasopharyngeal carcinoma identifies three new 
susceptibility loci.

Bei JX(1), Li Y, Jia WH, Feng BJ, Zhou G, Chen LZ, Feng QS, Low HQ, Zhang H, He
F, Tai ES, Kang T, Liu ET, Liu J, Zeng YX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China, Guangzhou, China.

To identify genetic susceptibility loci for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), a
genome-wide association study was performed using 464,328 autosomal SNPs in 1,583
NPC affected individuals (cases) and 1,894 controls of southern Chinese descent. 
The top 49 SNPs from the genome-wide association study were genotyped in 3,507
cases and 3,063 controls of southern Chinese descent from Guangdong and Guangxi. 
The seven supportive SNPs were further confirmed by transmission disequilibrium
test analysis in 279 trios from Guangdong. We identified three new susceptibility
loci, TNFRSF19 on 13q12 (rs9510787, Pcombined=1.53x10(-9), odds ratio (OR)=1.20),
MDS1-EVI1 on 3q26 (rs6774494, Pcombined=1.34x10(-8), OR=0.84) and the
CDKN2A-CDKN2B gene cluster on 9p21 (rs1412829, Pcombined=4.84x10(-7), OR=0.78).
Furthermore, we confirmed the role of HLA by revealing independent associations
at rs2860580 (Pcombined=4.88x10(-67), OR=0.58), rs2894207
(Pcombined=3.42x10(-33), OR=0.61) and rs28421666 (Pcombined=2.49x10(-18),
OR=0.67). Our findings provide new insights into the pathogenesis of NPC by
highlighting the involvement of pathways related to TNFRSF19 and MDS1-EVI1 in
addition to HLA molecules.

PMID: 20512145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell Death Differ. 2010 Dec;17(12):1867-81. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2010.53. Epub 2010
May 28.

Arsenic trioxide induces a beclin-1-independent autophagic pathway via modulation
of SnoN/SkiL expression in ovarian carcinoma cells.

Smith DM(1), Patel S, Raffoul F, Haller E, Mills GB, Nanjundan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of
South Florida, 4202 East Fowler Avenue, BSF218, Tampa, FL, USA.

Arsenic trioxide (As(2)O(3)), used to treat promyelocytic leukemia, triggers cell
death through unknown mechanisms. To further our understanding of
As(2)O(3)-induced death, we analyzed its effects on transforming growth factor-ß 
(TGFß) signaling mediators in ovarian cells. Dysregulated TGFß signaling is a
characteristic of ovarian cancers. As(2)O(3) reduced the protein expression of
EVI1, TAK1, SMAD2/3, and TGFßRII while increasing SnoN/SkiL. EVI1 protein was
modulated by treatment with the proteasome inhibitors, MG132 and PS-341/Velcade, 
suggesting that degradation occurs through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The 
sensitivity of ovarian cells to As(2)O(3)-induced apoptosis correlated with
expression of multidrug resistance protein 1. Interestingly, expression of SnoN
was similar to LC3-II (autophagy marker), which increased with induction of
cytoplasmic vacuolation preceding apoptosis. These vesicles were identified as
autophagosomes based on transmission electron microscopy and immunofluorescence
staining with EGFP-LC3. The addition of N-acetyl-L-cysteine (ROS scavenger) to
As(2)O(3)-treated cells reversed changes in SnoN protein and the
autophagic/apoptotic response. In contrast to beclin-1 knockdown, siRNA targeting
ATG5, ATG7, and hVps34 markedly reduced autophagy in As(2)O(3)-treated ovarian
carcinoma cells. Further, treatment with SnoN siRNA markedly decreased LC3-II
levels and increased PARP degradation (an apoptosis marker). Collectively, these 
findings suggest that As(2)O(3) induces a beclin-1-independent autophagic pathway
in ovarian carcinoma cells and implicates SnoN in promoting As(2)O(3)-mediated
autophagic cell survival.

PMCID: PMC2932795
PMID: 20508647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Gynecol Oncol. 2010 Aug 1;118(2):189-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.04.007. Epub
2010 May 11.

Evaluation of EVI1 and EVI1s (Delta324) as potential therapeutic targets in
ovarian cancer.

Jazaeri AA(1), Ferriss JS, Bryant JL, Dalton MS, Dutta A.

Author information: 
(1)W. Norman Thornton Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics 
& Gynecology, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA. aj2a@virginia.edu

PURPOSE: The MDS1 and EVI1 complex locus (MECOM) at 3q26 gives rise to several
alternatively spliced transcripts implicated in leukemic oncogenesis.
Overexpression of EVI1 in ovarian cancer has led to a proposed oncogenic role.
Our objective was to evaluate the therapeutic potential of EVI1 and EVI1s (also
known as Delta324) in ovarian cancer.
METHODS: Expression of EVI1 mRNA and protein isoforms was evaluated in ovarian
cancers, normal ovaries, benign ovarian neoplasms, and fallopian tube fimbria.
Effects of EVI1 isoform overexpression and knockdown on proliferation,
cisplatin-induced apoptosis, and double stranded DNA breaks were investigated.
RESULTS: EVI1 and EVI1s mRNAs were ubiquitously expressed in ovarian cancers and 
benign gynecologic tissues examined, with highest expression of both isoforms
noted in the cancer samples. The EVI1s to total EVI1 mRNA ratio was uniform among
the examined tissues. In contrast, EVI1 protein isoform levels were undetectable 
in normal ovarian tissues, and highest in serous ovarian cancers. EVI1 protein
expression patterns were similar between serous ovarian cancer samples, fallopian
tube fimbria, and benign neoplasms. Expression of EVI1 or EVI1s did not increase 
proliferation in EVI1-null OVCAR8 cells. Total and isoform selective knockdown of
EVI1 isoforms in EVI1 expressing ovarian cancer cells had no effect on
proliferation, cisplatin-induced apoptosis, or gamma-H2AX levels in ovarian
cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: Our data do not support a role for EVI1 or EVI1s in ovarian cancer
cell proliferation or response to DNA damage. Further research is required before
EVI1 can be considered an oncogene or a therapeutic target in ovarian cancer.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20462630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 25;107(21):9783-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004297107. Epub 2010 May 6.

Methylation and silencing of miRNA-124 by EVI1 and self-renewal exhaustion of
hematopoietic stem cells in murine myelodysplastic syndrome.

Dickstein J(1), Senyuk V, Premanand K, Laricchia-Robbio L, Xu P, Cattaneo F,
Fazzina R, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Jerome.Dickstein@uchospitals.edu

By expressing EVI1 in murine bone marrow (BM), we previously described a
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) model characterized by pancytopenia,
dysmegakaryopoiesis, dyserythropoiesis, and BM failure. The mice invariably died 
11-14 months after BM transplantation (BMT). Here, we show that a double point
mutant EVI1-(1+6Mut), unable to bind Gata1, abrogates the onset of MDS in the
mouse and re-establishes normal megakaryopoiesis, erythropoiesis, BM function,
and peripheral blood profiles. These normal features were maintained in the
reconstituted mice until the study was ended at 21 months after BMT. We also
report that EVI1 deregulates several genes that control cell division and cell
self-renewal. In striking contrast, these genes are normalized in the presence of
the EVI1 mutant. Moreover, EVI1, but not the EVI1 mutant, seemingly deregulates
these cellular processes by altering miRNA expression. In particular, the
silencing of miRNA-124 by DNA methylation is associated with EVI1 expression, but
not that of the EVI1 mutant, and appears to play a key role in the up-regulation 
of cell division in murine BM cells and in the hematopoietic cell line 32Dcl3.
The results presented here demonstrate that EVI1 induces MDS in the mouse through
two major pathways, both of which require the interaction of EVI1 with other
factors: one, results from EVI1-Gata1 interaction, which deregulates
erythropoiesis and leads to fatal anemia, whereas the other occurs by interaction
of EVI1 with unidentified factors causing perturbation of the cell cycle and
self-renewal, as a consequence of silencing miRNA-124 by EVI1 and, ultimately,
ensues in BM failure.

PMCID: PMC2906858
PMID: 20448201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 28;285(22):16967-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.102046. Epub
2010 Apr 2.

Acetylation of lysine 564 adjacent to the C-terminal binding protein-binding
motif in EVI1 is crucial for transcriptional activation of GATA2.

Shimahara A(1), Yamakawa N, Nishikata I, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor and Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.

Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) is an important transcription factor
for leukemogenesis. EVI1 is a member of a group of transcription factors with
C-terminal binding protein (CtBP)-binding motifs that act as transcriptional
co-repressors; however, we recently found that EVI1 directly activates GATA2
transcription, which is an important gene for the maintenance of hematopoietic
stem cells. We show here that EVI1-activated GATA2 transcripts derive from exon
1S of GATA2, which is specifically activated in neural and hematopoietic cells.
EVI1 was acetylated by the histone acetyltransferase p300/CBP association factor 
(P/CAF) in myeloid leukemia cells and hematopoietic progenitor cells. Acetylation
at Lys(564), which is adjacent to the CtBP-binding consensus sequence of EVI1,
was found to be important for transcriptional activation of GATA2. Mutation of
Lys(564) to alanine (K564A) markedly reduced the ability of EVI1 to bind DNA and 
activate transcription of GATA2. Furthermore, we confirmed that Lys(564) in EVI1 
was specifically acetylated in leukemia and primary hematopoietic cells by using 
an antibody directed against an acetylated Lys(564) EVI1 peptide. Moreover,
co-transfection of P/CAF with EVI1 overcame the suppressive effect of the CtBP
co-repressor and resulted in GATA2 transcriptional activation; nonetheless, CtBP2
was still included in the protein complex with EVI1 and P/CAF on the EVI1-binding
site in the GATA2 promoter region. Thus, acetylation of EVI1 at Lys(564) by P/CAF
enhances the DNA binding capacity of EVI1 and thereby contributes to the
activation of GATA2.

PMCID: PMC2878005
PMID: 20363750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Leukemia. 2010 May;24(5):942-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.47. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

EVI1 overexpression in distinct subtypes of pediatric acute myeloid leukemia.

Balgobind BV(1), Lugthart S, Hollink IH, Arentsen-Peters ST, van Wering ER, de
Graaf SS, Reinhardt D, Creutzig U, Kaspers GJ, de Bont ES, Stary J, Trka J,
Zimmermann M, Beverloo HB, Pieters R, Delwel R, Zwaan CM, van den Heuvel-Eibrink 
MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC--Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Overexpression of the ecotropic virus integration-1 (EVI1) gene (EVI1+),
localized at chromosome 3q26, is associated with adverse outcome in adult acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). In pediatric AML, 3q26 abnormalities are rare, and the
role of EVI1 is unknown. We studied 228 pediatric AML samples for EVI1+ using
gene expression profiling and RQ-PCR. EVI1+ was found in 20/213 (9%) of children 
with de novo AML, and in 4/8 with secondary AML. It was predominantly found in
MLL-rearranged AML (13/47), monosomy 7 (2/3), or FAB M6/7 (6/10), and mutually
exclusive with core-binding factor AML, t(15;17), and NPM1 mutations. Fluorescent
in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed to detect cryptic 3q26 abnormalities. 
However, none of the EVI1+ patients harbored structural 3q26 alterations.
Although significant differences in 4 years pEFS for EVI1+ and EVI1- pediatric
AML were observed (28%+/-11 vs 44%+/-4, P=0.04), multivariate analysis did not
identify EVI1+ as an independent prognostic factor. We conclude that EVI1+ can be
found in approximately 10% of pediatric AML. Although EVI1+ was not an
independent prognostic factor, it was predominantly found in subtypes of
pediatric AML that are related with an intermediate to unfavorable prognosis.
Further research should explain the role of EVI1+ in disease biology in these
cases. Remarkably, no 3q26 abnormalities were identified in EVI1+ pediatric AML.

PMID: 20357826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):2101-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.26.0646. Epub 2010
Mar 22.

High EVI1 expression predicts outcome in younger adult patients with acute
myeloid leukemia and is associated with distinct cytogenetic abnormalities.

Gröschel S(1), Lugthart S, Schlenk RF, Valk PJ, Eiwen K, Goudswaard C, van Putten
WJ, Kayser S, Verdonck LF, Lübbert M, Ossenkoppele GJ, Germing U, Schmidt-Wolf I,
Schlegelberger B, Krauter J, Ganser A, Döhner H, Löwenberg B, Döhner K, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus University Medical Center, Department of Hematology, Dr Molewaterplein
50, 3015 GE Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

PURPOSE The purpose of this study was to investigate frequency and prognostic
significance of high EVI1 expression in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). PATIENTS
AND METHODS A diagnostic assay detecting multiple EVI1 splice variants was
developed to determine the relative EVI1 expression by single real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction in 1,382 newly diagnosed adult patients
with AML younger than 60 years. Patients were treated on four Dutch-Belgian HOVON
(n = 458) and two German-Austrian AML Study Group protocols (n = 924). Results
The EVI1 assay was tested in the HOVON cohort and validated in the AMLSG cohort. 
High EVI1 levels (EVI1(+)) were found with similar frequencies in both cohorts
combined, with a 10.7% incidence (148 of 1,382). EVI1(+) independently predicted 
low complete remission (CR) rate (odds ratio, 0.54; P = .002), adverse
relapse-free survival (RFS; hazard ratio [HR], 1.32; P = .05), and event-free
survival (EFS; HR, 1.46; P < .001). This adverse prognostic impact was more
pronounced in the intermediate cytogenetic risk group (EFS; HR, 1.64; P < .001;
and RFS; HR, 1.55; P = .02), and was also apparent in cytogenetically normal AML 
(EFS; HR, 1.67; P = .008). Besides inv(3)/t(3;3), EVI1(+) was significantly
associated with chromosome abnormalities monosomy 7 and t(11q23), conferring
prognostic impact within these two cytogenetic subsets. EVI1(+) was virtually
absent in favorable-risk AML and AML with NPM1 mutations. Patients with EVI1(+)
AML (n = 28) who received allogeneic stem cell transplantation in first CR had
significantly better 5-year RFS (33% +/- 10% v 0%). CONCLUSION EVI1 expression in
AML is unequally distributed in cytogenetic subtypes. It predicts poor outcome,
particularly among intermediate cytogenetic risk AML. Patients with EVI1(+) AML
may benefit from allogeneic transplantation in first CR. Pretreatment EVI1
screening should be included in risk stratification.

PMID: 20308656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Future Oncol. 2010 Mar;6(3):445-55. doi: 10.2217/fon.09.175.

Molecular mechanisms involved in the progression of myelodysplastic syndrome.

Nolte F(1), Hofmann WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, Germany.
florian.nolte@medma.uni-heidelberg.de

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group of diseases
characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis presenting with peripheral cytopenias 
in combination with a hyperplastic bone marrow. MDS patients have an increased
risk of disease evolution to acute leukemia. Strong efforts have been made to
gain further insights into the pathobiology of MDS. Development and progression
of MDS to acute myeloid leukemia is suggested to be a multistep alteration to
hematopoietic stem cells consisting of class I and class II alterations: the
former targeting genes that are involved in signal transduction (e.g., FLT3, RAS 
and KIT), whereas the latter affect transcription factors (e.g., RUNX, RARA, EVI1
and WT1). These alterations consist of not only genomic mutations but also
epigenetic aberrations, which can lead to reversible gene silencing. However,
whether numerical and structural alterations of chromosomes and/or single genes
or epigenetic changes represent the initiating event or, more likely, secondary
events remains part of the discussion. Accumulation of such defects may finally
cause the leukemic transformation of MDS.

PMID: 20222800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Lung Cancer. 2010 Nov;70(2):152-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2010.01.019. Epub 2010 
Feb 24.

Copy number alterations and expression profiles of candidate genes in a pulmonary
inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor.

Jung SH(1), Yim SH, Hu HJ, Jung CK, Lee SH, Kim DH, Chung YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Research Center for Genome Polymorphism, The Catholic University of
Korea School of Medicine, 505 Banpo-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul 137-701, Republic of
Korea.

Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) is a soft tissue neoplasm composed of
myofibroblastic spindle cells accompanied by the inflammatory infiltrate. In
addition to its phenotypic ambiguity, pathogenic mechanisms of the IMT also
remain elusive. Although several chromosomal aberrations have been identified by 
karyotyping, detailed characteristics and extent of copy number alterations in
IMT are unknown. Copy number alterations of an IMT case were examined using 30K
whole-genome oligoarray-comparative genomic hybridization. RNA expression of
putative cancer-related genes located in the chromosomal altered regions was
assessed by qRT-PCR. We identified seven copy number gained regions, seven lost
regions, nine amplifications and six homozygous deletions, which covers 2.5% of
total genome. In homozygously deleted regions, RNA levels of putative tumor
suppressors, SEMA3B, SEMA3F and SULT2A1, were significantly repressed being
consistent with copy number status. In high-level amplification regions, RNA
expression of four potential cancer-related genes was examined; GSTT1, ESR1, EVI1
and MITF. Among them, GSTT1 and ESR1 were significantly up-regulated, but EVI1
and MITF showed insignificant elevation of RNA expression. To our knowledge, this
is the first genome-wide analysis of copy number alterations in IMT. Most of the 
putative cancer-related genes identified in this study are supposedly novel in
IMT. Taken together, our results will help to elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms
of IMT.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20185201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nat Med. 2010 Feb;16(2):163-5. doi: 10.1038/nm0210-163.

Gene therapy activates EVI1, destabilizes chromosomes.

Dunbar CE, Larochelle A.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2010 Feb;16(2):198-204.

PMID: 20134468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Hum Gene Ther. 2010 Jun;21(6):695-703. doi: 10.1089/hum.2009.191.

Repetitive busulfan administration after hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy
associated with a dominant HDAC7 clone in a nonhuman primate.

Xie J(1), Larochelle A, Maric I, Faulhaber M, Donahue RE, Dunbar CE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Hematopoiesis Section, Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The risk of genotoxicity of retroviral vector-delivered gene therapy targeting
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) has been highlighted by the development of clonal
dominance and malignancies in human and animal gene therapy trials. Large-animal 
models have proven invaluable to test the safety of retroviral vectors, but the
detection of clonal dominance may require years of follow-up. We hypothesized
that hematopoietic stress may accelerate the proliferation and therefore the
detection of abnormal clones in these models. We administered four monthly
busulfan (Bu) infusions to induce hematopoietic stress in a healthy rhesus
macaque previously transplanted with CD34+ cells transduced with retroviral
vectors carrying a simple marker gene. Busulfan administration resulted in
significant cytopenias with each cycle, and prolonged pancytopenia after the
final cycle with eventual recovery. Before busulfan treatment there was highly
polyclonal marking in all lineages. After Bu administration clonal diversity was 
markedly decreased in all lineages. Unexpectedly, we found no evidence of
selection of the MDS1/EVI1 clones present before Bu administration, but a clone
with a vector integration in intron 1 of the histone deacetylase-7 (HDAC7) gene
became dominant in granulocytes over time after Bu administration. The overall
marking level in the animal was increased significantly after Bu treatment and
coincident with expansion of the HDAC7 clone, suggesting an in vivo advantage for
this clone under stress. HDAC7 expression was upregulated in marrow progenitors
containing the vector. Almost 5 years after Bu administration, the animal
developed progressive cytopenias, and at autopsy the marrow showed complete lack 
of neutrophil or platelet maturation, with a new population of approximately 20% 
undifferentiated blasts. These data suggest that chemotherapeutic stress may
accelerate vector-related clonal dominance, even in the absence of drug
resistance genes expressed by the vector. This model may both accelerate the
detection of abnormal clones to facilitate analysis of genotoxicity for human
gene therapy, and help assess the safety of administering myelotoxic
chemotherapeutic agents in patients previously engrafted with vector-containing
cells.

PMCID: PMC2938356
PMID: 20102258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nat Med. 2010 Feb;16(2):198-204. doi: 10.1038/nm.2088. Epub 2010 Jan 24.

Genomic instability and myelodysplasia with monosomy 7 consequent to EVI1
activation after gene therapy for chronic granulomatous disease.

Stein S(1), Ott MG, Schultze-Strasser S, Jauch A, Burwinkel B, Kinner A, Schmidt 
M, Krämer A, Schwäble J, Glimm H, Koehl U, Preiss C, Ball C, Martin H, Göhring G,
Schwarzwaelder K, Hofmann WK, Karakaya K, Tchatchou S, Yang R, Reinecke P,
Kühlcke K, Schlegelberger B, Thrasher AJ, Hoelzer D, Seger R, von Kalle C, Grez
M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Frankfurt, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2010 Feb;16(2):163-5.

Gene-modified autologous hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) can provide ample
clinical benefits to subjects suffering from X-linked chronic granulomatous
disease (X-CGD), a rare inherited immunodeficiency characterized by recurrent,
often life-threatening bacterial and fungal infections. Here we report on the
molecular and cellular events observed in two young adults with X-CGD treated by 
gene therapy in 2004. After the initial resolution of bacterial and fungal
infections, both subjects showed silencing of transgene expression due to
methylation of the viral promoter, and myelodysplasia with monosomy 7 as a result
of insertional activation of ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1). One
subject died from overwhelming sepsis 27 months after gene therapy, whereas a
second subject underwent an allogeneic HSC transplantation. Our data show that
forced overexpression of EVI1 in human cells disrupts normal centrosome
duplication, linking EVI1 activation to the development of genomic instability,
monosomy 7 and clonal progression toward myelodysplasia.

PMID: 20098431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 13;5(1):e8676. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008676.

Identification of two critically deleted regions within chromosome segment
7q35-q36 in EVI1 deregulated myeloid leukemia cell lines.

De Weer A(1), Poppe B, Vergult S, Van Vlierberghe P, Petrick M, De Bock R, Benoit
Y, Noens L, De Paepe A, Van Roy N, Menten B, Speleman F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Chromosomal rearrangements involving the EVI1 proto-oncogene are a recurrent
finding in myeloid leukemias and are indicative of a poor prognosis.
Rearrangements of the EVI1 locus are often associated with monosomy 7 or
cytogenetic detectable deletions of part of 7q. As EVI1 overexpression alone is
not sufficient to induce leukemia, loss of a 7q tumour suppressor gene might be a
required cooperating event. To test this hypothesis, we performed high-resolution
array comparative genomic hybridization analysis of twelve EVI1 overexpressing
patients and three EVI1 deregulated cell lines to search for 7q submicroscopic
deletions. This analysis lead to the delineation of two critical regions, one of 
0.39 Mb on 7q35 containing the CNTNAP2 gene and one of 1.33 Mb on chromosome
bands 7q35-q36 comprising nine genes in EVI1 deregulated cell lines. These
findings open the way to further studies aimed at identifying the culprit EVI1
implicated tumour suppressor genes on 7q.

PMCID: PMC2800774
PMID: 20084277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Feb;24(2):447-63. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0295. Epub 2010 Jan
15.

A link between mir-100 and FRAP1/mTOR in clear cell ovarian cancer.

Nagaraja AK(1), Creighton CJ, Yu Z, Zhu H, Gunaratne PH, Reid JG, Olokpa E,
Itamochi H, Ueno NT, Hawkins SM, Anderson ML, Matzuk MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that direct gene regulation through
translational repression and degradation of complementary mRNA. Although miRNAs
have been implicated as oncogenes and tumor suppressors in a variety of human
cancers, functional roles for individual miRNAs have not been described in clear 
cell ovarian carcinoma, an aggressive and chemoresistant subtype of ovarian
cancer. We performed deep sequencing to comprehensively profile miRNA expression 
in 10 human clear cell ovarian cancer cell lines compared with normal ovarian
surface epithelial cultures and discovered 54 miRNAs that were aberrantly
expressed. Because of the critical roles of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 1/mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) pathway in clear cell ovarian cancer, we focused on mir-100, a
putative tumor suppressor that was the most down-regulated miRNA in our cancer
cell lines, and its up-regulated target, FRAP1/mTOR. Overexpression of mir-100
inhibited mTOR signaling and enhanced sensitivity to the rapamycin analog RAD001 
(everolimus), confirming the key relationship between mir-100 and the mTOR
pathway. Furthermore, overexpression of the putative tumor suppressor mir-22
repressed the EVI1 oncogene, which is known to suppress apoptosis by stimulating 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 1
signaling. In addition to these specific effects, reversing the expression of
mir-22 and the putative oncogene mir-182 had widespread effects on target and
nontarget gene populations that ultimately caused a global shift in the cancer
gene signature toward a more normal state. Our experiments have revealed strong
candidate miRNAs and their target genes that may contribute to the pathogenesis
of clear cell ovarian cancer, thereby highlighting alternative therapeutic
strategies for the treatment of this deadly cancer.

PMCID: PMC2817607
PMID: 20081105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. FEBS J. 2010 Jan;277(2):441-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07496.x. Epub 2009 
Dec 15.

Enhanced sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis in Evi1 transformed
Rat1 fibroblasts due to repression of carbonic anhydrase III.

Roy P(1), Reavey E, Rayne M, Roy S, Abed El Baky M, Ishii Y, Bartholomew C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological & Biomedical Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University,
City Campus, Glasgow, UK.

EVI1 is a nuclear zinc finger protein essential to normal development, which
participates in acute myeloid leukaemia progression and transforms Rat1
fibroblasts. In this study we show that enforced expression of Evi1 in Rat1
fibroblasts protects from paclitaxel-induced apoptosis, consistent with
previously published studies. Surprisingly, however, these cells show increased
sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2))-induced apoptosis, demonstrated by
elevated caspase 3 catalytic activity. This effect is caused by a reduction in
carbonic anhydrase III (caIII) production. caIII transcripts are repressed by
92-97% by Evi1 expression, accompanied by a similar reduction in caIII protein.
Reporter assays with the rat caIII gene promoter show repressed activity,
demonstrating that Evi1 either directly or indirectly modulates transcription of 
this gene in Rat1 cells. Targeted knockdown of caIII alone, with Dicer-substrate 
short inhibitory RNAs, also increases the sensitivity of Rat1 fibroblasts to
H(2)O(2), which occurs in the absence of any other changes mediated by Evi1
expression. Enforced expression of caIII in Evi1-expressing Rat1 cells reverts
the phenotype, restoring H(2)O(2) resistance. Together these data show that Evi1 
represses transcription of caIII gene expression, leading to increased
sensitivity to H(2)O(2)-induced apoptosis in Rat1 cells and might suggest the
basis for the development of a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of
leukaemias and solid tumours where EVI1 is overexpressed.

PMID: 20015077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Blood. 2010 Feb 11;115(6):1194-203. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-216184. Epub 2009 
Dec 9.

Retroviral insertional mutagenesis identifies Zeb2 activation as a novel
leukemogenic collaborating event in CALM-AF10 transgenic mice.

Caudell D(1), Harper DP, Novak RL, Pierce RM, Slape C, Wolff L, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Center for Molecular
Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of
Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.

The t(10;11) translocation results in a CALM-AF10 fusion gene in a subset of
leukemia patients. Expression of a CALM-AF10 transgene results in leukemia, with 
prolonged latency and incomplete penetrance, suggesting that additional events
are necessary for leukemic transformation. CALM-AF10 mice infected with the
MOL4070LTR retrovirus developed acute leukemia, and ligation-mediated polymerase 
chain reaction was used to identify retroviral insertions at 19 common insertion 
sites, including Zeb2, Nf1, Mn1, Evi1, Ift57, Mpl, Plag1, Kras, Erg, Vav1, and
Gata1. A total of 26% (11 of 42) of the mice had retroviral integrations near
Zeb2, a transcriptional corepressor leading to overexpression of the
Zeb2-transcript. A total of 91% (10 of 11) of mice with Zeb2 insertions developed
B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia, suggesting that Zeb2 activation promotes 
the transformation of CALM-AF10 hematopoietic precursors toward B-lineage
leukemias. More than half of the mice with Zeb2 integrations also had Nf1
integrations, suggesting cooperativity among CALM-AF10, Zeb2, and Ras pathway
mutations. We searched for Nras, Kras, and Ptpn11 point mutations in the
CALM-AF10 leukemic mice. Three mutations were identified, all of which occurred
in mice with Zeb2 integrations, consistent with the hypothesis that Zeb2 and Ras 
pathway activation promotes B-lineage leukemic transformation in concert with
CALM-AF10.

PMCID: PMC2826231
PMID: 20007546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Blood. 2010 Jan 21;115(3):615-25. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-227363. Epub 2009
Nov 16.

SETBP1 overexpression is a novel leukemogenic mechanism that predicts adverse
outcome in elderly patients with acute myeloid leukemia.

Cristóbal I(1), Blanco FJ, Garcia-Orti L, Marcotegui N, Vicente C, Rifon J, Novo 
FJ, Bandres E, Calasanz MJ, Bernabeu C, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Center for Applied Medical Research, Spain.

Acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs) result from multiple genetic alterations in
hematopoietic stem cells. We describe a novel t(12;18)(p13;q12) involving ETV6 in
a patient with AML. The translocation resulted in overexpression of SETBP1
(18q12), located close to the breakpoint. Overexpression of SETBP1 through
retroviral insertion has been reported to confer growth advantage in
hematopoietic progenitor cells. We show that SETBP1 overexpression protects SET
from protease cleavage, increasing the amount of full-length SET protein and
leading to the formation of a SETBP1-SET-PP2A complex that results in PP2A
inhibition, promoting proliferation of the leukemic cells. The prevalence of
SETBP1 overexpression in AML at diagnosis (n = 192) was 27.6% and was associated 
with unfavorable cytogenetic prognostic group, monosomy 7, and EVI1
overexpression (P < .01). Patients with SETBP1 overexpression had a significantly
shorter overall survival, and the prognosis impact was remarkably poor in
patients older than 60 years in both overall survival (P = .015) and event-free
survival (P = .015). In summary, our data show a novel leukemogenic mechanism
through SETBP1 overexpression; moreover, multivariate analysis confirms the
negative prognostic impact of SETBP1 overexpression in AML, especially in elderly
patients, where it could be used as a predictive factor in any future clinical
trials with PP2A activators.

PMID: 19965692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Chem Biol Interact. 2010 Mar 19;184(1-2):50-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2009.11.025.
Epub 2009 Dec 1.

Cytogenetic and genetic pathways in therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia.

Qian Z(1), Joslin JM, Tennant TR, Reshmi SC, Young DJ, Stoddart A, Larson RA, Le 
Beau MM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine and the Cancer Research
Center, University of Chicago, 5841 S Maryland Ave, MC2115, Chicago, IL 60637,
USA.

Therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia (t-MDS/t-AML)
are late complications of cytotoxic therapy used in the treatment of malignant
diseases. The most common subtype of t-AML ( approximately 75% of cases) develops
after exposure to alkylating agents, and is characterized by loss or deletion of 
chromosome 5 and/or 7 [-5/del(5q), -7/del(7q)], and a poor outcome (median
survival 8 months). In the University of Chicago's series of 386 patients with
t-MDS/t-AML, 79 (20%) patients had abnormalities of chromosome 5, 95 (25%)
patients had abnormalities of chromosome 7, and 85 (22%) patients had
abnormalities of both chromosomes 5 and 7. t-MDS/t-AML with a -5/del(5q) is
associated with a complex karyotype, characterized by trisomy 8, as well as loss 
of 12p, 13q, 16q22, 17p (TP53 locus), chromosome 18, and 20q. In addition, this
subtype of t-AML is characterized by a unique expression profile (higher
expression of genes) involved in cell cycle control (CCNA2, CCNE2, CDC2),
checkpoints (BUB1), or growth (MYC), loss of expression of IRF8, and
overexpression of FHL2. Haploinsufficiency of the RPS14, EGR1, APC, NPM1, and
CTNNA1 genes on 5q has been implicated in the pathogenesis of MDS/AML. In
previous studies, we determined that Egr1 acts by haploinsufficiency and
cooperates with mutations induced by alkylating agents to induce myeloid
leukemias in the mouse. To identify mutations that cooperate with Egr1
haploinsufficiency, we used retroviral insertional mutagenesis. To date, we have 
identified two common integration sites involving genes encoding transcription
factors that play a critical role in hematopoiesis (Evi1 and Gfi1b loci). Of note
is that the EVI1 transcription factor gene is deregulated in human AMLs,
particularly those with -7, and abnormalities of 3q. Identifying the genetic
pathways leading to t-AML will provide new insights into the underlying biology
of this disease, and may facilitate the identification of new therapeutic
targets.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4642715
PMID: 19958752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Ann Hematol. 2010 May;89(5):453-8. doi: 10.1007/s00277-009-0864-x. Epub 2009 Nov 
27.

BAALC is an important predictor of refractoriness to chemotherapy and poor
survival in intermediate-risk acute myeloid leukemia (AML).

Santamaría C(1), Chillón MC, García-Sanz R, Pérez C, Caballero MD, Mateos MV,
Ramos F, de Coca AG, Alonso JM, Giraldo P, Bernal T, Queizán JA, Rodríguez JN,
Puig N, Balanzategui A, Sarasquete ME, Alcoceba M, Díaz-Mediavilla J, San Miguel 
J, González M.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario, Salamanca, Spain. cmsantamaria@usal.es

We have analyzed brain and acute leukemia, cytoplasmic (BAALC) gene expression
and other genetic markers (ERG, EVI1, MN1, PRAME, WT1, FLT3, and NPM1 mutations) 
in 127 intermediate-risk acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients: 98
cytogenetically normal and 29 with intermediate-risk cytogenetic alterations.
High versus low BAALC expressers showed a higher refractoriness to induction
treatment (31% vs 10%; p = .005), lower complete remission rate after salvage
therapy (82% vs 97%; p = .010), and lower 3-year overall (23% vs 58%, p < .001)
and relapse-free survival (26% vs 52%, p = .006). Similar results were found when
cytogenetic subgroups were analyzed separately. Multivariate models confirmed the
unfavorable prognosis of this marker. In conclusion, BAALC is a relevant
prognostic marker in intermediate-risk AML.

PMID: 19943049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Feb;49(2):119-31. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20725.

Hematopoietic immortalizing function of the NKL-subclass homeobox gene TLX1.

Zweier-Renn LA(1), Hawley TS, Burkett S, Ramezani A, Riz I, Adler RL, Hickstein
DD, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Translocations resulting in ectopic expression of the TLX1 homeobox gene
(previously known as HOX11) are recurrent events in human T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Transduction of primary murine hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells with retroviral vectors expressing TLX1 readily yields
immortalized hematopoietic progenitor cell lines. Understanding the processes
involved in TLX1-mediated cellular immortalization should yield insights into the
growth and differentiation pathways altered by TLX1 during the development of
T-ALL. In recent clinical gene therapy trials, hematopoietic clonal dominance or 
T-ALL-like diseases have occurred as a direct consequence of insertional
activation of the EVI1, PRDM16 or LMO2 proto-oncogenes by the retroviral vectors 
used to deliver the therapeutic genes. Additionally, the generation of murine
hematopoietic progenitor cell lines due to retroviral integrations into Evi1 or
Prdm16 has also been recently reported. Here, we determined by linker-mediated
nested polymerase chain reaction the integration sites in eight TLX1-immortalized
hematopoietic cell lines. Notably, no common integration site was observed among 
the cell lines. Moreover, no insertions into the Evi1 or Prdm16 genes were
identified although insertion near Lmo2 was observed in one instance. However,
neither Lmo2 nor any of the other genes examined surrounding the integration
sites showed differential vector-influenced expression compared to the cell lines
lacking such insertions. While we cannot exclude the possibility that insertional
side effects transiently provided a selective growth/survival advantage to the
hematopoietic progenitor populations, our results unequivocally rule out
insertions into Evi1 and Prdm16 as being integral to the TLX1-initiated
immortalization process.

PMCID: PMC2795049
PMID: 19862821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Nihon Rinsho. 2009 Oct;67(10):1853-62.

[Classification of myeloid leukemias].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuriyama K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematoimmunology, School of Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of
the Ryukyus.

Myeloid leukemia in this series corresponds to the myeloid neoplasms of the 4th
WHO classification of pathology and genetics of tumor of haematopoietic and
lymphoid tissue. The myeloid neoplasms are composed of six categories, which are 
1) myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), a new category of 2) myeloid and lymphoid 
neoplasms with eosinophilia and abnormalities of PDGFRA, PDGFRB or FGFR1, 3)
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)/MPN, 4) MDS, 5) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and
related precursor neoplasms, and 6) acute leukemias of ambiguous lineage. In MPNs
without chronic myelogenous leukemia, the genetic marker of JAK2 V617F is added
to the diagnostic criteria for polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia and
primary myelofibrosis. MDS has the new subtype of refractory cytopenia with
unilineage dysplasia composed of refractory anemia, refractory neutropenia and
refractory thrombocytopenia. AML with t(9; 11) (p22;q23); MLLT3-MLL, AML with
t(6;9) (p23; q34); DEK-NUP214, AML with inv(3) (q21q26.2) or t(3; 3) (q21 ;
q26.2); RPN1-EVI1 and AML (megakaryoblastic) with t(1; 22) (p13; q13); RBM15-MKL1
are added to the subtype of AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities, and AML
with gene mutations of NPM1 and CEBPA are also added as provisional entities of
it. The myeloid neoplasms of the 4th WHO classification are comprehensive and
seem to be dynamic by incorporating the results of leukemia researches.

PMID: 19860179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Feb;222(2):282-5. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21953.

The role of Runx1/AML1 and Evi-1 in the regulation of hematopoietic stem cells.

Kumano K(1), Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Therapy and Transplantation Medicine, University of Tokyo
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Lineage-specific transcription factors must be precisely regulated during stem
cell self-renewal and lineage commitment decisions. The role of specific
transcription factors in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) fate decisions has derived
largely from genetic strategies, primarily gene-targeting and transgenic or
retroviral overexpression experiments. From the previous experimental results,
several transcription factors have been found to play critical roles in HSC
physiology. Among them, we focus two transcription factors, Runx1/AML1 and Evi-1,
in this review. During embryogenesis, both Runx1 and Evi-1 are essential for HSCs
whereas in the adult, Runx1 and Evi-1 regulate HSCs negatively and positively,
respectively.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19847803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. FEBS J. 2009 Nov;276(22):6810-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07398.x. Epub
2009 Oct 16.

Zinc finger transcription factor ecotropic viral integration site 1 is induced by
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and acts as a dual modulator of the ATRA response.

Bingemann SC(1), Konrad TA, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) plays important roles in leukaemia and 
development, and its expression is temporally and spatially highly restricted
during the latter process. Nevertheless, the only physiological agent that to
date has been shown to regulate transcription of this gene in mammalian cells is 
all-trans retinoic acid. Here we describe the identification of a retinoic acid
response element that was located in the most distal of several alternative first
exons of the human EVI1 gene and was constitutively bound by canonical retinoid
receptors in NTERA-2 teratocarcinoma cells. Furthermore, it was the target of
negative feedback by EVI1 on the induction of its own promoter by retinoic acid. 
This process required a previously described transcription repression domain of
EVI1. Extending its role as a modulator of the retinoic acid response, EVI1 had
the opposite effect on the RARbeta retinoic acid response element, whose
induction by all-trans retinoic acid it enhanced through a mechanism that
involved almost all of its known functional domains. Augmentation of the retinoic
acid response by EVI1 was also observed for the endogenous RARbeta gene. Thus, we
have established EVI1 as a novel type of modulator of the retinoic acid response,
which can both enhance and repress induction by this agent in a promoter-specific
manner.

PMCID: PMC2779989
PMID: 19843176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. BMC Cancer. 2009 Oct 18;9:368. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-368.

Potential predictive markers of chemotherapy resistance in stage III ovarian
serous carcinomas.

Osterberg L(1), Levan K, Partheen K, Delle U, Olsson B, Sundfeldt K, Horvath G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of
Gothenburg, Sweden. lovisa.osterberg@gu.se

BACKGROUND: Chemotherapy resistance remains a major obstacle in the treatment of 
women with ovarian cancer. Establishing predictive markers of chemoresponse would
help to individualize therapy and improve survival of ovarian cancer patients.
Chemotherapy resistance in ovarian cancer has been studied thoroughly and several
non-overlapping single genes, gene profiles and copy number alterations have been
suggested as potential markers. The objective of this study was to explore
genetic alterations behind chemotherapy resistance in ovarian cancer with the
ultimate aim to find potential predictive markers.
METHODS: To create the best opportunities for identifying genetic alterations of 
importance for resistance, we selected a homogenous tumor material concerning
histology, stage and chemotherapy. Using high-resolution whole genome array
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), we analyzed the tumor genomes of 40
fresh-frozen stage III ovarian serous carcinomas, all uniformly treated with
combination therapy paclitaxel/carboplatin. Fisher's exact test was used to
identify significant differences. Subsequently, we examined four genes in the
significant regions (EVI1, MDS1, SH3GL2, SH3KBP1) plus the ABCB1 gene with
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) to evaluate the impact of
DNA alterations on the transcriptional level.
RESULTS: We identified gain in 3q26.2, and losses in 6q11.2-12, 9p22.3,
9p22.2-22.1, 9p22.1-21.3, Xp22.2-22.12, Xp22.11-11.3, and Xp11.23-11.1 to be
significantly associated with chemotherapy resistance. In the gene expression
analysis, EVI1 expression differed between samples with gain versus without gain,
exhibiting higher expression in the gain group.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, we detected specific genetic alterations associated
with resistance, of which some might be potential predictive markers of
chemotherapy resistance in advanced ovarian serous carcinomas. Thus, further
studies are required to validate these findings in an independent ovarian tumor
series.

PMCID: PMC2770569
PMID: 19835627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Leuk Res. 2010 May;34(5):594-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.08.029. Epub 2009 Sep
24.

Immunophenotypic features of acute myeloid leukemia with
inv(3)(q21q26.2)/t(3;3)(q21;q26.2).

Medeiros BC(1), Kohrt HE, Arber DA, Bangs CD, Cherry AM, Majeti R, Kogel KE, Azar
CA, Patel S, Alizadeh AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA. bruno.medeiros@stanford.edu

Immunophenotypic identification of myeloid specific antigens is an important
diagnostic tool in the management of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). 
These antigens allow determination of cell of origin and degree of
differentiation of leukemia blasts. AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2)/t(3;3)(q21;q26.2)
is a relatively rare subtype of AML. The immunophenotypic characteristics of
inv(3) AML patients are somewhat limited. We identified 14 new cases of
hematological disorders with increased myeloid blasts carrying
inv(3)(q21q26.2)/t(3;3)(q21;q26.2). Also, we identified another 13 cases
previously published in the literature, where the immunophenotype of
inv(3)(q21q26.2) was documented. As a group, patients with AML with
inv(3)(q21q26.2) had high levels of early myeloid (CD13, CD33, CD117 and MPO) and
uncommitted markers (CD34, HLA-DR and CD56) and a high rate of monosomy 7 in
addition to the inv(3)(q21q26.2). Differential karyotype and expression of
certain antigens were noted in patients with de novo AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2)
vs. those with inv(3)(q21q26.2)-containing blasts.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19781775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Ther. 2009 Nov;17(11):1919-28. doi: 10.1038/mt.2009.179. Epub 2009 Aug 11.

Insertional transformation of hematopoietic cells by self-inactivating lentiviral
and gammaretroviral vectors.

Modlich U(1), Navarro S, Zychlinski D, Maetzig T, Knoess S, Brugman MH, Schambach
A, Charrier S, Galy A, Thrasher AJ, Bueren J, Baum C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Gene transfer vectors may cause clonal imbalance and even malignant cell
transformation by insertional upregulation of proto-oncogenes. Lentiviral vectors
(LV) with their preferred integration in transcribed genes are considered less
genotoxic than gammaretroviral vectors (GV) with their preference for integration
next to transcriptional start sites and regulatory gene regions. Using a
sensitive cell culture assay and a series of self-inactivating (SIN) vectors, we 
found that the lentiviral insertion pattern was approximately threefold less
likely than the gammaretroviral to trigger transformation of primary
hematopoietic cells. However, lentivirally induced mutants also showed robust
replating, in line with the selection for common insertion sites (CIS) in the
first intron of the Evi1 proto-oncogene. This potent proto-oncogene thus
represents a CIS for both GV and LV, despite major differences in their
integration mechanisms. Altering the vectors' enhancer-promoter elements had a
greater effect on safety than the retroviral insertion pattern. Clinical grade LV
expressing the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) protein under control of its own
promoter had no transforming potential. Mechanistic studies support the
conclusion that enhancer-mediated gene activation is the major cause for
insertional transformation of hematopoietic cells, opening rational strategies
for risk prevention.

PMCID: PMC2835038
PMID: 19672245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Sep;193(2):119-22. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.04.025.

Chronic myeloid leukemia in blast phase associated with t(3;8)(q26;q24).

Lin P(1), Lennon PA, Yin CC, Abruzzo LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, Box 72, The University of Texas-M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. peilin@mdanderson.org

We previously reported a recurrent t(3;8)(q26;q24) translocation involving EVI1
in five patients with myelodysplastic syndrome or acute myeloid leukemia. Here we
report the same structural abnormality in a case of chronic myeloid leukemia in
blast phase. The t(3;8)(q26;q24) occurred several months after the initial
diagnosis of chronic myeloid leukemia, while the patient was being treated with a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor. We confirmed rearrangement of EVI1 by fluorescence in 
situ hybridization assay using a dual-color break-apart probe set that spans the 
EVI1 region. Our findings demonstrate that, similar to other recurrent
translocations involving 3q26, such as t(3;3) and t(3;21), the t(3;8)(q26;q24) is
implicated not only in myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia, but
also in progression of chronic myeloid leukemia. These findings extend the known 
disease spectrum associated with this cytogenetic aberration.

PMID: 19665075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Gene Ther. 2009 Dec;16(12):1452-64. doi: 10.1038/gt.2009.96.

Retroviral vector integration in post-transplant hematopoiesis in mice
conditioned with either submyeloablative or ablative irradiation.

Sadat MA(1), Dirscherl S, Sastry L, Dantzer J, Pech N, Griffin S, Hawkins T, Zhao
Y, Barese CN, Cross S, Orazi A, An C, Goebel WS, Yoder MC, Li X, Grez M, Cornetta
K, Mooney SD, Dinauer MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Riley 
Hospital for Children, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

X-linked chronic granulomatous disease (X-CGD) is an inherited immunodeficiency
with absent phagocyte NADPH-oxidase activity caused by defects in the
gene-encoding gp91(phox). Here, we evaluated strategies for less intensive
conditioning for gene therapy of genetic blood disorders without selective
advantage for gene correction, such as might be used in a human X-CGD protocol.
We compared submyeloablative with ablative irradiation as conditioning in murine 
X-CGD, examining engraftment, oxidase activity and vector integration in mice
transplanted with marrow transduced with a gamma-retroviral vector for gp91(phox)
expression. The frequency of oxidase-positive neutrophils in the donor population
was unexpectedly higher in many 300 cGy-conditioned mice compared with lethally
irradiated recipients, as was the fraction of vector-marked donor secondary
CFU-S12. Vector integration sites in marrow, spleen and secondary CFU-S12 DNA
from primary recipients were enriched for cancer-associated genes, including
Evi1, and integrations in or near cancer-associated genes were more frequent in
marrow and secondary CFU-S12 from 300 cGy-conditioned mice compared with fully
ablated mice. These findings support the concept that vector integration can
confer a selection bias, and suggest that the intensity of the conditioning
regimen may further influence the effects of vector integration on clonal
selection in post-transplant engraftment and hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2795029
PMID: 19657370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Ther. 2009 Nov;17(11):1910-8. doi: 10.1038/mt.2009.172. Epub 2009 Jul 28.

Self-inactivating retroviral vector-mediated gene transfer induces oncogene
activation and immortalization of primary murine bone marrow cells.

Bosticardo M(1), Ghosh A, Du Y, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Candotti F.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Insertional mutagenesis leading to insurgence of leukemia has been shown as a
consequence of retroviral (RV)-mediated gene transfer in animal models and in
clinical trials of gene therapy for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency.
Aberrant expression of oncogenes neighboring the gamma-RV vector insertion site
via induction by the enhancer element of the viral long terminal repeats (LTRs)
is thought to have played a role in leukemogenesis. Consequently, RV vectors
devoid of LTR enhancer elements could prove as safer tools for gene transfer. To 
test this hypothesis, we evaluated the immortalization ability of two RV vectors:
one carrying the full-length Moloney leukemia virus (MLV) LTR and one with the
same LTR in which the enhancer element was deleted [MLV self-inactivating (SIN)].
Unexpectedly, transduction with MLV SIN resulted in an only slightly and not
significant decreased immortalization frequency of primary bone marrow (BM)
cultures (about 37%) compared to transduction with MLV (about 48%). Similar to
MLV, immortalization by MLV SIN is likely caused by insertional activation of
oncogenes including Evi1, Mds1, Mef2c, and Hoxa7. Our results indicate that the
MLV SIN, devoid of the LTR enhancer element, was still able to immortalize BM
cells by activating nearby gene expression, indicating the need of an accurate
selection of the internal promoter to obtain safer SIN RV vectors.

PMCID: PMC2835037
PMID: 19638958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jul 16;9:237. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-237.

Identification of novel candidate target genes, including EPHB3, MASP1 and SST at
3q26.2-q29 in squamous cell carcinoma of the lung.

Kang JU(1), Koo SH, Kwon KC, Park JW, Kim JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY,
USA. ju2497@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The underlying genetic alterations for squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) 
and adenocarcinoma (AC) carcinogenesis are largely unknown.
METHODS: High-resolution array- CGH was performed to identify the differences in 
the patterns of genomic imbalances between SCC and AC of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC).
RESULTS: On a genome-wide profile, SCCs showed higher frequency of gains than ACs
(p = 0.067). More specifically, statistically significant differences were
observed across the histologic subtypes for gains at 2q14.2, 3q26.2-q29,
12p13.2-p13.33, and 19p13.3, as well as losses at 3p26.2-p26.3, 16p13.11, and
17p11.2 in SCC, and gains at 7q22.1 and losses at 15q22.2-q25.2 occurred in AC (P
< 0.05). The most striking difference between SCC and AC was gains at the
3q26.2-q29, occurring in 86% (19/22) of SCCs, but in only 21% (3/14) of ACs. Many
significant genes at the 3q26.2-q29 regions previously linked to a specific
histology, such as EVI1,MDS1, PIK3CA and TP73L, were observed in SCC (P < 0.05). 
In addition, we identified the following possible target genes (> 30% of
patients) at 3q26.2-q29: LOC389174 (3q26.2),KCNMB3 (3q26.32),EPHB3 (3q27.1),
MASP1 and SST (3q27.3), LPP and FGF12 (3q28), and OPA1,KIAA022,LOC220729,
LOC440996,LOC440997, and LOC440998 (3q29), all of which were significantly
targeted in SCC (P < 0.05). Among these same genes, high-level amplifications
were detected for the gene, EPHB3, at 3q27.1, and MASP1 and SST, at 3q27.3 (18,
18, and 14%, respectively). Quantitative real time PCR demonstrated array CGH
detected potential candidate genes that were over expressed in SCCs.
CONCLUSION: Using whole-genome array CGH, we have successfully identified
significant differences and unique information of chromosomal signatures
prevalent between the SCC and AC subtypes of NSCLC. The newly identified
candidate target genes may prove to be highly attractive candidate molecular
markers for the classification of NSCLC histologic subtypes, and could
potentially contribute to the pathogenesis of the squamous cell carcinoma of the 
lung.

PMCID: PMC2716371
PMID: 19607727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Leukoc Biol. 2009 Oct;86(4):813-22. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0109042. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

Inducible expression of EVI1 in human myeloid cells causes phenotypes consistent 
with its role in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Konrad TA(1), Karger A, Hackl H, Schwarzinger I, Herbacek I, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria.

The oncogene EVI1 has been implicated in the etiology of AML and MDS. Although
AML cells are characterized by accelerated proliferation and differentiation
arrest, MDS cells hyperproliferate when immature but fail to differentiate later 
and die instead. In agreement with its roles in AML and in immature MDS cells,
EVI1 was found to stimulate cell proliferation and inhibit differentiation in
several experimental systems. In contrast, the variant protein MDS1/EVI1 caused
the opposite effect in some of these assays. In the present study, we expressed
EVI1 and MDS1/EVI1 in a tetracycline-regulable manner in the human myeloid cell
line U937. Induction of either of these proteins caused cells to accumulate in
the G(0)/G(1)-phase of the cell cycle and moderately increased the rate of
spontaneous apoptosis. However, when EVI1- or MDS1/EVI1-expressing cells were
induced to differentiate, they massively succumbed to apoptosis, as reflected by 
the accumulation of phosphatidylserine in the outer leaflet of the plasma
membrane and increased rates of DNA fragmentation. In summary, these data show
that inducible expression of EVI1 in U937 cells causes phenotypes that may be
relevant for its role in MDS and provides a basis for further investigation of
its contribution to this fatal disease.

PMCID: PMC2777892
PMID: 19605700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mol Ther. 2009 Sep;17(9):1537-47. doi: 10.1038/mt.2009.134. Epub 2009 Jun 16.

Cell-intrinsic and vector-related properties cooperate to determine the incidence
and consequences of insertional mutagenesis.

Kustikova OS(1), Schiedlmeier B, Brugman MH, Stahlhut M, Bartels S, Li Z, Baum C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

In gene therapeutic approaches targeting hematopoietic cells, insertional
mutagenesis may provoke clonal dominance with potential progress to overt
leukemia. To investigate the contribution of cell-intrinsic features and
determine the frequency of insertional proto-oncogene activation, we sorted
hematopoietic subpopulations before transduction with replication-deficient
gamma-retroviral vectors and studied the clonal repertoire in transplanted
C57BL/6J mice. Progressive clonal dominance only developed in the progeny of
populations with intrinsic stem cell potential, where expanding clones with
insertional upregulation of proto-oncogenes such as Evi1 were retrieved with a
frequency of approximately 10(-4). Longitudinal studies by high-throughput
sequencing and locus-specific quantitative PCR showed clones with >50-fold
expansion between weeks 5 and 31 after transplantation. In contrast, insertional 
events in proto-oncogenes did not endow the progeny of multipotent or
myeloid-restricted progenitors with the potential for clonal dominance (risk
<10(-6)). Transducing sorted hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) with
self-inactivating (SIN) lentiviral vectors in short-term cultures improved
chimerism, and although clonal dominance developed, there was no evidence for
insertional events in the vicinity of proto-oncogenes as the underlying cause. We
conclude that cell-intrinsic properties cooperate with vector-related features to
determine the incidence and consequences of insertional mutagenesis. Furthermore,
our study offers perspectives for refinement of animal experiments in the
assessment of vector-related genotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC2835258
PMID: 19532134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Blood. 2009 Jul 2;114(1):148-52. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-11-187724. Epub 2009 Apr
27.

Molecular stratification model for prognosis in cytogenetically normal acute
myeloid leukemia.

Santamaría CM(1), Chillón MC, García-Sanz R, Pérez C, Caballero MD, Ramos F, de
Coca AG, Alonso JM, Giraldo P, Bernal T, Queizán JA, Rodriguez JN,
Fernández-Abellán P, Bárez A, Peñarrubia MJ, Balanzategui A, Vidriales MB,
Sarasquete ME, Alcoceba M, Díaz-Mediavilla J, San Miguel JF, Gonzalez M.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario, Universidad de Salamanca-Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientificas, Salamanca, Spain.

We have evaluated 9 new molecular markers (ERG, EVI1, MLL-PTD, MN1, PRAME, RHAMM,
and WT1 gene-expression levels plus FLT3 and NPM1 mutations) in 121 de novo
cytogenetically normal acute myeloblastic leukemias. In the multivariate
analysis, high ERG or EVI1 and low PRAME expressions were associated with a
shorter relapse-free survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS). A 0 to 3 score was
given by assigning a value of 0 to favorable parameters (low ERG, low EVI1, and
high PRAME) and 1 to adverse parameters. This model distinguished 4 subsets of
patients with different OS (2-year OS of 79%, 65%, 46%, and 27%; P = .001) and
RFS (2-year RFS of 92%, 65%, 49%, and 43%; P = .005). Furthermore, this score
identified patients with different OS (P = .001) and RFS (P = .013), even within 
the FLT3/NPM1 intermediate-risk/high-risk subgroups. Here we propose a new
molecular score for cytogenetically normal acute myeloblastic leukemias, which
could improve patient risk-stratification.

PMID: 19398719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Blood. 2009 May 28;113(22):5434-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-10-185199. Epub 2009 
Apr 1.

Sustained high-level polyclonal hematopoietic marking and transgene expression 4 
years after autologous transplantation of rhesus macaques with SIV lentiviral
vector-transduced CD34+ cells.

Kim YJ(1), Kim YS, Larochelle A, Renaud G, Wolfsberg TG, Adler R, Donahue RE,
Hematti P, Hong BK, Roayaei J, Akagi K, Riberdy JM, Nienhuis AW, Dunbar CE,
Persons DA.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20852, USA.

We previously reported that lentiviral vectors derived from the simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV) were efficient at transducing rhesus hematopoietic
repopulating cells. To evaluate the persistence of vector-containing and
-expressing cells long term, and the safety implications of SIV lentiviral
vector-mediated gene transfer, we followed 3 rhesus macaques for more than 4
years after transplantation with transduced CD34+ cells. All 3 animals
demonstrated significant vector marking and expression of the GFP transgene in T 
cells, B cells, and granulocytes, with mean GFP+ levels of 6.7% (range,
3.3%-13.0%), 7.4% (4.2%-13.4%), and 5.6% (3.1%-10.5%), respectively. There was no
vector silencing in hematopoietic cells over time. Vector insertion site analysis
of granulocytes demonstrated sustained highly polyclonal reconstitution, with no 
evidence for progression to oligoclonality. A significant number of clones were
found to contribute at both 1-year and 3- or 4-year time points. No vector
integrations were detected in the MDS1/EVI1 region, in contrast to our previous
findings with a gamma-retroviral vector. These data show that lentiviral vectors 
can mediate stable and efficient long-term expression in the progeny of
transduced hematopoietic stem cells, with an integration profile that may be
safer than that of standard Moloney murine leukemia virus (MLV)-derived
retroviral vectors.

PMCID: PMC2689045
PMID: 19339698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Jun;219(3):529-34. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21739.

Molecular bases of myelodysplastic syndromes: lessons from animal models.

Komeno Y(1), Kitaura J, Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Therapy, Institute of Medical Science, the University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a clonal disorder of hematopietic stem cells
characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis, peripheral blood cytopenia,
morphologic dysplasia, and susceptibility to acute myeloid leukemia. Several
mechanisms have been suggested as causes of MDS: unbalanced chromosomal
abnormalities reflecting a gain or loss of chromosomal material, point mutations 
of transcription factors, and inactivation of p53. However, appropriate animal
models that mimic MDS have long been lacking. We recently reported a novel murine
model of MDS that recapitulates trilineage dysplasia and transformation to AML.
In this review, we summarize the animal models of MDS and discuss the molecular
bases of MDS as well as those of leukemia and myeloproliferative disorders (MPD).
J. Cell. Physiol. 219: 529-534, 2009. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19259975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Int J Hematol. 2009 Mar;89(2):253-6. doi: 10.1007/s12185-009-0267-8. Epub 2009
Feb 26.

Enhanced expression of the EVI1 gene in NUP98/HOXA-expressing leukemia cells.

Eguchi-Ishimae M, Eguchi M, Ohyashiki K, Yamagata T, Mitani K.

PMID: 19241117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 15;69(4):1633-42. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2562. Epub
2009 Feb 10.

EVI1 Impairs myelopoiesis by deregulation of PU.1 function.

Laricchia-Robbio L(1), Premanand K, Rinaldi CR, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA. robbiol@uic.edu

EVI1 is an oncogene inappropriately expressed in the bone marrow (BM) of
approximately 10% of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) patients. This disease is
characterized by severe anemia and multilineage myeloid dysplasia that are
thought to be a major cause of mortality in MDS patients. We earlier reported on 
a mouse model that constitutive expression of EVI1 in the BM led to fatal anemia 
and myeloid dysplasia, as observed in MDS patients, and we subsequently showed
that EVI1 interaction with GATA1 blocks proper erythropoiesis. Whereas this
interaction could provide the basis for the erythroid defects in EVI1-positive
MDS, it does not explain the alteration of myeloid differentiation. Here, we have
examined the expression of several genes activated during terminal myelopoiesis
in BM cells and identified a group of them that are altered by EVI1. A common
feature of these genes is their regulation by the transcription factor PU.1. We
report here that EVI1 interacts with PU.1 and represses the PU.1-dependent
activation of a myeloid promoter. EVI1 does not seem to inhibit PU.1 binding to
DNA, but rather to block its association with the coactivator c-Jun. After
mapping the PU.1-EVI1 interaction sites, we show that an EVI1 point mutant,
unable to bind PU.1, restores the activation of PU.1-regulated genes and allows a
normal differentiation of BM progenitors in vitro.

PMID: 19208846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Jul;48(7):648-61. doi: 10.1002/mc.20511.

Reprogramming of the transcriptome in a novel chromosome 3 transfer tumor
suppressor ovarian cancer cell line model affected molecular networks that are
characteristic of ovarian cancer.

Quinn MC(1), Filali-Mouhim A, Provencher DM, Mes-Masson AM, Tonin PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.

Tumor suppression as a consequence of the transfer of chromosome 3p fragments was
previously observed in a novel epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) OV-90 cell line
model harboring loss of 3p. Microarray analysis revealed that tumor suppression
was associated with a modified transcriptome. To investigate the relevance of the
altered transcriptome, the differentially expressed genes identified by
Affymetrix analysis in the 3p transfer studies, were integrated with a
comparative microarray analysis of normal ovarian surface epithelial (NOSE) cells
and malignant ovarian (TOV) cancers. Data from 219 significantly differentially
expressed genes exhibited patterns in the direction predicted by the analysis of 
3p transfer study. The 30 genes with the highest statistically significant
differences (P < 1 x 10(-8)) in expression were found consistently differentially
expressed between NOSE and TOV samples. The investigation of these genes in
benign serous ovarian tumors and EOC cell lines also exhibited predictable
expression patterns. Within the group of differentially expressed genes were
SPARC, DAB2, CP, EVI1, ELF3, and EHD2, known to play a role in ovarian cancer,
genes implicated in other cancers, such as GREM1 and GLIPR1, as well as genes not
previously reported in a cancer context such as AKAP2 and ATAD4. A number of the 
differentially expressed genes are implicated in the TGF-beta signaling pathway. 
These findings suggest that the reprogramming of the transcriptome that occurred 
as a consequence of the chromosome 3 transfer and tumor suppression affected
molecular networks that are characteristic of ovarian carcinogenesis thus
validating our novel ovarian cancer cell line model.

PMID: 19123201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cancer Res. 2009 Jan 1;69(1):262-71. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2534.

Consistent up-regulation of Stat3 Independently of Jak2 mutations in a new murine
model of essential thrombocythemia.

Senyuk V(1), Rinaldi CR, Li D, Cattaneo F, Stojanovic A, Pane F, Du X, Mahmud N, 
Dickstein J, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 909 Wolcott Avenue, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Janus-activated kinase 2 (JAK2) mutations are common in myeloproliferative
disorders; however, although they are detected in virtually all polycythemia vera
patients, they are found in approximately 50% of essential thrombocythemia (ET)
patients, suggesting that converging pathways/abnormalities underlie the onset of
ET. Recently, the chromosomal translocation 3;21, leading to the fusion gene
AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME), was observed in an ET patient. After we forced the
expression of AME in the bone marrow (BM) of C57BL/6J mice, all the reconstituted
mice died of a disease with symptoms similar to ET with a latency of 8 to 16
months. Peripheral blood smears consistently showed an elevated number of
dysplastic platelets with anisocytosis, degranulation, and giant size. Although
the AME-positive mice did not harbor Jak2 mutations, the BM of most of them had
significantly higher levels of activated Stat3 than the controls. With combined
biochemical and biological assays we found that AME binds to the Stat3 promoter
leading to its up-regulation. Signal transducers and activators of transcription 
3 (STAT3) analysis of a small group of ET patients shows that in about half of
the patients, there is STAT3 hyperactivation independently of JAK2 mutations,
suggesting that the hyperactivation of STAT3 by JAK2 mutations or promoter
activation may be a critical step in development of ET.

PMCID: PMC2613549
PMID: 19118011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cancer Treat Res. 2010;145:67-83. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-69259-3_5.

Genes predictive of outcome and novel molecular classification schemes in adult
acute myeloid leukemia.

Verhaak RG(1), Valk PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. p.valk@erasmusmc.nl

The pretreatment karyotype of leukemic blasts is currently the key determinant in
therapy decision making in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The World Health
Organization (WHO) has recognized this important information by including,
besides clinical, cytological, cytochemical, and immunophenotypical features,
recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities in its classification (Table 1). However,
although the WHO defines important biologically and clinically relevant entities,
the prognostic value of some of the well-defined cytogenetic subgroups is
partially masked in the WHO classification. Moreover, in the recent past a number
of novel molecular aberrations with marked prognostic value, which are not yet
incorporated in the WHO classifications have been identified. These molecular
abnormalities include mutations (e.g., in FLT3, c-KIT, and NPM1), partial
duplications (e.g., of MLL and FLT3), and abnormal expression of pathogenetic
genes (e.g., EVI1, WT1, BCL2, MDR1, BAALC, and ERG). In addition, novel molecular
approaches in genomics, like monitoring the expression levels of thousands of
genes in parallel using DNA microarray technology, open possibilities for further
refinement of prognostication of AML. Gene expression profiling in AML is already
well established and has proven to be valuable to recognize various cytogenetic
subtypes, discover novel AML subclasses, and predict clinical outcome. The
current advances made in molecular understanding of AML will ultimately lead to a
further refinement of prognostics of AML.

PMID: 20306246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Bone. 2009 Apr;44(4):528-36. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.11.011. Epub 2008 Nov 27.

Zfp521 antagonizes Runx2, delays osteoblast differentiation in vitro, and
promotes bone formation in vivo.

Wu M(1), Hesse E, Morvan F, Zhang JP, Correa D, Rowe GC, Kiviranta R, Neff L,
Philbrick WM, Horne WC, Baron R.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

Zfp521, a 30 C2H2 Kruppel-like zinc finger protein, is expressed at high levels
at the periphery of early mesenchymal condensations prefiguring skeletal elements
and in all developing bones in the perichondrium and periosteum, in osteoblast
precursors and osteocytes, and in chondroblast precursors and growth plate
prehypertrophic chondrocytes. Zfp521 expression in cultured mesenchymal cells is 
decreased by BMP-2 and increased by PTHrP, which promote and antagonize
osteoblast differentiation, respectively. In vitro, Zfp521 overexpression reduces
the expression of several downstream osteoblast marker genes and antagonizes
osteoblast differentiation. Zfp521 binds Runx2 and represses its transcriptional 
activity, and Runx2 dose-dependently rescues Zfp521's inhibition of osteoblast
differentiation. In contrast, osteocalcin promoter-targeted overexpression of
Zfp521 in osteoblasts in vivo results in increased bone formation and bone mass. 
We propose that Zfp521 regulates the rate of osteoblast differentiation and bone 
formation during development and in the mature skeleton, in part by antagonizing 
Runx2.

PMCID: PMC2746087
PMID: 19095088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 30;284(5):3334-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808989200. Epub 2008
Dec 1.

SKI and MEL1 cooperate to inhibit transforming growth factor-beta signal in
gastric cancer cells.

Takahata M(1), Inoue Y, Tsuda H, Imoto I, Koinuma D, Hayashi M, Ichikura T,
Yamori T, Nagasaki K, Yoshida M, Matsuoka M, Morishita K, Yuki K, Hanyu A,
Miyazawa K, Inazawa J, Miyazono K, Imamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, the Cancer Institute of the Japanese Foundation for 
Cancer Research (JFCR), Division of Molecular Pharmacology, the Cancer
Chemotherapy Center of the JFCR, and Genome Center of the JFCR, Tokyo, Japan.

Chromosomal amplification occurs frequently in solid tumors and is associated
with poor prognosis. Several reports demonstrated the cooperative effects of
oncogenic factors in the same amplicon during cancer development. However, the
functional correlation between the factors remains unclear. Transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta signaling plays important roles in cytostasis and normal
epithelium differentiation, and alterations in TGF-beta signaling have been
identified in many malignancies. Here, we demonstrated that transcriptional
co-repressors of TGF-beta signaling, SKI and MDS1/EVI1-like gene 1 (MEL1), were
aberrantly expressed in MKN28 gastric cancer cells by chromosomal
co-amplification of 1p36.32. SKI and MEL1 knockdown synergistically restored
TGF-beta responsiveness in MKN28 cells and reduced tumor growth in vivo. MEL1
interacted with SKI and inhibited TGF-beta signaling by stabilizing the inactive 
Smad3-SKI complex on the promoter of TGF-beta target genes. These findings reveal
a novel mechanism where distinct transcriptional co-repressors are co-amplified
and functionally interact, and provide molecular targets for gastric cancer
treatment.

PMID: 19049980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Dec;187(2):61-73. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.06.015.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia relapsing as secondary acute myelogenous leukemia
with translocation t(3;21)(q26;q22) and RUNX1-MDS1-EVI1 fusion transcript.

Park TS(1), Choi JR, Yoon SH, Song J, Kim J, Kim SJ, Kwon O, Min YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 250 
Seongsanno, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype of acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML) that is characterized by peculiar clinical and biologic features, including
severe hemorrhagic diathesis, specific recurrent chromosomal aberration, and
distinct morphologic features with predominant pathologic promyelocytes. A
reciprocal translocation involving chromosomes 15 and 17, t(15;17)(q22;q21), is a
characteristic feature of APL that represents approximately 5-8% of AML. The
rearranged gene created by this translocation encodes a chimeric protein PML-RARA
that is a transcriptional repressor. In contrast to other AML subtypes, APL is
particularly sensitive to treatment with all trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) combined 
with chemotherapy, converting this once fatal leukemia to a highly curable
disease. Nonetheless, therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome-acute myelogenous 
leukemia (t-MDS/AML) has been reported as a rare complication of chemotherapy in 
APL. Of 30 APL cases described as t-MDS/AML in the literature, only 1 case
relapsed as acute leukemia with t(3;21)(q26;q22). Here we describe a rare case of
APL relapsing as secondary AML with t(3;21)(q26;q22) and clinically characterize 
this patient using the RUNX1 (previously AML1)-MDS1-EVI1 fusion transcript (with 
follow-up for 55 months), and review the relevant literature.

PMID: 19027486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cancer Sci. 2008 Oct;99(10):1878-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00956.x.

Role of the RUNX1-EVI1 fusion gene in leukemogenesis.

Maki K(1), Yamagata T, Mitani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine,
Shimotsuga-Gun, Tochigi, Japan.

RUNX1-EVI1 is a chimeric gene generated by t(3;21)(q26;q22) observed in patients 
with aggressive transformation of myelodysplastic syndrome or chronic myelogenous
leukemia. RUNX1-EVI1 has oncogenic potentials through dominant-negative effect
over wild-type RUNX1, inhibition of Jun kinase (JNK) pathway, stimulation of cell
growth via AP-1, suppression of TGF-beta-mediated growth inhibition and
repression of C/EBPalpha. Runx1-EVI1 heterozygous knock-in mice die in uteri due 
to central nervous system (CNS) hemorrhage and severe defects in definitive
hematopoiesis as Runx1-/- mice do, indicating that RUNX1-EVI1 dominantly
suppresses functions of wild-type RUNX1 in vivo. Acute myelogenous leukemia is
induced in mice transplanted with bone marrow cells expressing RUNX1-EVI1, and a 
Runx1-EVI1 knock-in chimera mouse developed acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.
These results suggest that RUNX1-EVI1 plays indispensable roles in leukemogenesis
of t(3;21)-positive leukemia. Major leukemogenic effect of RUNX1-EVI1 is mainly
through histone deacetyltransferase recruitment via C-terminal binding protein.
Histone deacetyltransferase could be a target in molecular therapy of
RUNX1-EVI1-expressing leukemia.

PMID: 19016745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 15;325(2):402-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.09.026. Epub 2008 
Oct 7.

Dissection of lin-11 enhancer regions in Caenorhabditis elegans and other
nematodes.

Marri S(1), Gupta BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada.

The Caenorhabditis elegans LIM homeobox gene lin-11 plays crucial roles in the
morphogenesis of the reproductive system and differentiation of several neurons. 
The expression of lin-11 in different tissues is regulated by enhancer regions
located upstream as well as within lin-11 introns. These regions are functionally
separable suggesting that multiple regulatory inputs operate to control the
spatiotemporal pattern of lin-11 expression. To further dissect apart the nature 
of lin-11 regulation we focused on three Caenorhabditis species C. briggsae, C.
remanei, and C. brenneri that are substantially diverged from C. elegans but
share almost identical vulval morphology. We show that, in these species, the 5' 
region of lin-11 possesses conserved sequences to activate lin-11 expression in
the reproductive system. Analysis of the in vivo role of these sequences in C.
elegans has led to the identification of three functionally distinct enhancers
for the vulva, VC neurons, and uterine pi lineage cells. We found that the pi
enhancer is regulated by FOS homolog FOS-1 and LIN-12/Notch pathway effectors,
LAG-1 (Su(H)/CBF1 family) and EGL-43 (EVI1 family). These results indicate that
multiple factors cooperate to regulate pi-specific expression of lin-11 and
together with other findings suggest that the mechanism of lin-11 regulation by
LIN-12/Notch signaling is evolutionarily conserved in Caenorhabditis species. Our
work demonstrates that 4-way comparison is a powerful tool to study conserved
mechanisms of gene regulation in C. elegans and other nematodes.

PMID: 18950616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Haematologica. 2008 Dec;93(12):1903-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.13192. Epub 2008 Sep
24.

EVI1 overexpression in t(3;17) positive myeloid malignancies results from
juxtaposition of EVI1 to the MSI2 locus at 17q22.

De Weer A(1), Speleman F, Cauwelier B, Van Roy N, Yigit N, Verhasselt B, De
Moerloose B, Benoit Y, Noens L, Selleslag D, Lippert E, Struski S, Bastard C, De 
Paepe A, Vandenberghe P, Hagemeijer A, Dastugue N, Poppe B; Groupe Français de
Cytogénétique Hématologique (GFCH).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics Gent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Chromosomal translocations involving the EVI1 locus are a recurrent finding in
myeloid leukemia and are associated with poor prognosis. In this study, we
performed a detailed molecular characterization of the recurrent translocation
t(3;17)(q26;q22) in 13 hematologic malignancies. The EVI1 gene locus was
rearranged in all 13 patients and was associated with EVI1 overexpression. In 9
out of 13 patients, the 17q breakpoints clustered in a 250 kb region on band
17q22 encompassing the MSI2 (musashi homologue 2) gene. Expression analyses
failed to demonstrate ectopic MSI2 expression or the presence of an MSI2/EVI1
fusion gene. In conclusion, we show for the first time that the t(3;17) is indeed
a recurrent chromosomal aberration in myeloid malignancies. In keeping with
findings in other recurrent 3q26 rearrangements, overexpression of the EVI1 gene 
appears to be the major contributor to leukemogenesis in patients with a t(3;17).

PMID: 18815193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Blood. 2008 Dec 15;112(13):5190-2. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-04-148791. Epub 2008
Sep 22.

BCR-ABL fusion transcript types and levels and their interaction with secondary
genetic changes in determining the phenotype of Philadelphia chromosome-positive 
leukemias.

Jones D(1), Luthra R, Cortes J, Thomas D, O'Brien S, Bueso-Ramos C, Hai S,
Ravandi F, de Lima M, Kantarjian H, Jorgensen JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematopathology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, USA.

It remains unresolved how different BCR-ABL transcripts differentially drive
lymphoid and myeloid proliferation in Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph(+))
leukemias. We compared BCR-ABL transcript type and level with kinase domain (KD) 
mutation status, genotype, and phenotype in 1855 Ph(+) leukemias. Compared with
e1a2/p190 BCR-ABL cases, de novo e13-e14a2/p210 Ph(+) lymphoid leukemia more
frequently showed CML-type background, had higher blast-normalized BCR-ABL
transcript levels, and more frequent persistent BCR-ABL transcript in the absence
of detectable lymphoblasts. Secondary lymphoid blast transformation of CML was
exclusively due to e13/e14a2/p210 BCR-ABL but was associated, at a much higher
level than p210 myeloid transformation, with acquisition of new KD mutations
and/or Ph genomic amplification. In contrast, myeloid blast transformation was
more frequently accompanied by new acquisition of acute myeloid leukemia-type
chromosomal aberrations, particularly involving the EVI1 and RUNX1 loci.
Therefore, higher kinase activity by mutation, transcriptional up-regulation or
gene amplification appears required for lymphoid transformation by p210 BCR-ABL.

PMCID: PMC2597614
PMID: 18809762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Leuk Res. 2009 Apr;33(4):594-6. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.07.018. Epub 2008 Aug
27.

EVI1, BAALC and AME: prevalence of the secondary mutations in chronic and
accelerated phases of chronic myeloid leukemia patients from eastern India.

Kuila N, Sahoo DP, Kumari M, Biswas S, Patnaik RS, Pattnayak NC, Biswas G,
Chakraborty S.

PMID: 18752846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Aug 7;3(2):207-20. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.06.002.

Evi-1 is a critical regulator for hematopoietic stem cells and transformed
leukemic cells.

Goyama S(1), Yamamoto G, Shimabe M, Sato T, Ichikawa M, Ogawa S, Chiba S,
Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Evi-1 has been recognized as one of the dominant oncogenes associated with murine
and human myeloid leukemia. Here, we show that hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in
Evi-1-deficient embryos are severely reduced in number with defective
proliferative and repopulating capacity. Selective ablation of Evi-1 in Tie2(+)
cells mimics Evi-1 deficiency, suggesting that Evi-1 function is required in
Tie2(+) hematopoietic stem/progenitors. Conditional deletion of Evi-1 in the
adult hematopoietic system revealed that Evi-1-deficient bone marrow HSCs cannot 
maintain hematopoiesis and lose their repopulating ability. In contrast, Evi-1 is
dispensable for blood cell lineage commitment. Evi-1(+/-) mice exhibit the
intermediate phenotype for HSC activity, suggesting a gene dosage requirement for
Evi-1. We further demonstrate that disruption of Evi-1 in transformed leukemic
cells leads to significant loss of their proliferative activity both in vitro and
in vivo. Thus, Evi-1 is a common and critical regulator essential for
proliferation of embryonic/adult HSCs and transformed leukemic cells.

PMID: 18682242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 1;105(2):344-52. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21869.

EVI1 recruits the histone methyltransferase SUV39H1 for transcription repression.

Cattaneo F(1), Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA.

EVI1 is an oncoprotein inappropriately expressed in acute myeloid leukemia and
myelodysplastic syndrome cells. In vitro studies indicate that diverse biological
properties can be attributed to this protein. Its role in leukemogenesis is still
unclear but it is thought that overall EVI1 can act mostly as a transcription
repressor through its interaction with a subset of histone deacetylases. Studies 
with histone deacetylase inhibitors have however indicated that EVI1-mediated
repression can be only partially rescued by deacetylase inhibitor drugs,
suggesting that additional chromosomal modifications might occur to induce gene
repression by EVI1. To investigate whether histone methylation contributes to the
repressive potential of EVI1, we examined a potential association between EVI1,
the histone methyltransferase (HMT) SUV39H1, and methyltransferase activity in
vitro. We find that EVI1 directly interacts with SUV39H1 and that the proteins
form an active complex with methyltransferase activity in vitro. Our data
indicate that SUV39H1 enhances the transcription repressive potential of EVI1 in 
vivo. We suggest that EVI1 affects promoters' activity in two different pathways,
by association with histone deacetylases and by recruiting chromatin-modifying
enzymes to impose a heterochromatin-like structure establishing a lasting
transcription repression.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18655152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. FEBS Lett. 2008 Aug 6;582(18):2761-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.06.056. Epub
2008 Jul 11.

A novel interaction between the proto-oncogene Evi1 and histone
methyltransferases, SUV39H1 and G9a.

Spensberger D(1), Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Dr.
Molewaterplein 50, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The transcription factor ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) is associated 
with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) in patients 
due to chromosomal aberration of chromosome 3. Here we show that Evi1 interacts
with the histone methyltransferase SUV39H1. The interaction requires the
N-terminal part of Evi1 and the H3-specific histone methyltransferase domain,
SET, of SUV39H1 without Evi1 having an inhibitory effect on SUV39H1
methyltransferase activity. Presence of SUV39H1 enhances Evi1 transcriptional
repression in a dose dependent manner. In addition, Evi1 also interacts with
another histone methyltransferase, G9a, but not with SET9. Our data establish an 
epigenetic role of Evi1 in cell transformation by recruiting higher order
chromatin remodeling complexes.

PMID: 18619962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. BMC Cancer. 2008 Jul 9;8:193. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-193.

EVI1 activation in blast crisis CML due to juxtaposition to the rare 17q22
partner region as part of a 4-way variant translocation t(9;22).

De Weer A(1), Poppe B, Cauwelier B, Carlier A, Dierick J, Verhasselt B, Philippé 
J, Van Roy N, Speleman F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics Gent (CMGG), Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium. an.deweer@ugent.be

BACKGROUND: Variant translocations t(9;22) occur in 5 to 10% of newly diagnosed
CMLs and additional genetic changes are present in 60-80% of patients in blast
crisis (BC). Here, we report on a CML patient in blast crisis presenting with a
four-way variant t(9;22) rearrangement involving the EVI1 locus.
METHODS: Dual-colour Fluorescence In Situ Hybridisation was performed to unravel 
the different cytogenetic aberrations. Expression levels of EVI1 and BCR/ABL1
were investigated using real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: In this paper we identified a patient with a complex 4-way t(3;9;17;22) 
which, in addition to BCR/ABL1 gene fusion, also resulted in EVI1 rearrangement
and overexpression.
CONCLUSION: This report illustrates how a variant t(9;22) translocation can
specifically target a second oncogene most likely contributing to the more
aggressive phenotype of the disease. Molecular analysis of such variants is thus 
warranted to understand the phenotypic consequences and to open the way for
combined molecular therapies in order to tackle the secondary oncogenic effect
which is unresponsive to imatinib treatment.

PMCID: PMC2474635
PMID: 18613965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Ther. 2008 Sep;16(9):1617-23. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.135. Epub 2008 Jun 24.

Reduced genotoxicity of avian sarcoma leukosis virus vectors in rhesus long-term 
repopulating cells compared to standard murine retrovirus vectors.

Hu J(1), Renaud G, Gomes TJ, Ferris A, Hendrie PC, Donahue RE, Hughes SH,
Wolfsberg TG, Russell DW, Dunbar CE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Hematopoiesis Section, Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung,
Blood Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Ther. 2008 Oct;16(10):1770.. Golmes, Theotonius [corrected to Gomes,
Theotonius J].

Insertional mutagenesis continues to be a major concern in hematopoietic
stem-cell gene therapy. Nonconventional gene transfer vectors with more favorable
integration features in comparison with conventional retrovirus and lentivirus
vectors are being developed and optimized. In this study, we report for the first
time a systematic analysis of 198 avian sarcoma leukosis virus (ASLV) insertion
sites identified in rhesus long-term repopulating cells, and a comparison of ASLV
insertion patterns to Moloney murine leukemia virus (MLV) (n = 396) and simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV) (n = 289) using the newly released rhesus genome
databank. Despite a weak preference toward gene-coding regions, ASLV integration 
is nonclustered, does not favor gene-rich regions, transcription start sites, or 
CpG islands. There was no propensity for ASLV insertions within or near
proto-oncogenes, and most importantly, no insertions close to or within the
Mds1-Evi1 locus, which is in contrast to the significant over-representation of
this insertion site for MLV vectors in the same transplantation model.
Furthermore, ASLV long terminal repeats (LTRs) do not have detectable promoter
and enhancer activity in a quantitative luciferase assay to measure neighboring
gene activation. The combination of these features is unique for ASLV and
suggests that optimized vectors based on this virus could be useful and safe for 
gene transfer to hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2561952
PMID: 18578011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biochemistry. 2008 Jun 17;47(24):6418-26. doi: 10.1021/bi800267f. Epub 2008 May
24.

Myeloid transforming protein Evi1 interacts with methyl-CpG binding domain
protein 3 and inhibits in vitro histone deacetylation by Mbd3/Mi-2/NuRD.

Spensberger D(1), Vermeulen M, Le Guezennec X, Beekman R, van Hoven A, Bindels E,
Stunnenberg H, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam 3015
GE, The Netherlands.

The ecotropic viral integration site 1 ( Evi1) gene encodes a putative
transcription regulator, which is aberrantly expressed in acute myeloid leukemias
(AML) with chromosomal abnormalities involving the 3q26 locus. Repression and
activation of transcriptional control have been reported, but it is currently
unclear how Evi1 may evoke these opposing effects. Using a yeast two-hybrid
screen, we identified a novel binding partner of Evi1, i.e., methyl binding
domain 3b (Mbd3b) protein, a member of the Mi-2/NuRD histone deacetylase complex.
Applying in vitro and in vivo assays, we found that Evi1 interacts with Mbd3b but
not with other MBD family members Mbd1, -2, and -4 or MeCP2. We show that
interaction of Evi1 with Mbd3 requires 40 amino acids that are adjacent and
downstream of the methyl binding domain (MBD). We further demonstrate that the
first three zinc fingers of Evi1 are needed for Mbd3 interaction. Evi1 acts as a 
transcriptional repressor when recruited to an active promoter, yet when present 
in the Mi-2/NuRD complex through Mbd3 interaction, it inhibits the histone
deacetylation function of this multiprotein structure. Our data may in part
explain how Evi1 could act as a repressor as well as an activator of
transcription.

PMID: 18500823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Leukemia. 2008 Aug;22(8):1519-28. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.118. Epub 2008 May 22.

Leukemia induction after a single retroviral vector insertion in Evi1 or Prdm16.

Modlich U(1), Schambach A, Brugman MH, Wicke DC, Knoess S, Li Z, Maetzig T,
Rudolph C, Schlegelberger B, Baum C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Insertional activation of cellular proto-oncogenes by replication-defective
retroviral vectors can trigger clonal dominance and leukemogenesis in animal
models and clinical trials. Here, we addressed the leukemogenic potential of
vectors expressing interleukin-2 receptor common gamma-chain (IL2RG), the coding 
sequence required for correction of X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency.
Similar to conventional gamma-retroviral vectors, self-inactivating (SIN) vectors
with strong internal enhancers also triggered profound clonal imbalance, yet with
a characteristic insertion preference for a window located downstream of the
transcriptional start site. Controls including lentivirally transduced cells
revealed that ectopic IL2RG expression was not sufficient to trigger leukemia.
After serial bone marrow transplantation involving 106 C57Bl6/J mice monitored
for up to 18 months, we observed leukemic progression of six distinct clones
harboring gamma-retroviral long terminal repeat (LTR) or SIN vector insertions in
Evi1 or Prdm16, two functionally related genes. Three leukemic clones had single 
vector integrations, and identical clones manifested with a remarkably similar
latency and phenotype in independent recipients. We conclude that upregulation of
Evi1 or Prdm16 was sufficient to initiate a leukemogenic cascade with consistent 
intrinsic dynamics. Our study also shows that insertional mutagenesis is required
for leukemia induction by IL2RG vectors, a risk to be addressed by improved
vector design.

PMID: 18496560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 May 13;105(19):6998-7003. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0800454105. Epub 2008 May 5.

Promoter polymorphism of the erythropoietin gene in severe diabetic eye and
kidney complications.

Tong Z(1), Yang Z, Patel S, Chen H, Gibbs D, Yang X, Hau VS, Kaminoh Y, Harmon J,
Pearson E, Buehler J, Chen Y, Yu B, Tinkham NH, Zabriskie NA, Zeng J, Luo L, Sun 
JK, Prakash M, Hamam RN, Tonna S, Constantine R, Ronquillo CC, Sadda S, Avery RL,
Brand JM, London N, Anduze AL, King GL, Bernstein PS, Watkins S; Genetics of
Diabetes and Diabetic Complication Study Group, Jorde LB, Li DY, Aiello LP,
Pollak MR, Zhang K.

Collaborators: Ma X, Cameron DJ, Rabena M, Goldfarb-Rumyantzev A, Banerjee N,
Keenan H, Mamalis N, Perez C, Katz BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Eccles Institute of Human
Genetics.

Significant morbidity and mortality among patients with diabetes mellitus result 
largely from a greatly increased incidence of microvascular complications.
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) and end stage renal disease (ESRD) are
two of the most common and severe microvascular complications of diabetes. A high
concordance exists in the development of PDR and ESRD in diabetic patients, as
well as strong familial aggregation of these complications, suggesting a common
underlying genetic mechanism. However, the precise gene(s) and genetic variant(s)
involved remain largely unknown. Erythropoietin (EPO) is a potent angiogenic
factor observed in the diabetic human and mouse eye. By a combination of
case-control association and functional studies, we demonstrate that the T allele
of SNP rs1617640 in the promoter of the EPO gene is significantly associated with
PDR and ESRD in three European-American cohorts [Utah: P = 1.91 x 10(-3);
Genetics of Kidneys in Diabetes (GoKinD) Study: P = 2.66 x 10(-8); and Boston: P 
= 2.1 x 10(-2)]. The EPO concentration in human vitreous body was 7.5-fold higher
in normal subjects with the TT risk genotype than in those with the GG genotype. 
Computational analysis suggests that the risk allele (T) of rs1617640 creates a
matrix match with the EVI1/MEL1 or AP1 binding site, accounting for an observed
25-fold enhancement of luciferase reporter expression as compared with the G
allele. These results suggest that rs1617640 in the EPO promoter is significantly
associated with PDR and ESRD. This study identifies a disease risk-associated
gene and potential pathway mediating severe diabetic microvascular complications.

PMCID: PMC2383970
PMID: 18458324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer Sci. 2008 Jul;99(7):1407-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00842.x. Epub
2008 Apr 29.

Evi-1 promotes para-aortic splanchnopleural hematopoiesis through up-regulation
of GATA-2 and repression of TGF-b signaling.

Sato T(1), Goyama S, Nitta E, Takeshita M, Yoshimi M, Nakagawa M, Kawazu M,
Ichikawa M, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Evi-1 is a zinc-finger transcriptional factor whose inappropriate expression
leads to leukemic transformation in mice and humans. Recently, it has been shown 
that Evi-1 regulates proliferation of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells at
embryonic stage via GATA-2 up-regulation; however, detailed mechanisms underlying
Evi-1-mediated early hematopoiesis are not fully understood. We therefore
evaluated hematopoietic potential of Evi-1 mutants using a cultivation system of 
murine para-aortic splanchnopleural (P-Sp) regions, and found that both the first
zinc finger domain and the acidic domain were required for Evi-1-mediated
hematopoiesis. The hematopoietic potential of Evi-1 mutants was likely to be
related to its ability to up-regulate GATA-2 expression. We also showed that the 
decreased colony forming capacity of Evi-1-deficient P-Sp cells was successfully 
recovered by inhibition of TGF-b signaling, using ALK5 inhibitor or retroviral
transfer of dominant-negative-type Smad3. Our findings suggest that Evi-1
promotes hematopoietic stem/progenitor expansion at the embryonic stage through
up-regulation of GATA-2 and repression of TGF-beta signaling.

PMID: 18452556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):3916-7.

AML1 and Evi1: coconspirators in MDS/AML?

Graubert T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, USA.

Comment on
    Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):4297-308.

In this issue of Blood, Watanabe-Okochi and colleagues use a mouse bone marrow
transplantation model to demonstrate that mutant alleles of AML1 (RUNX1) can
initiate a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) that progresses to acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML) in association with overexpression of Evi1.

PMID: 18434965  [PubMed]


243. J Vasc Res. 2008;45(6):457-68. doi: 10.1159/000127437. Epub 2008 Apr 23.

Altered transforming growth factor-beta signaling in a murine model of thoracic
aortic aneurysm.

Jones JA(1), Barbour JR, Stroud RE, Bouges S, Stephens SL, Spinale FG, Ikonomidis
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery Research, Medical
University of South Carolina, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA. jonesja@musc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAAs) develop by a multifactorial process
involving maladaptive signaling pathways that alter the aortic vascular
environment. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) has been implicated in
regulating the structure and composition of the extracellular matrix by
differential activation of various intracellular signaling pathways. However,
whether and to what degree TGF-beta signaling contributes to TAA development
remains unclear. Accordingly, the hypothesis that alterations in TGF-beta
signaling occur during aneurysm formation was tested in a murine model of TAA.
METHODS: TAAs were surgically induced in mice (C57BL/6J) and aortas were analyzed
at predetermined time points (1, 2, and 4 weeks post-TAA induction). Quantitative
real-time PCR (QPCR) was performed to evaluate the expression of 84 relevant
TGF-beta superfamily genes, and the protein levels of key signaling intermediates
were measured by immunoblotting. Results were compared to unoperated reference
control mice.
RESULTS: QPCR revealed increased expression of TGF-beta superfamily ligands
(Gdf-2, -6, -7, Inhba), ligand inhibitors (Bmper, Chrd, Gsc), and transcriptional
regulators (Dlx2, Evi1), among other genes (Cdkn2b, Igf1, IL-6). Protein levels
of TGF-beta receptor(II), Smad2, Smad1/5/8, phospho-Smad1/5/8, and Smurf1 were
increased from control values post-TAA induction. Both TGF-beta receptor(I) and
Smad4 were decreased from control values, while ALK-1 levels remained unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: These alterations in the TGF-beta pathway suggest a mechanism by
which primary signaling is switched from a TGF-betaR(I)/Smad2-dependent response,
to an ALK-1/Smad1/5/8 response, representing a significant change in signaling
outcome, which may enhance matrix degradation.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2574785
PMID: 18434745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2008 Mar;21(1):43-52. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2007.11.010.

Is it important to decipher the heterogeneity of "normal karyotype AML"?

Nimer SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematologic Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, NY
1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA. nimers@mskcc.org

Almost half of adult acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) is normal cytogenetically, 
and this subgroup shows a remarkable heterogeneity of genetic mutations at the
molecular level and an intermediate response to therapy. The finding of recurrent
cytogenetic abnormalities has influenced, in a primary way, the understanding and
treatment of leukemias. Yet "normal karyotype AML" lacks such obvious
abnormalities, but has a variety of prognostically important genetic
abnormalities. Thus, the presence of a FLT3-ITD (internal tandem duplication),
MLL-PTD (partial tandem duplication), or the increased expression of ERG or EVI1 
mRNAs confer a poor prognosis, and an increased risk of relapse. In contrast, the
presence of cytoplasmic nucleophosmin or C/EBPA mutations is associated with
lower relapse rates and improved survival. Although resistance to treatment is
associated with specific mutations, the degree to which the leukemia resembles a 
stem cell in its functional properties may provide greater protection from the
effects of treatment. Although usually all of the circulating leukemia cells are 
cleared following treatment, a small residual population of leukemic cells in the
bone marrow persists, making this disease hard to eradicate. Increased
understanding of the biological consequences of at least some of these mutations 
in "normal karyotype AML" is leading to more targeted approaches to develop more 
effective treatments for this disease.

PMCID: PMC2654590
PMID: 18342811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Leukemia. 2008 Jun;22(6):1241-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.53. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

AML1-Evi-1 specifically transforms hematopoietic stem cells through fusion of the
entire Evi-1 sequence to AML1.

Takeshita M(1), Ichikawa M, Nitta E, Goyama S, Asai T, Ogawa S, Chiba S, Kurokawa
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The t(3;21) chromosomal translocation seen in blastic crisis of chronic myeloid
leukemia and secondary leukemias results in a formation of a chimeric protein
AML1-Evi-1, which suppresses wild-type AML1 function. Loss of AML1 function
causes expansion of hematopoietic progenitor cells, whereas it is not sufficient 
for the development of leukemia. To identify essential mechanisms through which
AML1-Evi-1 exerts full leukemogenic potential, we introduced AML1-Evi-1 and its
mutants in murine bone marrow cells, and evaluated their transforming activities 
by colony replating assays. The transforming activity of AML1-Evi-1 was lost when
any of the known functional domains of Evi-1 was deleted from the chimeric
protein, and forced expression of Evi-1 did not transform the AML1-deleted bone
marrow cells. Unlike the MLL-ENL and AML1-ETO leukemia-related chimeric proteins,
AML1-Evi-1 could transform only the hematopoietic stem cell fraction. Moreover,
AML1-Evi-1-transformed cells show a cell-marker profile distinct from that of the
cells transformed by AML1-ETO, which also suppresses AML1 function. Thus,
leukemogenic activity of AML1-Evi-1 may be due to activation of molecular
mechanisms distinct from those activated by MLL-ENL or AML1-ETO in the
hematopoietic stem cell fractions.

PMID: 18337762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Ther. 2008 Apr;16(4):718-25. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.5. Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Physiological promoters reduce the genotoxic risk of integrating gene vectors.

Zychlinski D(1), Schambach A, Modlich U, Maetzig T, Meyer J, Grassman E, Mishra
A, Baum C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

The possible activation of cellular proto-oncogenes as a result of clonal
transformation is a potential limitation in a therapeutic approach involving
random integration of gene vectors. Given that enhancer promiscuity represents an
important mechanism of insertional transformation, we assessed the enhancer
activities of various cellular and retroviral promoters in transient transfection
assays, and also in a novel experimental system designed to measure the
activation of a minigene cassette contained in stably integrating retroviral
vectors. Retroviral enhancer-promoters showed a significantly greater potential
to activate neighboring promoters than did cellular promoters derived from human 
genes, elongation factor-1alpha (EF1alpha) and phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK).
Self-inactivating (SIN) vector design reduced but did not abolish enhancer
interactions. Using a recently established cell culture assay that detects
insertional transformation by serial replating of primary hematopoietic cells, we
found that SIN vectors containing the EF1alpha promoter greatly decrease the risk
of insertional transformation. Despite integration of multiple copies per cell,
activation of the crucial proto-oncogene Evi1 was not detectable when using
SIN-EF1alpha vectors. On the basis of several quantitative indicators, the
decrease in transforming activity was highly significant (more than tenfold, P < 
0.01) when compared with similarly designed vectors containing a retroviral
enhancer-promoter with or without a well-characterized genetic insulator core
element. In this manner, the insertional biosafety of therapeutic gene vectors
can be greatly enhanced and proactively evaluated in sensitive cell-based assays.

PMID: 18334985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biochemistry. 2008 Mar 25;47(12):3697-704. doi: 10.1021/bi702524v. Epub 2008 Feb 
28.

Regulation of the calreticulin gene by GATA6 and Evi-1 transcription factors.

Qiu Y(1), Lynch J, Guo L, Yatsula B, Perkins AS, Michalak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
T6G 2H7.

Calreticulin is a Ca (2+)-buffering chaperone of the endoplasmic reticulum. The
protein is highly expressed in embryonic heart but downregulated in postnatal
heart, indicating that expression of calreticulin in the heart is highly
regulated. In this study we identify GATA6 and Evi-1 transcription factors as new
regulators of the calreticulin gene. In neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes
and mouse fibroblasts the calreticulin gene is activated by GATA6 but repressed
by Evi-1. Furthermore, transactivation of the calreticulin gene by GATA6 is
suppressed by Evi-1, suggesting an antagonistic role between both GATA6 and
Evi-1. Using EMSA, ChIP analysis, and site-specific mutagenesis, we showed that
GATA6 and Evi-1 bind to site 1 on the calreticulin promoter. GATA6 and Evi-1 are 
highly expressed early during cardiogenesis of ES cells, suggesting that they may
regulate expression of the calreticulin gene during cardiac development.

PMID: 18303859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):4329-37. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-119230. Epub 2008
Feb 13.

High EVI1 levels predict adverse outcome in acute myeloid leukemia: prevalence of
EVI1 overexpression and chromosome 3q26 abnormalities underestimated.

Lugthart S(1), van Drunen E, van Norden Y, van Hoven A, Erpelinck CA, Valk PJ,
Beverloo HB, Löwenberg B, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Inappropriate expression of EVI1 (ecotropic virus integration-1), in particular
splice form EVI1-1D, through chromosome 3q26 lesions or other mechanisms has been
implicated in the development of high-risk acute myeloid leukemia (AML). To
validate the clinical relevance of EVI1-1D, as well as of the other EVI1 splice
forms and the related MDS1/EVI1 (ME) gene, real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction was performed in 534 untreated adults with de novo AML. EVI1-1D
was highly expressed in 6% of cases (n = 32), whereas 7.8% were EVI1(+) (n = 41) 
when all splice variants were taken into account. High EVI1 predicted a
distinctly worse event-free survival (HR = 1.9; P = .002) and disease-free
survival (HR = 2.1, P = .006) following multivariate analysis. Importantly, we
distinguished a subset of EVI1(+) cases that lacked expression of ME
(EVI1(+)ME(-); n = 17) from cases that were ME(+) (EVI1(+)ME(+); n = 24). The
atypical EVI1(+)ME(-) expression pattern exhibited cytogenetically detectable
chromosomal 3q26 breakpoints in 8 cases. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
revealed 7 more EVI1(+)ME(-) cases that carried cryptic 3q26 breakpoints, which
were not found in the EVI1(+)ME(+) group. EVI1(+)ME(-) expression predicts an
extremely poor prognosis distinguishable from the general EVI1(+) AML patients
(overall survival [OS]: P < .001 and event-free survival [EFS]: P = .002). We
argue that EVI1/ME quantitative expression analysis should be implemented in the 
molecular diagnostic procedures of AML.

PMID: 18272813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Cancer Sci. 2008 Feb;99(2):414-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2007.00699.x.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors trichostatin A and valproic acid circumvent
apoptosis in human leukemic cells expressing the RUNX1 chimera.

Sasaki K(1), Yamagata T, Mitani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine, 880
Kitakobayashi, Mibu-machi, Shimotsuga-gun, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan.

Disturbance of the normal functions of wild-type RUNX1 resulting from chromosomal
translocations or gene mutations is one of the major molecular mechanisms in
human leukemogenesis. RUNX1-related chimeras generated by the chromosomal
translocations repress transcriptional activity of wild-type RUNX1 by recruiting 
the co-repressor/histone deacetylase complex. Thus, histone deacetylase
inhibitors are expected to restore normal functions of wild-type RUNX1 and
thereby affect the growth and differentiation ability of leukemic cells
expressing the chimera. We investigated the in vitro effects of histone
deacetylase inhibitors, trichostatin A and valproic acid, on human leukemic cell 
lines such as SKNO-1 and Kasumi-1 expressing RUNX1/ETO, Reh expressing TEL/RUNX1 
and SKH-1 co-expressing RUNX1/EVI1 and BCR/ABL. We also employed K562 cells
expressing BCR/ABL without such a chimera as a control. Treatment with each
inhibitor increased acetylated histone 4 in all of these cell lines.
Interestingly, proliferation of SKNO-1, Kasumi-1, SKH-1 and Reh cells was
significantly suppressed after 3-day culture with trichostatin A or valproic
acid, when compared to that of K562 cells. We observed cell cycle arrest and
apoptotic induction in the RUNX1 chimera-expressing cells by the propidium iodide
staining. Up- and downregulation of cell cycle regulator genes appeared to be the
molecular basis for the former, and activation of both extrinsic and intrinsic
apoptotic caspases for the latter. We propose histone deacetylase inhibitors to
be an attractive choice in the molecular targeting therapy of RUNX1-related
leukemia.

PMID: 18271940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Feb;181(1):75-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2007.11.009.

Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia with p190(BCR-ABL)
rearrangement, overexpression of the EVI1 gene, and extreme thrombocytosis: a
case report.

Balatzenko G, Guenova M, Stoimenov A, Jotov G, Toshkov S.

PMID: 18262061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Ther. 2008 Mar;16(3):439-49. doi: 10.1038/sj.mt.6300372. Epub 2008 Jan 29.

The MDS1-EVI1 gene complex as a retrovirus integration site: impact on behavior
of hematopoietic cells and implications for gene therapy.

Métais JY(1), Dunbar CE.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Gene therapy trials have been performed with virus-based vectors that have the
ability to integrate permanently into genomic DNA and thus allow prolonged
expression of corrective genes after transduction of hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells. Adverse events observed during the X-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency gene therapy trial revealed a significant risk of genotoxicity
related to retrovirus vector integration and activation of adjacent
proto-oncogenes, with several cases of T-cell leukemia linked to vector
activation of the LMO2 gene. In patients with chronic granulomatous disease
(CGD), rhesus macaques, and mice receiving hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells transduced with retrovirus vectors, a highly non-random pattern of vector
integration has been reported. The most striking finding has been
overrepresentation of integrations in one specific genomic locus, a complex
containing the MDS1 and the EVI1 genes. Most evidence suggests that this
overrepresentation is primarily due to a modification of primitive myeloid cell
behavior by overexpression of EVI1 or MDS1-EVI1, as opposed to a specific
predilection for integration at this site. Three different proteins can be
produced from this complex locus: MDS1, MDS1-EVI1, and EVI1. This review will
summarize current knowledge regarding this locus and its gene products, with
specific focus on issues with relevance to gene therapy, leukemogenesis, and
hematopoiesis. Insights into the mechanisms that result in altered hematopoiesis 
and leukemogenesis when this locus is dysregulated could improve the safety of
gene therapy in the future.

PMID: 18227842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Jan 15;180(2):115-20. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2007.09.023.

Late appearance of a Philadelphia chromosome in a patient with therapy-related
acute myeloid leukemia and high expression of EVI1.

Yagyu S(1), Morimoto A, Kakazu N, Tamura S, Fujiki A, Nakase Y, Iehara T, Hosoi
H, Kuroda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto City Hospital, 1-2 Mibuhigushitakada-cho,
Nakagyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. shigeky@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

A 17-year-old boy developed therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML) 3
years after the cessation of chemo- and radiotherapy for undifferentiated sarcoma
of the liver. At the onset of the t-AML, his white blood cell count was
900/microL with a 46,XY,t(2;3)(p21;q26),del(5)(q?) karyotype. Despite intensive
chemotherapy and two hematopoietic stem cell transplants, he died of the
leukemia. At the terminal phase, his white blood cell count surpassed
30,000/microL and the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome appeared. Expression of EVI1
in bone marrow cells was remarkably high at the onset of t-AML, although it was
not detected at the end of therapy for the sarcoma. Polymerase chain reaction
analysis of bone marrow cells revealed that mRNA for the bcr-abl chimera was
negative at the onset of t-AML and positive at the terminal phase. These results 
suggest that EVI1 overexpression was the major factor contributing to
leukemogenesis, and the late appearance of the Ph chromosome is closely
associated with the progression to an aggressive form of leukemia.

PMID: 18206536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):4297-308. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-01-068346. Epub 2008 
Jan 11.

AML1 mutations induced MDS and MDS/AML in a mouse BMT model.

Watanabe-Okochi N(1), Kitaura J, Ono R, Harada H, Harada Y, Komeno Y, Nakajima H,
Nosaka T, Inaba T, Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Therapy, Advanced Clinical Research Center, The Institute
of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):3916-7.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a hematopoietic stem-cell disorder
characterized by trilineage dysplasia and susceptibility to acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML). Analysis of molecular basis of MDS has been hampered by the
heterogeneity of the disease. Recently, mutations of the transcription factor
AML1/RUNX1 have been identified in 15% to 40% of MDS-refractory anemia with
excess of blasts (RAEB) and MDS/AML. We performed mouse bone marrow
transplantation (BMT) using bone marrow cells transduced with the AML1 mutants.
Most mice developed MDS and MDS/AML-like symptoms within 4 to 13 months after
BMT. Interestingly, among integration sites identified, Evi1 seemed to
collaborate with an AML1 mutant harboring a point mutation in the Runt homology
domain (D171N) to induce MDS/AML with an identical phenotype characterized by
marked hepatosplenomegaly, myeloid dysplasia, leukocytosis, and biphenotypic
surface markers. Collaboration between AML1-D171N and Evi1 was confirmed by a BMT
model where coexpression of AML1-D171N and Evi1 induced acute leukemia of the
same phenotype with much shorter latencies. On the other hand, a C-terminal
truncated AML1 mutant (S291fsX300) induced pancytopenia with erythroid dysplasia 
in transplanted mice, followed by progression to MDS-RAEB or MDS/AML. Thus, we
have developed a useful mouse model of MDS/AML that should help in the
understanding of the molecular basis of MDS and the progression of MDS to overt
leukemia.

PMID: 18192504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2008 Apr;47(4):288-98. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20532.

Expression and prognostic significance of different mRNA 5'-end variants of the
oncogene EVI1 in 266 patients with de novo AML: EVI1 and MDS1/EVI1 overexpression
both predict short remission duration.

Haas K(1), Kundi M, Sperr WR, Esterbauer H, Ludwig WD, Ratei R, Koller E, Gruener
H, Sauerland C, Fonatsch C, Valent P, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Rearrangements of chromosome band 3q26.2 lead to overexpression of the EVI1 gene 
and are associated with a poor prognosis in myeloid malignancies. EVI1 is also
overexpressed in some cases without 3q26 rearrangements. To uncover its
prognostic significance in this patient group, however, it may be necessary to
distinguish among several known 5'-end variants of its mRNA. According to a
recent report, overexpression of the transcript variant EVI1_1d was associated
with shortened survival in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), but overexpression of
MDS1/EVI1, whose protein product differs structurally and functionally from that 
of all other known EVI1 5'-end variants, was not. The aim of the present study
was to determine, for the first time, the expression and prognostic significance 
of all known EVI1 5'-end variants in AML. Quantitative RT-PCR was used to measure
the expression of EVI1_1a, EVI1_1b, EVI1_1d, EVI1_3L, and MDS1/EVI1 in 266
samples from patients with de novo AML. To correlate expression of the EVI1
5'-end variants with survival parameters, regression analyses were performed.
41/266 patients (15.4%) overexpressed at least one, but more often several or
all, EVI1 transcript type(s). High expression of each of the EVI1 mRNA variants, 
including MDS1/EVI1, was significantly associated with shortened continuous
complete remission in the total patient population as well as in the subgroups of
patients with intermediate risk or normal cytogenetics. The present study
therefore shows that high levels of each of the known EVI1 mRNA 5'-end variants
represents an adverse prognostic factor in de novo AML without 3q26
rearrangements. This article contains Supplementary Material available at
http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/1045-2257/suppmat.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18181178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Virus Res. 2008 Mar;132(1-2):237-41. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2007.11.015.

Pathogenic risk of endogenous retrovirus infection in immunodeficient hosts.

Zhang F(1), Da R, Song W, Chen X, Zhang X, Li X, Gu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Harbin Medical University,
Heilongjiang Province, Harbin 150086, China. fengminzhang@yahoo.com.cn

To investigate the pathogenic risk of endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) infection in
immunodeficient hosts, the ERV of N-type ecotropic murine leukemia virus (MuLV)
isolated from SL mice, a kind of mice containing considerable infectious ERV
particles determined with SC-XC test and developing leukemia spontaneously with
average of high frequency of 30% and incubation period of 315days, was inoculated
intraperitoneally into newborn CBA nude mice. The distinct marker of splenomegaly
for leukemia was observed in 33% of homozygous (nu/nu) and 17% of heterozygous
(nu/+) of CBA nude mice with average incubation period of 310days and 432days
post-inoculation, respectively. Furthermore, the ERV induced leukemia in both the
SL mice and CBA nude mice was identified to be B lymphatic, transplantable and
with rearrangement of the Evi-1 locus. The higher induction of leukemia and
rearrangement of the Evi-1 locus in CBA nude mice are considered to be dependent 
on the lower immune status of the hosts. These findings indicate that the ERV
could present the host immune dependent leukemogenesis in immunodeficient hosts
through the Evi-1 gene rearrangement and suggest that screening of ERVs may be
necessary in clinical transplantation or transfusion.

PMID: 18178281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Korean J Lab Med. 2006 Aug;26(4):255-62.

[Erythroleukemic blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia.].

[Article in Korean]

Chung HJ(1), Chi HS, Seo EJ, Jang S, Park CJ, Lee KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine and
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. hschi@amc.seoul.kr.

Erythroleukemic blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is very rare. We
report two cases of erythroleukemic blast crisis of CML resistant to imatinib
treatment. Both patients made a rapid progression to blast crisis 6 and 4 months 
after diagnosis while being treated with imatinib 400 mg/day. Bone marrow
aspiration revealed predominant erythroid precursors with 65.4% and 54.8% each.
There were significant proportions (more than 20%) of myeloblasts among
non-erythroid cells. Immunophenotyping revealed expression of glycophorin A
confirming erythroleukemic blast crisis. The karyotyping result of patient 1 was 
46,XX,t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)[3]/52,idem,+8,+12,+18,+21,+22,+der(22)t(9;22)[17] and
that of patient 2 was 46,XX,inv(3)(q21q26.2),t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)[20]. Patient 1
showed no response to imatinib and BMS-354825 in the following bone marrow study.
She died of septic shock as a complication of an infection after 69 days of blast
crisis. Patient 2 received allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in the
cytogenetically no response state, but she also died of graft-versus-host disease
9 weeks after BMT. The poor prognosis and rapid progression of disease in both
cases were correspondent to most of the reported cases. During the course of the 
disease of the two patients, we monitored the BCR-ABL chimeric mRNA with
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and it was found
useful in predicting the imatinib response and progression to blast crisis of
CML. Although both of our cases showed the typical bad prognosis and findings of 
erythroleukemic blast crisis of CML, the karyotypes were different from the
expected type of t(3;21)(q26;q22). But the relationship between additional
changes of EVI1 on chromosome 3q26 shown in case 2, and progression to the
erythroleukemic blast crisis need further investigation.

PMID: 18156735  [PubMed]


257. Ann Hematol. 2008 Feb;87(2):147-50. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

A complex chromosome 3 rearrangement not affecting RPN1, EVI1/MDS1 genes in a
patient with an atypical refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia.

Bernasconi P, Dambruoso I, Cavigliano PM, Boni M, Travaglino E, Benatti C,
Invernizzi R.

PMID: 17960379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 Mar-Apr;40(2):141-7. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Significant increase of self-renewal in hematopoietic cells after forced
expression of EVI1.

Laricchia-Robbio L(1), Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago (M/C 737), 909 South
Wolcott Avenue, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. robbiol@uic.edu

EVI1 was first identified as a preferential integration site of ecotropic
retroviruses in the MDS1/EVI1 genomic locus leading to myeloid tumors in
susceptible mice. Later studies showed that retroviral integration in the
MDS1/EVI1 locus results in the emergence of a non-malignant dominant
hematopoietic stem cell clone in non-susceptible mice strains, in non-human
primates, and in patients, suggesting that a gene encoded by the locus could
affect the self-renewal potential of a cell. The locus encodes two genes. One of 
them, EVI1, has long been associated with myeloid leukemia. To understand whether
EVI1 has a role in self-renewal control, we forcibly expressed EVI1 in the bone
marrow progenitors of two mice strains that differ in their proliferation and
self-renewal potential. By comparing the response of the hematopoietic cells to
EVI1, we conclude that EVI1 has a role in prolonging the self-renewal potential
of the cells and that this ability of EVI1 is limited and modulated by inherent
characteristics of the cells.

PMCID: PMC2323624
PMID: 17913523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Hum Gene Ther. 2007 Oct;18(10):895-906.

Retroviral integration site analysis and the fate of transduced clones in an MDR1
gene therapy protocol targeting metastatic breast cancer.

Mitsuhashi J(1), Tsukahara S, Suzuki R, Oh-hara Y, Nishi S, Hosoyama H, Katayama 
K, Noguchi K, Minowa S, Shibata H, Ito Y, Hatake K, Aiba K, Takahashi S, Sugimoto
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo
135-8550, Japan.

A clinical study of an MDR1 gene therapy protocol targeting metastatic breast
cancer has been conducted in which the patients received high-dose chemotherapy, 
a transplant of MDR1-transduced autologous CD34(+) cells, and docetaxel. We
herein report the molecular results of a 6-year follow-up of an individual in
this study (patient 1). HaMDR-transduced cells, which had been initially detected
in the peripheral blood of this individual, were found to have gradually
decreased. After 10 cycles of docetaxel (days 71-316), MDR1 transgene levels were
found to have increased, and then decreased to undetectable levels by day 1461.
Thirty-eight MDR1-transduced clones were identified in patient 1, of which 11
showed a retroviral integration in close proximity to genes listed in the
Retrovirus Tagged Cancer Gene Database (RTCGD). Four short-life clones in this
group were found to harbor retroviral integrations close to the ZFHX1B, NOTCH1,
BMI1, or HHEX gene; these genes have been frequently reported in the RTCGD. In
addition, a long-lived RTCGD-hit clone, L-34, had a retroviral integration at a
position 179 kb upstream of the EVI1 gene. L-34 was detectable on days 327-1154, 
but became undetectable 3 years after the docetaxel treatments had ceased. An
additional three docetaxel-induced long-life clones showed comparable polymerase 
chain reaction profiles, which were also similar to that of the total
MDR1-transduced cells. Our results thus show that docetaxel may have been
effective in promoting the expansion of several MDR1-transduced clones in patient
1, but that they persist in the peripheral blood for only a few years.

PMID: 17907967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cancer Sci. 2007 Nov;98(11):1752-7.

RUNX1/EVI1, which blocks myeloid differentiation, inhibits CCAAT-enhancer binding
protein alpha function.

Tokita K(1), Maki K, Mitani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine, 880
Kitakobayashi, Mibu-machi, Shimotsuga-gun, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan.

The RUNX1/EVI1 chimeric transcription factor produced by t(3;21) causes leukemic 
transformation in hematopoietic stem cell tumors, possibly through a
differentiation block of malignant myeloid progenitors. A dominant negative
effect over wild-type RUNX1 has been shown to constitute one of the underlying
molecular mechanisms. We introduced RUNX1/EVI1 cDNA into LG-3 cells that
differentiate along the myeloid lineage upon exposure to granulocyte colony
stimulating factor, and confirmed that RUNX1/EVI1 suppressed the differentiation.
To further investigate the molecular mechanisms of RUNX1/EVI1-mediated
differentiation block, we analyzed RUNX1/EVI1's effect on the functions of
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha), a key transcriptional
regulator that induces granulocytic differentiation. RUNX1/EVI1 was found to
associate with C/EBPalpha. By using a reporter assay with the CEBPA promoter, we 
observed a dominant negative effect of RUNX1/EVI1 over C/EBPalpha-mediated
transcriptional activation via the carboxyl terminal-binding protein
(CtBP)-binding site in the EVI1 portion. In a gel-shift assay, RUNX1/EVI1
downregulated the DNA-binding activity of C/EBPalpha. Therefore, recruitment of
histone deacetylase via CtBP and disruption of DNA binding could be likely
scenarios for the RUNX1/EVI1-induced dominant repression on C/EBPalpha.
Importantly, coexpression of C/EBPalpha restored the differentiation ability of
the RUNX1/EVI1-expressing LG-3 cells. All of these data argue that inhibition of 
C/EBPalpha function may be causatively related to the leukemogenic potential of
RUNX1/EVI1.

PMID: 17894555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. IUBMB Life. 2007 Oct;59(10):628-633.

Functional connections and pathways of coenzyme Q10-inducible genes: an in-silico
study.

Schmelzer C(1), Lindner I, Vock C, Fujii K, Döring F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science, Molecular Nutrition,
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Germany. doering@molnut.uni-kiel.de

Erratum in
    IUBMB Life. 2007 Nov;59(11):740.

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10, ubiquinone) is an essential cofactor in the electron
transport chain, serves as a potent antioxidant in mitochondria and lipid
membranes, and is often used as a dietary supplement for a number of diseases
including cardiovascular diseases. Recently, we obtained evidence that CoQ10
(Kaneka Q10) affects the expression of hundreds of human genes. To decipher the
functional and regulatory connections of these genes, a literature search
combined with transcription factor binding site analysis was performed using
Genomatix BiblioSphere and MatInspector. This in-silico analysis revealed 17
CoQ10-inducible genes which are functionally connected by signalling pathways of 
G-protein coupled receptors, JAK/STAT, integrin, and beta-arrestin. Promoter
analysis of these CoQ10-inducible genes showed one group of NF B-regulated genes,
namely IL5, thrombin, vitronectin receptor and C-reactive protein (CRP).
Furthermore, a common promoter framework containing binding sites of the
transcription factor families EVI1, HOXF, HOXC, and CLOX was identified in the
promoters of IL5, CRP, and vitronectin receptor. The identified CoQ10-inducible
genes and pathways play an important role in inflammatory response. Since these
effects are based on an in-vitro study, the effect of CoQ10 on vascular health in
vivo needs to be addressed in further animal and/or human intervention studies.

PMID: 17852568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Aug;177(1):64-9.

Feasibility of using the combined MDS-EVI1/EVI1 gene expression as an alternative
molecular marker in acute myeloid leukemia: a report of four cases.

Weisser M(1), Haferlach C, Haferlach T, Schnittger S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department III, Klinikum Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Marchioninistrasse 15, 81377 Munich, Germany. martin.weisser@gmx.de

To establish an additional marker for polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based
measurement of minimal residual disease (MRD) detection in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), the expression level of the combined MDS1-EVI1 and EVI1 gene was
quantified by real-time reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) in four AML cases at
initial presentation and as a follow-up marker during anti-leukemic therapy.
Quantification of the MDS1-EVI1/EVI1 gene expression correlated closely to the
clinical course of the disease in all four cases. A hematologic complete
remission was accompanied by a reduction of MDS1-EVI1/ EVI1 expression levels of 
at least 2 log while persistent leukemia was reflected by an MDS1-EVI1/ EVI1
expression in the range of the primary diagnostic sample. After achieving a
complete cytomorphologic remission, three patients relapsed after 154, 210, and
280 days, respectively. Molecular relapse was detected on the basis of increasing
expression levels of MDS1-EVI/EVI 29, 36, and 93 days before hematologic
manifestation. In conclusion, the combined MDS-EVI1/EVI1 gene may serve as an
alternative MRD marker in AML, especially in samples where other specific markers
are lacking.

PMID: 17693194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Aug;177(1):37-42.

Aberrant EVI1 expression in acute myeloid leukemias associated with the
t(3;8)(q26;q24).

Lennon PA(1), Abruzzo LV, Medeiros LJ, Cromwell C, Zhang X, Yin CC, Kornblau SM, 
Konopieva M, Lin P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, The University of Texas-M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

EVI is a proto-oncogene that is activated in acute myeloid leukemia with
chromosomal rearrangements that map to chromosome 3q26. We previously reported
the clinicopathologic features of five cases of acute myeloid leukemia carrying
t(3;8)(q26;q24). Using fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, we
demonstrate in the current study that the breakpoint on chromosome 3 is at
EVI1/MDS1, and the breakpoint on chromosome 8 is just distal to the PVT1 oncogene
homolog, a C-MYC activator in mice. The breakpoint on chromosome 8 was detected
between the components of the LSI MYC dual-color break-apart rearrangement probe.
Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assay showed expression of EVI1
in all four cases analyzed, and DNA sequence analysis confirmed the findings.
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assay also demonstrated the
expression of PVT1 and C-MYC in all four cases assessed. Western blot analysis
detected EVI1 in one case analyzed. We conclude that the t(3;8)(q26;q24) results 
in deregulated EVI1 expression, similar to other balanced or unbalanced
chromosomal translocations involving chromosome 3q26.

PMID: 17693189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Pathol. 2007 Sep;213(1):46-55.

DNA profiling of primary serous ovarian and fallopian tube carcinomas with array 
comparative genomic hybridization and multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification.

Nowee ME(1), Snijders AM, Rockx DA, de Wit RM, Kosma VM, Hämäläinen K, Schouten
JP, Verheijen RH, van Diest PJ, Albertson DG, Dorsman JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Primary serous ovarian carcinoma (OVCA) and serous Fallopian tube carcinoma
(FTC), both belonging to the BRCA-linked tumour spectrum, share many properties
and are treated similarly. However, a detailed molecular comparison has been
lacking. We hypothesized that comparative genomic studies of serous OVCAs and
FTCs should point to gene regions critically involved in their tumorigenesis.
Array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) analysis indicated that
serous OVCAs and serous FTCs displayed common but also more distinctive patterns 
of recurrent changes. Targeted gene identification using a dedicated multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) probe set directly identified
EIF2C2 on 8q as a potentially important driver gene. Other previously
unappreciated gained/amplified genes included PSMB4 on 1q, MTSS1 on 8q, TEAD4 and
TSPAN9 on 12p, and BCAS4 on 20q. SPINT2 and ACTN4 on 19q were predominantly found
in FTCs. Gains/amplifications of CCNE1 and MYC, often in conjunction with changes
in genes of the AKT pathway, EVI1 and PTK2, seemed to be involved at earlier
stages, whereas changes of ERBB2 were associated with advanced stages. The only
BRCA1-mutated FTC shared common denominators with the sporadic tumours. In
conclusion, the data suggest that serous OVCAs and FTCs, although related,
exhibit differences in genomic profiles. In addition to known pathways, new
genes/pathways are likely to be involved, with changes in an miRNA-associated
gene, EIF2C2, as one important new feature. Dedicated MLPA sets constitute
potentially important tools for differential diagnosis and may provide footholds 
for tailored therapy.

PMID: 17668415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. FEBS J. 2007 Aug;274(15):3960-71. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

UXT interacts with the transcriptional repressor protein EVI1 and suppresses cell
transformation.

McGilvray R(1), Walker M, Bartholomew C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological & Biomedical Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University,
Glasgow, UK.

The EVI1 transcriptional repressor is critical to the normal development of a
variety of tissues and participates in the progression of acute myeloid
leukaemias. The repressor domain (Rp) was used to screen an adult human kidney
yeast two-hybrid library and a novel binding partner designated ubiquitously
expressed transcript (UXT) was isolated. Enforced expression of UXT in
Evi1-expressing Rat1 fibroblasts suppresses cell transformation and UXT may
therefore be a negative regulator of Evi1 biological activity. The Rp-binding
site for UXT was determined and non-UXT-binding Evi1 mutants (Evi1Delta706-707)
were developed which retain the ability to bind the corepressor mCtBP2.
Evi1Delta706-707 transforms Rat1 fibroblasts, showing that the interaction is not
essential for Evi1-mediated cell transformation. However, Evi1Delta706-707
produces an increased proportion of large colonies relative to wild-type, showing
that endogenous UXT has an inhibitory effect on Evi1 biological activity.
Exogenous UXT still suppresses Evi1Delta706-707-mediated cell transformation,
indicating that it inhibits cell proliferation and/or survival by both
Evi1-dependent and Evi1-independent mechanisms. These observations are consistent
with the growth-suppressive function attributed to UXT in human prostate cancer. 
Our results show that UXT suppresses cell transformation and might mediate this
function by interaction and inhibition of the biological activity of cell
proliferation and survival stimulatory factors like Evi1.

PMID: 17635584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Cancer Res. 2007 Jun 15;67(12):5658-66.

Repression of RUNX1 activity by EVI1: a new role of EVI1 in leukemogenesis.

Senyuk V(1), Sinha KK, Li D, Rinaldi CR, Yanamandra S, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA.

Recurring chromosomal translocations observed in human leukemia often result in
the expression of fusion proteins that are DNA-binding transcription factors.
These altered proteins acquire new dimerization properties that result in the
assembly of inappropriate multimeric transcription complexes that deregulate
hematopoietic programs and induce leukemogenesis. Recently, we reported that the 
fusion protein AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME), a product of a t(3;21)(q26;q22) associated
with chronic myelogenous leukemia and acute myelogenous leukemia, displays a
complex pattern of self-interaction. Here, we show that the 8th zinc finger motif
of MDS1/EVI1 is an oligomerization domain involved not only in interaction of AME
with itself but also in interactions with the parental proteins, RUNX1 and
MDS1/EVI1, from which AME is generated. Because the 8th zinc finger motif is also
present in the oncoprotein EVI1, we have evaluated the effects of the interaction
between RUNX1 and EVI1 in vitro and in vivo. We found that in vitro, this
interaction alters the ability of RUNX1 to bind to DNA and to regulate a reporter
gene, whereas in vivo, the expression of the isolated 8th zinc finger motif of
EVI1 is sufficient to block the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-induced
differentiation of 32Dcl3 cells, leading to cell death. As EVI1 is not detected
in normal bone marrow cells, these data suggest that its inappropriate expression
could contribute to hematopoietic transformation in part by a new mechanism that 
involves EVI1 association with key hematopoietic regulators, leading to their
functional impairment.

PMID: 17575132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Leukemia. 2007 Aug;21(8):1679-90. Epub 2007 May 24.

MN1 overexpression is an important step in the development of inv(16) AML.

Carella C(1), Bonten J, Sirma S, Kranenburg TA, Terranova S, Klein-Geltink R,
Shurtleff S, Downing JR, Zwarthoff EC, Liu PP, Grosveld GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Tumor Cell Biology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105-0318, USA.

The gene encoding the transcriptional co-activator MN1 is the target of the
reciprocal chromosome translocation (12;22)(p13;q12) in some patients with acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML). In addition, expression array analysis showed that MN1
was overexpressed in AML specified by inv(16), in some AML overexpressing
ecotropic viral integration 1 site (EVI1) and in some AML without karyotypic
abnormalities. Here we describe that mice receiving transplants of bone marrow
(BM) overexpressing MN1 rapidly developed myeloproliferative disease (MPD). This 
BM also generated myeloid cell lines in culture. By mimicking the situation in
human inv(16) AML, forced coexpression of MN1 and Cbfbeta-SMMHC rapidly caused
AML in mice. These findings identify MN1 as a highly effective hematopoietic
oncogene and suggest that MN1 overexpression is an important cooperative event in
human inv(16) AML.

PMID: 17525718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Gene. 2007 Jul 15;396(2):346-57. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

The oncogene and developmental regulator EVI1: expression, biochemical
properties, and biological functions.

Wieser R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Währingerstr,
10, A-1090 Wien, Austria. rotraud.wieser@meduniwien.ac.at

The EVI1 gene codes for a zinc finger transcription factor with important roles
both in normal development and in leukemogenesis. Transcriptional activation of
this gene through chromosome rearrangements or other, yet to be identified
mechanisms leads to particularly aggressive forms of human myeloid leukemia. In
vitro as well as in animal model systems, EVI1 affected cellular proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis in cell type specific ways. Retroviral
integrations into the EVI1 locus provided cells with increased abilities to
engraft, survive, and proliferate in bone marrow transplantation experiments.
Experimental overexpression of EVI1 by itself was insufficient to cause leukemia 
in animal model systems, but it cooperated with other genes in this process. This
review summarizes the currently available experimental evidence for the proposed 
biochemical and biological functions of this important oncogene.

PMID: 17507183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Int J Hematol. 2007 May;85(4):279-86.

Leukemogenesis of the EVI1/MEL1 gene family.

Morishita K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor and Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Medical Sciences,
University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan. kmorishi@med.miyazaki-u.ac.jp

Leukemia is a group of monoclonal diseases that arise from hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells in the bone marrow or other hematopoietic organs. Retroviral
infections are one of the major events leading to leukemogenesis in mice, because
retroviruses can induce hematopoietic disease via the insertional mutagenesis of 
oncogenes; therefore, the cloning of viral-integration sites in murine leukemia
has provided valuable molecular tags for oncogene discovery. Transcription of the
murine gene ecotropic viral-integration site 1 (Evi1) is activated by nearby
viral integration. In humans, the Evi1 homologue EVI1 is activated by chromosomal
translocations. This review discusses the roles of the overexpression of
EVI1/MEL1 gene family members in leukemogenesis, the relationships of various
translocations in EVI1 overexpression, and the importance of PR domains in tumor 
suppression and oncogenesis. The functions of EVI1/MEL1 members as transcription 
factors and the concept of EVI1-positive leukemia as a stem cell disease are also
reviewed.

PMID: 17483069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Feb 27;87(8):526-32.

[Real-time PCR array for simultaneous detection of 37 kinds of fusion genes in
leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu HX(1), Zhu P, Zhang Y, Wang HX, DU JW, Liu J, Gu JY, Ou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Daopei Hospital, Beijing 100034, China.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a real-time PCR array for simultaneous quantitative
detection of translocations/chromosomal aberrations in patients with leukemia,
and to investigate the feasibility and utility thereof.
METHODS: By construction and optimization a set of specific primes (totally 82
primers), an array containing 66 parallel PCR reactions was developed. That array
was used on the specimens of bone marrow or peripheral blood from 31 patients
with leukemia to detect simultaneously 37 fusion genes and 4 proto-oncogene
activations often occurring in patients with leukemia. Eva Green fluorescent dye 
method was chosen in the protocol. Relative quantification was performed by Ct
analysis and the result was expressed as the ratio of the target gene versus the 
internal control gene (ABL). Six patients with chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML) 
among the 31 cases underwent prior to and after treatment so as to study the
expression changes of fusion genes and/or proto-oncogene.
RESULTS: The established PCR array showed high efficiency of amplification and
good sensibility (232 copies/microl) in the fusion gene detected. The standard
curve had a satisfying linear range (10(2) approximately 10(8) copies/microl),
showing a good reproducibility. Fourteen fusion genes, including PML/RARalpha,
PLZF/RARalpha, BCR/ABL, MLL/AF1, MLL/AF6, MLL/AF10, AML/Eto, CBFbeta/MYH11,
TLS/ERG, TEL/AML1, MOZ/CBP, MLL/hCDCrel, LAF4/MLLT2, and FIP1L1/PDGFRalpha, and
activation of all 4 proto-oncogenes were found in the 31 samples. In one patient,
5 fusion genes and activation of 2 proto-oncogenes were observed. Such results
were compared with those of RT-nested PCR in 28 samples. The comparison showed
that this array was a bit less sensitive than RT-nested PCR, however, without
significant difference between them (P = 0.009). The expression of BCR/ABL fusion
gene, WT1 gene, and EVI1 gene decreased after treatment in the 6 CML patients,
which was in accordance with the clinical features.
CONCLUSION: The PCR array newly-established successfully detects various leukemia
related fusion genes and proto-oncogene activation. It is useful in molecule
diagnosis and monitoring minimal residual disease in leukemia, and therapeutic
effect monitoring.

PMID: 17459201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Verh K Acad Geneeskd Belg. 2007;69(1):47-64.

Acquired chromosomal rearrangements targeting selected transcription factors:
contribution of molecular cytogenetic and expression analyses to the
identification of clinically and biologically relevant subgroups in hematological
malignancies.

Poppe B(1), De Paepe A, Speleman F.

Author information: 
(1)Centrum voor Medische Genetica, Faculteit Geneeskunde en
Gezondheidswetenschappen, U. Z. Gent, De Pintelaan 185 - B 9000 Gent.

In leukemias chromosomal aberrations, balanced translocations in particular, play
a critical role in the oncogenic process. The characterization of these
chromosomal alterations was crucial to the discovery of the genes implicated in
leukemogenesis, as the chromosomal breakpoints indicated their genomic
localization. In addition, these molecular defects may serve as targets for
diagnostic essays and can have a major prognostic value. Finally, the
characterization of the deregulated cellular pathways potentially identifies
targets for therapeutic intervention. In this paper we summarize our efforts to
expand the current knowledge of the diagnostic, prognostic or biological
significance of selected chromosomal aberrations identified in M-FISH studies.
First, we illustrated the power of M-FISH in dissecting complex chromosomal
aberrations in myeloid neoplasms. MLL amplification was defined as a clinical
entity characterized by adverse prognosis and within the multitude and variety of
chromosomal rearrangements a pattern of a limited number of cytogenetic
subclasses was discerned. In leukemias characterized by 11q23 amplification, we
described the amplicon and confirmed MLL, in addition to DDX6, as a principal
amplification target. Molecular characterization of a large series of unselected 
sporadic and recurrent 3q26 rearranged leukemias confirmed the decisive role of
ectopic EVI1 expression in these malignancies. We contributed to an extensive
analysis of the phenotypical and prognostic features of T-ALL characterized by
HOX11L2 expression and identified HOX11L2 overexpression as one of the most
frequent genetic defects in childhood T-ALL, associated with intermediate
prognosis. Finally, we designed and validated diagnostic tools for the detection 
of the t(9;14) (p13;q34) resulting in PAX5 overexpression and convincingly
associated the presence of this rearrangement to high-grade morphology and
karyotype complexity. In conclusion, the series of investigations presented here 
clearly illustrate the benefits of M-FISH as molecular tool for the dissection
and characterization of complex and cryptic rearrangements. The subsequent
reports demonstrate the utility of molecular cytogenetics and expression analyses
to the clinical management of patients diagnosed with hematological malignancies.

PMID: 17427874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;67(7):3074-84.

Amplification of MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1, located in the 3q26.2 amplicon, is
associated with favorable patient prognosis in ovarian cancer.

Nanjundan M(1), Nakayama Y, Cheng KW, Lahad J, Liu J, Lu K, Kuo WL, Smith-McCune 
K, Fishman D, Gray JW, Mills GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, University
of Texas, Houston, Texas, USA. mnanjund@mdanderson.org

Increased copy number involving chromosome 3q26 is a frequent and early event in 
cancers of the ovary, lung, head and neck, cervix, and BRCA1 positive and basal
breast cancers. The p110alpha catalytic subunit of phosphoinositide-3-kinase
(PI3KCA) and protein kinase Ciota (PKCiota) have previously been shown as
functionally deregulated by 3q copy number increase. High-resolution array
comparative genomic hybridization of 235 high-grade serous epithelial ovarian
cancers using contiguous bacterial artificial chromosomes across 3q26 delineated 
an approximately 2 Mb-wide region at 3q26.2 encompassing PDCD10 to MYNN
(chr3:168722613-170908630). Ecotropic viral integration site-1 (EVI1) and
myelodysplastic syndrome 1 (MDS1) are located at the center of this region, and
their DNA copy number increases are associated with at least 5-fold increased RNA
transcript levels in 83% and 98% of advanced ovarian cancers, respectively.
Moreover, MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1 protein levels are increased in ovarian cancers and 
cancer cell lines. EVI1 and MDS1/EVI1 gene products increased cell proliferation,
migration, and decreased transforming growth factor-beta-mediated plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 promoter activity in ovarian epithelial cells.
Intriguingly, the increases in EVI1 DNA copy number and MDS1/EVI1 transcripts are
associated with improved patient outcomes, whereas EVI1 transcript levels are
associated with a poor patient survival. Thus, the favorable patient prognosis
associated with increased DNA copy number seems to be as a result of high-level
expression of the fusion transcript MDS1/EVI1. Collectively, these studies
suggest that MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1, previously implicated in acute myelogenous
leukemia, contribute to the pathophysiology of epithelial ovarian cancer.

PMID: 17409414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2006;26(6):661-3.

Multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction for simultaneous
screening of 29 chromosomal translocation in hematologic malignancies.

Huang M(1), Li C, Liang H, Zhou J, Deng J, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

Multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (M-RT-PCR) has been
proved to possess great clinical potential for simultaneous screening of 29
chromosomal translocations in acute leukemia. To evaluate the clinical value of
M-RT-PCR in hematologic malignancies, bone marrow samples from 90 patients with
various hematologic malignancies, including 25 acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), 
22 acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 27 chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), 4
myeloproliferative diseases (MPD), 3 chronic lymphoblastic leukemia (CLL), 3
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), 3 myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 2 multiple
myeloma (MM) and 1 malignant histiocytosis (MH) were subjected to both M-RT-PCR
and chromosome karyotypic analysis. Some of cases were subjected to follow-up
examination of M-RT-PCR during the period of clinical complete remission (CR) for
detection of minimal residual leukemia. In our hand, 12 of 29 chromosomal
translocation transcripts including TEL/PDGFR, DEK/CAN, MLL/AF6, AML1/ETO,
MLL/AF9, BCR/ABL, MLL/MLL, PML/RARu, TLS/ERG, E2A/HLF, EVI1 and HOXI1 were
detected in 57 cases (63.3 %) of the 90 samples, which were in consistency with
the results of karyotypic analysis. Furthermore, M-RT-PCR had also shown good
clinical relevance when used as an approach to detect minimal residual leukemia. 
We concluded that M-RT-PCR could be used as an efficient and fast diagnostic tool
not only in the initial diagnosis of hematologic malignancies but also in
subsequent monitor of minimal residual leukemia.

PMID: 17357482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Br J Haematol. 2007 Mar;136(6):806-13.

An interphase fluorescence in situ hybridisation assay for the detection of
3q26.2/EVI1 rearrangements in myeloid malignancies.

Bobadilla D(1), Enriquez EL, Alvarez G, Gaytan P, Smith D, Slovak ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics, City of Hope national Medical Center, Duarte, CA
91010, USA.

Chromosome rearrangements involving band 3q26.2 are associated with myeloid
malignancies, aberrant expression of the human ecotropic virus integration site-1
(EVI1) gene, an unfavourable prognosis and an aggressive clinical course. The
3q26.2 rearrangements are characteristically heterogeneous and typically
difficult to detect in poor quality metaphases. To develop a dual-colour
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) assay for the detection of 3q26.2/EVI1 
aberrations, a series of 10 BAC clones corresponding to the EVI1 gene region were
systematically evaluated and narrowed down to two probe sets; one probe set
encompassed the EVI1 gene extending centromeric, while the second probe set
covered the EVI1 gene and extends telomeric. Both probe sets were evaluated on 35
patient samples with cytogenetically defined 3q26.2 rearrangements collected at
various treatment time points, the inv(3)(q21q26.2) Kasumi-4 cell line, and 10
known negative samples. The two-probe set strategy identified all samples,
despite the vast breakpoint heterogeneity observed. In samples from acute myeloid
leukaemia and myelodysplastic syndrome cases, the majority of inversion
breakpoints were 3' to EVI1 whereas 3q26.2 translocation breakpoints frequently
mapped 5' to EVI1. However, two 3q26.2 translocation samples had breakpoints 3'
to EVI1. Most inv(3q) chronic myeloid leukaemia samples showed breakpoints within
the EVI1 gene. This study demonstrated that, despite the extensive breakpoint
heterogeneity observed with 3q26.2 aberrations, this FISH strategy is effective
for the detection of 3q26.2 abnormalities in myeloid malignancies.

PMID: 17341266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Jun;46(6):517-21.

Mutations of the PTPN11 gene in therapy-related MDS and AML with rare balanced
chromosome translocations.

Christiansen DH(1), Desta F, Andersen MK, Pedersen-Bjergaard J.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetic Laboratory, Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Clinical
Genetics, The Juliane Marie Center, Copenhagen DK 2100 Ø, Denmark.

Activating mutations of the PTPN11 gene encoding the SHP2 tyrosine phosphatase is
the most common genetic abnormality in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia and is
sporadically observed in myelodysplasia (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
An unselected series of 140 patients with therapy-related MDS or AML were
investigated for mutations of PTPN11 in Exons 3, 4, 8, and 13. Four cases had
mutations of the gene; three of these had deletions or loss of chromosome arm 7q.
Two cases had rare balanced translocations to chromosome band 21q22 with
rearrangement of the RUNX1 gene and the other two patients had rare balanced
translocations to chromosome band 3q26 with rearrangement of the EVI1 gene. The
findings support cooperation between so called Class I and Class II mutations in 
leukemogenesis.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17330262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Arch Oral Biol. 2007 Aug;52(8):712-9. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Expression of the TGF-beta/BMP inhibitor EVI1 in human dental pulp cells.

Durand SH(1), Romeas A, Couble ML, Langlois D, Li JY, Magloire H, Bleicher F,
Staquet MJ, Farges JC.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, F-69003 Lyon, France.

Members of the TGF-beta/BMP family of growth factors induce odontoblast
differentiation and reparative dentin synthesis, and their use has been proposed 
to stimulate pulp healing during dental therapeutics in human. However, factors
that modulate TGF-beta and/or BMP signalling during odontoblast differentiation
and physiology remain largely unknown. To identify them, we compared expression
profiles of TGF-beta/BMP-related genes in pulp fibroblast- and odontoblast-like
cells cultured from human dental pulp explants using cDNA gene arrays. We
evidenced that the gene encoding ecotropic viral integration site-1 (EVI1), a
transcription factor that inhibits TGF-beta/BMP signalling, was under-expressed
in odontoblast-like cells. This result was verified by real-time PCR and, at the 
protein level, by immunohistochemistry. In vivo, real-time PCR analysis revealed 
that EVI1 was expressed in the dental pulp, at a level similar to brain, but
lower than in lung, kidney or trachea. The protein was localized in dental pulp
samples in pulp core and subodontoblast cells. Staining intensity progressively
decreased from the radicular to the coronal pulp where EVI1 staining was almost
undetectable in odontoblasts. Our data suggest that fine regulation of the EVI1
level in the human dental pulp might be important in the TGF-beta/BMP-induced
modulation of dental pulp cell kinetics and/or odontoblast differentiation.

PMID: 17328861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Int J Hematol. 2007 Feb;85(2):175-6.

Dual-specificity phosphatase 10 is fused to MDS1/EVI1-like gene 1 in a case of
acute myelogenous leukemia with der1t1;1(p36.3;q21).

Noguchi M, Tashiro H, Shirasaki R, Gotoh M, Kawasugi K, Shirafuji N.

PMID: 17321999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Apr;46(4):359-72.

Amplification and translocation of 3q26 with overexpression of EVI1 in Fanconi
anemia-derived childhood acute myeloid leukemia with biallelic FANCD1/BRCA2
disruption.

Meyer S(1), Fergusson WD, Whetton AD, Moreira-Leite F, Pepper SD, Miller C,
Saunders EK, White DJ, Will AM, Eden T, Ikeda H, Ullmann R, Tuerkmen S, Gerlach
A, Klopocki E, Tönnies H.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Paediatric Oncology, Christie Hospital Trust, University of
anchester, Manchester, UK. stefan.meyer@manchester.ac.uk

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an inherited disease with congenital abnormalities and an 
extreme risk of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Genetic events occurring during
malignant transformation in FA and the biology of FA-associated AML are poorly
understood, but are often preceded by the development of chromosomal aberrations 
involving 3q26-29 in bone marrow of FA patients. We report here the molecular
cytogenetic characterization of FA-derived AML cell lines SB1685CB and SB1690CB
by conventional and array comparative genomic hybridization, fluorescence in situ
hybridization, and SKY. We identified gains of a 3.7 MB chromosomal region on
3q26.2-26.31, which preceded transformation to overt leukemia. This region
harbors the oncogenic transcription factor EVI1. A third FA-derived cell line,
FA-AML1, carried a translocation with ectopic localization of 3q26 including
EVI1. Rearrangements of 3q, which are rare in childhood AML, commonly result in
overexpression of EVI1, which determines specific gene expression patterns and
confers poor prognosis. We detected overexpression of EVI1 in all three
FA-derived AML. Our results suggest a link between the FA defect, chromosomal
aberrations involving 3q and overexpression of EVI1. We hypothesize that
constitutional or acquired FA defects might be a common factor for the
development of 3q abnormalities in AML. In addition, cryptic imbalances as
detected here might account for overexpression of EVI1 in AML without overt 3q26 
rearrangements.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17243162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3998-4005. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Trib1 and Evi1 cooperate with Hoxa and Meis1 in myeloid leukemogenesis.

Jin G(1), Yamazaki Y, Takuwa M, Takahara T, Kaneko K, Kuwata T, Miyata S,
Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Genome Center, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-10-6 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.

Cooperative activation of Meis1 and Hoxa9 perturbs myeloid differentiation and
eventually leads myeloid progenitors to leukemia, yet it remains to be clarified 
what kinds of subsequent molecular processes are required for development of
overt leukemia. To understand the molecular pathway in Hoxa9/Meis1-induced
leukemogenesis, retroviral insertional mutagenesis was applied using
retrovirus-mediated gene transfer. The mice that received Hoxa9/Meis1-transduced 
bone marrow cells developed acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and Trib1, Evi1, Ahi1, 
Raralpha, Pitpnb, and AK039950 were identified as candidate cooperative genes
located near common retroviral integration sites. Trib1 and Evi1 were
up-regulated due to retroviral insertions, and coexpression of these genes
significantly accelerated the onset of Hoxa9/Meis1-induced AML, suggesting that
Trib1 and Evi1 are the key collaborators. Furthermore, Trib1 by itself is a novel
myeloid oncogene, enhancing phosphorylation of ERK, resulting in inhibition of
apoptosis. These results demonstrate the importance of specific oncogene
interaction in myeloid leukemogenesis.

PMID: 17227832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Development. 2007 Feb;134(4):669-79. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

C. elegans EVI1 proto-oncogene, EGL-43, is necessary for Notch-mediated cell fate
specification and regulates cell invasion.

Hwang BJ(1), Meruelo AD, Sternberg PW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Division of Biology, 156-29, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

During C. elegans development, LIN-12 (Notch) signaling specifies the anchor cell
(AC) and ventral uterine precursor cell (VU) fates from two equivalent
pre-AC/pre-VU cells in the hermaphrodite gonad. Once specified, the AC induces
patterned proliferation of vulva via expression of LIN-3 (EGF) and then invades
into the vulval epithelium. Although these cellular processes are essential for
the proper organogenesis of vulva and appear to be temporally regulated, the
mechanisms that coordinate the processes are not well understood. We
computationally identified egl-43 as a gene likely to be expressed in the
pre-AC/pre-VU cells and the AC, based on the presence of an enhancer element
similar to the one that transcribes lin-3 in the same cells. Genetic epistasis
analyses reveal that egl-43 acts downstream of or parallel to lin-12 in AC/VU
cell fate specification at an early developmental stage, and functions downstream
of fos-1 as well as upstream of zmp-1 and him-4 to regulate AC invasion at a
later developmental stage. Characterization of the egl-43 regulatory region
suggests that EGL-43 is a direct target of LIN-12 and HLH-2 (E12/47), which is
required for the specification of the VU fate during AC/VU specification. EGL-43 
also regulates basement membrane breakdown during AC invasion through a
FOS-1-responsive regulatory element that drives EGL-43 expression in the AC and
VU cells at the later stage. Thus, egl-43 integrates temporally distinct upstream
regulatory events and helps program cell fate specification and cell invasion.

PMID: 17215301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Leuk Lymphoma. 2006 Dec;47(12):2645-7.

Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction based quantification of the
combined MDS-EVI1/EVI1 gene in acute myeloid leukemia.

Weisser M, Kern W, Schoch C, Tschulik C, Hiddemann W, Haferlach T, Schnittger S.

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2006 Dec;47(12):2443-4.

PMID: 17169810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Leuk Lymphoma. 2006 Dec;47(12):2443-4.

Dysregulated EVI1 expression in myeloid malignancies.

Pardanani A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, Division of Hematology, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
pardanani.animesh@mayo.edu

Comment on
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2006 Dec;47(12):2645-7.

PMID: 17169788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 1;66(23):11360-9.

Targeted degradation of the AML1/MDS1/EVI1 oncoprotein by arsenic trioxide.

Shackelford D(1), Kenific C, Blusztajn A, Waxman S, Ren R.

Author information: 
(1)Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, Department of Biology,
Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02454-9110, USA.

Arsenic trioxide (ATO) has been found to be an effective treatment for acute
promyelocytic leukemia patients and is being tested for treating other
hematologic malignancies. We have previously shown that AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME), a
fusion gene generated by a t(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation found in patients with 
chronic myelogenous leukemia during blast phase, myelodysplastic syndrome, or
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), impairs hematopoiesis and eventually induces an
AML in mice. Both fusion partners of AME, AML1 and MDS1/EVI1, encode
transcription factors and are also targets of a variety of genetic abnormalities 
in human hematologic malignancies. In addition, aberrant expression of ectopic
viral integration site 1 (EVI1) has also been found in solid tumors, such as
ovarian and colon cancers. In this study, we examined whether ATO could target
AME and related oncoproteins. We found that ATO used at therapeutic levels
degrades AME. The ATO treatment induces differentiation and apoptosis in AME
leukemic cells in vitro as well as reduces tumor load and increases the survival 
of mice transplanted with these cells. We further found that ATO targets AME via 
both myelodysplastic syndrome 1 (MDS1) and EVI1 moieties and degrades EVI1 via
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and MDS1 in a proteasome-independent manner. Our
results suggest that ATO could be used as a part of targeted therapy for AME-,
AML1/MDS1-, MDS1/EVI1-, and EVI1-positive human cancers.

PMID: 17145882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Lung Cancer. 2007 Jan;55(1):43-51. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Comparative genomic hybridization array analysis and real time PCR reveals
genomic alterations in squamous cell carcinomas of the lung.

Choi YW(1), Choi JS, Zheng LT, Lim YJ, Yoon HK, Kim YH, Wang YP, Lim Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic University,
Seoul, South Korea.

Genomic alterations have been identified in lung cancer tissues and reported in
numerous studies. To analyze genomic aberrations in lung cancer patients, we used
array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) in 14 squamous cell lung
carcinoma (SqC) tissues. Copy number gain and loss in chromosomal regions were
detected, and the corresponding genes were confirmed by real time PCR. Several
frequently altered loci, including gain of 3q (36% of samples), were found. The
most frequently identified losses were found at 14q32.33 (21% of samples). The
relative degree of chromosomal change was analyzed using log2 ratios. High-level 
DNA amplifications (>0.8 log2 ratio) were detected at 20 regions in 1p, 2q, 3q,
4q, 6q, 7p, 8q, 9p, 10q, 12q, 14q and 19p. We found that the fold change levels
were highest at EVI1 (3q26.2), LPP (3q27-28) and FHF-1 (3q28) gene loci. Our
results show that array CGH is a useful tool for identification of gene
alteration in lung cancer, and that the above-mentioned genes might represent
potential candidate genes for pathogenesis and diagnosis of lung cancer.

PMID: 17109992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Nov;171(1):79-80.

Screening for EVI1: ectopic expression absent in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia patients and cell lines.

De Weer A, Poppe B, Cauwelier B, Van Roy N, Dastugue N, Hagemeijer A, De Paepe A,
Speleman F.

PMID: 17074597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. PLoS Genet. 2006 Oct 6;2(10):e149.

Mutation at the Evi1 locus in Junbo mice causes susceptibility to otitis media.

Parkinson N(1), Hardisty-Hughes RE, Tateossian H, Tsai HT, Brooker D, Morse S,
Lalane Z, MacKenzie F, Fray M, Glenister P, Woodward AM, Polley S, Barbaric I,
Dear N, Hough TA, Hunter AJ, Cheeseman MT, Brown SD.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Gentics Unit, Medical Research Council, Harwell, United Kingdom.

Otitis media (OM), inflammation of the middle ear, remains the most common cause 
of hearing impairment in children. It is also the most common cause of surgery in
children in the developed world. There is evidence from studies of the human
population and mouse models that there is a significant genetic component
predisposing to OM, yet nothing is known about the underlying genetic pathways
involved in humans. We identified an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced dominant mouse
mutant Junbo with hearing loss due to chronic suppurative OM and otorrhea. This
develops from acute OM that arises spontaneously in the postnatal period, with
the age of onset and early severity dependent on the microbiological status of
the mice and their air quality. We have identified the causal mutation, a
missense change in the C-terminal zinc finger region of the transcription factor 
Evi1. This protein is expressed in middle ear basal epithelial cells,
fibroblasts, and neutrophil leukocytes at postnatal day 13 and 21 when
inflammatory changes are underway. The identification and characterization of the
Junbo mutant elaborates a novel role for Evi1 in mammalian disease and implicates
a new pathway in genetic predisposition to OM.

PMCID: PMC1592239
PMID: 17029558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Gene. 2006 Dec 15;384:154-62. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

Conservation and expression of a novel alternatively spliced Evi1 exon.

Alzuherri H(1), McGilvray R, Kilbey A, Bartholomew C.

Author information: 
(1)Glasgow Caledonian University, Department of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, City Campus Cowcaddens Road Glasgow, G4 OBA, United Kingdom.

The Evi1 transcriptional repressor protein is expressed in a developmentally
regulated manner, is essential for normal development, participates in regulating
cell proliferation and differentiation of cells of haemopoietic and neuronal
origin and contributes to the progression of leukaemia. In this report we
describe a new murine Evi1 gene transcript (Delta105) that contains two
alternatively spliced regions encoding a 9 amino acid insertion (Rp+9) within the
repressor domain (Rp) and a 105 amino acid C-terminal truncation. Abundant levels
of the 105 amino acid truncated protein are observed in murine leukaemia cells.
The combined primary sequence alterations do not affect the DNA binding,
transcriptional repressor or CtBP2 protein binding properties of Evi1 but they do
reduce its transforming and cell proliferation stimulating activities. Reduced
transforming activity is most likely due to the C-terminal truncation as the
activity of Evi1 containing either Rp or Rp+9 is indistinguishable. Both isoforms
exist in all murine tissues and cell lines examined. However, only the Rp+9
alternative splice variant is also found in humans and other vertebrates. Murine 
and human forms of Evi1 with Rp or Rp+9 exist. The additional 9 amino acids are
encoded by a conserved 27 nucleotide exon, the overall structural organisation of
the gene being preserved in the two species. The function of the Rp+9 and
Delta105 splice variants is unknown although the conservation of Rp+9 throughout 
evolution in vertebrate species suggests it is essential to the broad spectrum of
biological activities attributed to this developmentally essential protein.

PMID: 17014970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Oct 15;170(2):115-20.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization studies using BAC clones of the EVI1 locus in 
hematological malignancies with 3q rearrangements.

Madrigal I(1), Carrió A, Gómez C, Rozman M, Esteve J, Nomdedeu B, Campo E, Costa 
D.

Author information: 
(1)IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Chromosomal rearrangements involving 3q26 are a recurrent aberration in malignant
myeloid disorders. Several of these rearrangements involve the EVI1 oncogene or
its surrounding sequences and are associated with a poor prognosis. Fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH) studies using bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) 
clones were conducted to determine whether the EVI1 locus was rearranged in nine 
patients with hematological malignancies carrying 3q abnormalities. A dual-color 
probe was constructed with nine BACs; centromeric clones covering 1 Mb and
including the EVI1 gene were labeled with a red fluorescent dye and telomeric
clones covering 1 Mb were labeled with a green fluorescent dye. Two patients
showed normal copies of the EVI1 locus, four patients showed one EVI1 locus
rearranged (in all of them the breakpoint on 3q26 was telomeric to EVI1), one
patient showed one copy of the EVI1 locus translocated to another chromosome, one
patient showed one copy of the EVI1 locus rearranged and the other copy
translocated, and one patient showed one extra copy of the EVI1 locus. In four
cases, FISH studies using the EVI1 clones detected different 3q abnormalities not
previously found by conventional cytogenetics. FISH analysis with BAC clones was 
a useful tool for identifying the chromosome breakpoints affecting the EVI1 locus
in patients with 3q26 rearrangements.

PMID: 17011981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cas Lek Cesk. 2006;145(8):619-24.

[EVI1 and its role in myelodysplastic syndrome, myeloid leukemia and other
malignant diseases].

[Article in Czech]

Fuchs O(1).

Author information: 
(1)UHKT, Praha. ota.fuchs@uhkt.cz

The ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) gene was identified as a common
locus of retroviral integration in myeloid tumors found in mice. EVI1 gene is
highly conserved through evolution and human gene EVI1 on chromosome 3q26 encodes
zinc fingers-containing transcription factor. EVI1 is expressed in
nonhematopoietic tissues but not in normal blood or bone marrow. EVI1 was
detected in hematopoietic cells in retrovirus-induced myeloid leukemias in mice
and several reports documented EVI1 expression in human myelodysplastic syndromes
and other hematologic malignancies without 3q26 translocations. EVI1 is
abnormally expressed in human myeloid leukemias that are associated with the
t(3;3)(q21;q26), t(3;21)(q26;q22), inv(3)(q21q26) and other chromosomal
rearrangements. EVI1 is overexpressed in some ovarian cancers and human colon
cancer cell lines and may play a role in the initiation and/or progression of
solid tumors, as well as hematopoietic malignancies. EVI1 is a transcriptional
repressor which inhibits transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) family
signalling by binding signal transducers (Smad proteins) and recruiting
transcriptional corepressors. TGFbeta is an important regulator of proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis and migration of cells. EVI1 inhibits TGFbeta-mediated
apoptosis. Knockdown of EVI1 function by small interference RNA increases the
sensitivity of malignant cells to TGFbeta-mediated or other inducer-mediated
apoptosis. Overexpressed EVI-1 blocks granulocyte and erythroid differentiation
and possess the ability of growth promotion in some types of cells. EVI1
functions in some cases as a transcriptional activator which stimulates for
example GATA2 and GATA3 promoters. The study of EVI1 target genes will help to
clear the mechanism by which EVI1 upregulates cell proliferation, impairs cell
differentiation, and induces cell transformation.

PMID: 16995417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;26(20):7658-66. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Point mutations in two EVI1 Zn fingers abolish EVI1-GATA1 interaction and allow
erythroid differentiation of murine bone marrow cells.

Laricchia-Robbio L(1), Fazzina R, Li D, Rinaldi CR, Sinha KK, Chakraborty S,
Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago (M/C 737), 909 South Wolcott Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

EVI1 is an aggressive nuclear oncoprotein deregulated by recurring chromosomal
abnormalities in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). The expression of the
corresponding gene is a very poor prognostic marker for MDS patients and is
associated with severe defects of the erythroid lineage. We have recently shown
that the constitutive expression of EVI1 in murine bone marrow results in a fatal
disease with features characteristic of MDS, including anemia, dyserythropoiesis,
and dysmegakaryopoiesis. These lineages are regulated by the DNA-binding
transcription factor GATA1. EVI1 has two zinc finger domains containing seven
motifs at the N terminus and three motifs at the C terminus. Supported by results
of assays utilizing synthetic DNA promoters, it was earlier proposed that
erythroid-lineage repression by EVI1 is based on the ability of this protein to
compete with GATA1 for DNA-binding sites, resulting in repression of gene
activation by GATA1. Here, however, we show that EVI1 is unable to bind to
classic GATA1 sites. To understand the mechanism utilized by EVI1 to repress
erythropoiesis, we used a combination of biochemical assays, mutation analyses,
and in vitro bone marrow differentiation. The results indicate that EVI1
interacts directly with the GATA1 protein rather than the DNA sequence. We
further show that this protein-protein interaction blocks efficient recognition
or binding to DNA by GATA1. Point mutations that disrupt the geometry of two zinc
fingers of EVI1 abolish the protein-protein interaction, leading to normal
erythroid differentiation of normal murine bone marrow in vitro.

PMCID: PMC1636885
PMID: 16954386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 1;66(17):8404-12.

Expression profiling identifies altered expression of genes that contribute to
the inhibition of transforming growth factor-beta signaling in ovarian cancer.

Sunde JS(1), Donninger H, Wu K, Johnson ME, Pestell RG, Rose GS, Mok SC, Brady J,
Bonome T, Birrer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

Ovarian cancer is resistant to the antiproliferative effects of transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta); however, the mechanism of this resistance remains 
unclear. We used oligonucleotide arrays to profile 37 undissected, 68
microdissected advanced-stage, and 14 microdissected early-stage papillary serous
cancers to identify signaling pathways involved in ovarian cancer. A total of
seven genes involved in TGF-beta signaling were identified that had altered
expression >1.5-fold (P < 0.001) in the ovarian cancer specimens compared with
normal ovarian surface epithelium. The expression of these genes was coordinately
altered: genes that inhibit TGF-beta signaling (DACH1, BMP7, and EVI1) were
up-regulated in advanced-stage ovarian cancers and, conversely, genes that
enhance TGF-beta signaling (PCAF, TFE3, TGFBRII, and SMAD4) were down-regulated
compared with the normal samples. The microarray data for DACH1 and EVI1 were
validated using quantitative real-time PCR on 22 microdissected ovarian cancer
specimens. The EVI1 gene locus was amplified in 43% of the tumors, and there was 
a significant correlation (P = 0.029) between gene copy number and EVI1 gene
expression. No amplification at the DACH1 locus was found in any of the samples. 
DACH1 and EVI1 inhibited TGF-beta signaling in immortalized normal ovarian
epithelial cells, and a dominant-negative DACH1, DACH1-Delta DS, partially
restored signaling in an ovarian cancer cell line resistant to TGF-beta. These
results suggest that altered expression of these genes is responsible for
disrupted TGF-beta signaling in ovarian cancer and they may be useful as new and 
novel therapeutic targets for ovarian cancer.

PMID: 16951150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2006 May;27(5):310-3.

[Study of genes involved in chronic myeloid leukemia with t (3; 21) (q26; q22) in
blastic crisis].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XP(1), Zhang MR, Dai Y, Zhang L, Li R, Hao YS, Xiao ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Blood Diseases Hospital, CAMS & PUMC, Tianjin 300020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore genes involved in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) with t (3;
21) (q26; q22) chromosome translocation in blastic crisis.
METHODS: A case of CML patient with t (3; 21) (q26; q22) in blastic crisis was
reported. AML1 and bcr/abl genes were detected by FISH in interphase and
metaphase cells. Genes involved in t (3; 21) (q26; q22) were analysed by RT-PCR
and sequencing.
RESULTS: AML1 gene hybridization signal was detected in der (3) and der (21)
chromosomes. AML1-Evi1, AML1-MDS1-Evi1, AML1-EAP fusion transcripts and Evi1 gene
were detected in mRNA level, but no AML1-Evi1 fusion transcript. The mRNA
expression level of AML1-MDS1-Evi1 fusion gene was 1.58 and 1.54 times higher
than that of AML1-MDS1 and AML1-EAP, respectively. The mRNA expression level of
Evi1 gene of the patient was 2.71 times higher than that of HEL cell line.
CONCLUSION: t (3; 21) (q26; q22) resulted in the AML1-MDS1-Evi1, AML1-MDS1,
AML1-EAP fusion transcripts, and Evi1 gene was also activated by the
translocation. These secondary aberrations should be the molecular basis of CML
patient with t (3; 21) (q26; q22) in blastic crisis.

PMID: 16875579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Jul 15;168(2):172-4.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with t(8;21)(q22;q22) relapsing as AML with
t(3;21)(q26;q22).

Bacher U(1), Schnittger S, Kern W, Trenn G, Weisser M, Haferlach T, Schoch C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich,
Marchioninistrasse 15, 81377 Munich, Germany. ulrike.bacher@med.uni-muenchen.de

We here report on an 48-year-old male patient with a primary diagnosis of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML)-M2 with t(8;21)(q22;q22), who developed complete
hematologic and molecular remission after induction chemotherapy. Thirteen months
later, he relapsed and showed an AML-M2 with t(3;21)(q26;q22). Retrospectively,
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for AML1-EVI1 and EVI1 overexpression was
performed on bone marrow and peripheral blood samples taken at diagnosis and
during the first year after the first manifestation of AML to quantify the
AML1-EVI1-positive clone. In a bone marrow sample taken 25 days from diagnosis,
PCR for AML1-EVI1 was negative, and EVI1 expression, as assessed by quantitative 
real-time PCR, was within the same range as that of healthy controls. These data 
suggest that this patient developed a secondary therapy-related AML rather than a
relapse.

PMID: 16843110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Blood. 2006 Oct 15;108(8):2545-53. Epub 2006 Jul 6.

Cell-culture assays reveal the importance of retroviral vector design for
insertional genotoxicity.

Modlich U(1), Bohne J, Schmidt M, von Kalle C, Knöss S, Schambach A, Baum C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

Retroviral vectors with long terminal repeats (LTRs), which contain strong
enhancer/promoter sequences at both ends of their genome, are widely used for
stable gene transfer into hematopoietic cells. However, recent clinical data and 
mouse models point to insertional activation of cellular proto-oncogenes as a
dose-limiting side effect of retroviral gene delivery that potentially induces
leukemia. Self-inactivating (SIN) retroviral vectors do not contain the terminal 
repetition of the enhancer/promoter, theoretically attenuating the interaction
with neighboring cellular genes. With a new assay based on in vitro expansion of 
primary murine hematopoietic cells and selection in limiting dilution, we showed 
that SIN vectors using a strong internal retroviral enhancer/promoter may also
transform cells by insertional mutagenesis. Most transformed clones, including
those obtained after dose escalation of SIN vectors, showed insertions upstream
of the third exon of Evi1 and in reverse orientation to its transcriptional
orientation. Normalizing for the vector copy number, we found the transforming
capacity of SIN vectors to be significantly reduced when compared with
corresponding LTR vectors. Additional modifications of SIN vectors may further
increase safety. Improved cell-culture assays will likely play an important role 
in the evaluation of insertional mutagenesis.

PMCID: PMC1895590
PMID: 16825499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Leukemia. 2006 Aug;20(8):1458-60. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Development of megakaryoblastic leukaemia in Runx1-Evi1 knock-in chimaeric mouse.

Maki K, Yamagata T, Yamazaki I, Oda H, Mitani K.

PMID: 16761014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Leukemia. 2006 Jan;20(1):48-54.

Characterization of a recurrent translocation t(2;3)(p15-22;q26) occurring in
acute myeloid leukaemia.

Trubia M(1), Albano F, Cavazzini F, Cambrin GR, Quarta G, Fabbiano F, Ciambelli
F, Magro D, Hernandezo JM, Mancini M, Diverio D, Pelicci PG, Coco FL, Mecucci C, 
Specchia G, Rocchi M, Liso V, Castoldi G, Cuneo A.

Author information: 
(1)IFOM, Milan, Italy.

Six patients with de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and a
t(2;3)(p15-21;q26-27) were identified among approximately 1000 cases enrolled in 
the GIMEMA trial. The t(2;3) was the sole anomaly in three patients, whereas in
three cases monosomy 7, trisomy 15 and 22, and trisomy 14 represented additional 
aberrations. No cryptic chromosome deletions at 5q, 7q, 12p, and 20q were
observed. One patient carried a FLT3 D835 mutation; FLT3 internal tandem
duplication (ITD) was not detected in three patients tested. Characterization of 
the translocation breakpoints using a 3q26 BAC contig specific for the PRDM3
locus showed that the breakpoints were located 5' to EVIl as follows: within
myelodysplatic syndrome (MDS) intron 1 (# 3), between MDS1 exons 2 and 3 in three
patients (# 1, 2, 4) with a 170bp cryptic deletion distal to the breakpoint in
one (# 2), and in a more centromeric position spanning from intron 2 to the 5'
region of EVI1 (# 6, 5). A set of 2p16-21 BAC probes showed that the breakpoints 
on chromosome 2p were located within BCL11A in two separate regions (# 1, 4 and #
2-5), within the thyroid adenoma-associated (THADA) gene (# 6) or distal to the
ZFP36L2 locus (# 3). Regulatory elements were present in proximity of these
breakpoints. RACE PCR studies revealed a chimeric transcript in 1/6 patient
analyzed, but no fusion protein. Quantitative PCR showed a 21-58-fold
over-expression of the EVIl gene in all cases analyzed. The patients showed
dysplasia of at least two myeloid cell lineages in all cases; they had a
low-to-normal platelet count and displayed an immature CD34+ CD117+
immunophenotype. Despite intensive chemotherapy and a median age of 43 years
(range 36-59), only two patients attained a short-lived response; one patient is 
alive with active disease at 12 months, five died at 4-14 months. We arrived at
the following conclusions: (a) the t(2;3) is a recurrent translocation having an 
approximate 0.5% incidence in adult AML; (b) breakpoints involve the 5' region of
EVIl at 3q26, and the BCL11A, the THADA gene or other regions at 2p16.1-21; (c)
cryptic deletions distal to the 3q26 breakpoint may occur in some cases; (d) the 
juxtaposition of the 5' region of EVIl with regulatory elements normally located 
on chromosome 2 brings about EVI1 overexpression; (e) clinical outcome in these
cases is severe.

PMID: 16619048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nat Med. 2006 Apr;12(4):401-9. Epub 2006 Apr 2.

Correction of X-linked chronic granulomatous disease by gene therapy, augmented
by insertional activation of MDS1-EVI1, PRDM16 or SETBP1.

Ott MG(1), Schmidt M, Schwarzwaelder K, Stein S, Siler U, Koehl U, Glimm H,
Kühlcke K, Schilz A, Kunkel H, Naundorf S, Brinkmann A, Deichmann A, Fischer M,
Ball C, Pilz I, Dunbar C, Du Y, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Lüthi U, Hassan M,
Thrasher AJ, Hoelzer D, von Kalle C, Seger R, Grez M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University Hospital, German Cancer Research
Center, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2006 Apr;12(4):386-8.

Gene transfer into hematopoietic stem cells has been used successfully for
correcting lymphoid but not myeloid immunodeficiencies. Here we report on two
adults who received gene therapy after nonmyeloablative bone marrow conditioning 
for the treatment of X-linked chronic granulomatous disease (X-CGD), a primary
immunodeficiency caused by a defect in the oxidative antimicrobial activity of
phagocytes resulting from mutations in gp91(phox). We detected substantial gene
transfer in both individuals' neutrophils that lead to a large number of
functionally corrected phagocytes and notable clinical improvement. Large-scale
retroviral integration site-distribution analysis showed activating insertions in
MDS1-EVI1, PRDM16 or SETBP1 that had influenced regulation of long-term
hematopoiesis by expanding gene-corrected myelopoiesis three- to four-fold in
both individuals. Although insertional influences have probably reinforced the
therapeutic efficacy in this trial, our results suggest that gene therapy in
combination with bone marrow conditioning can be successfully used to treat
inherited diseases affecting the myeloid compartment such as CGD.

PMID: 16582916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Dev Biol. 2006 Jun 1;294(1):203-19. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Evi1 is specifically expressed in the distal tubule and duct of the Xenopus
pronephros and plays a role in its formation.

Van Campenhout C(1), Nichane M, Antoniou A, Pendeville H, Bronchain OJ, Marine
JC, Mazabraud A, Voz ML, Bellefroid EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut
de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires (IBMM), rue des Profs. Jeener et Brachet 
12, B-6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

The ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) and related MEL1 (MDS1/Evi1-like
gene 1) genes are zinc finger oncogenic transcription factors involved in myeloid
leukaemia. Here, we show that in Xenopus, Evi1 and MEL1 have partially
overlapping restricted embryonic expression profiles. Within the pronephros, Evi1
and MEL1 are sequentially expressed within the distal tubule and duct
compartments, Evi1 transcription being detected prior to any sign of pronephric
morphogenesis. In the pronephros of zebrafish embryos, Evi1 expression is
restricted to the posterior portion of the duct, the anterior portion having
characteristics of proximal tubules. In the Xenopus pronephros, Evi1 expression
is upregulated by retinoid signaling and repressed by overexpression of xWT1 and 
by Notch signaling. Overexpression of Evi1 from late neurula stage specifically
inhibits the expression of proximal tubule and glomus pronephric markers. We show
that the first zinc finger and CtBP interaction domains are required for this
activity. Overexpression of a hormone-inducible Evi1-VP16 antimorphic fusion with
activation at neurula stage disrupts distal tubule and duct formation and expands
the expression of glomus markers. Although overexpression of this construct also 
causes in many embryos a reduction of proximal tubule markers, embryos with
expanded and ectopic staining have been also observed. Together, these data
indicate that Evi1 plays a role in the proximo-distal patterning of the
pronephros and suggest that it may do so by functioning as a CtBP dependent
repressor.

PMID: 16574097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Cancer. 2006 Apr 15;106(8):1730-8.

t(3;21)(q26;q22) in myeloid leukemia: an aggressive syndrome of blast
transformation associated with hydroxyurea or antimetabolite therapy.

Yin CC(1), Cortes J, Barkoh B, Hayes K, Kantarjian H, Jones D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: The t(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation is associated with myeloid
leukemias and results in a chimeric oncoprotein containing AML1/RUNX1 variably
fused to EAP, MDS1, and/or EVI1.
METHODS: The current study describes what to the authors' knowledge is the first 
large case series reported to date of 26 t(3;21)(q26;q22)-associated leukemias,
in which 24 cases arose after chemotherapy. Conventional G-band karyotyping and
flow cytometry immunophenotyping were performed. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed to detect fusion transcripts between AML1
and EAP, MDS1, or EVI1, followed by DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: In all 16 patients with chronic myeloproliferative disorders, including 
14 with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), the occurrence of t(3;21) heralded
myeloid blast transformation. Fifteen (93%) patients had been previously treated 
with hydroxyurea. Eight patients with chronic myeloproliferative disorders (CMPD)
were found to have t(3;21) with t(9;22) as the sole cytogenetic abnormality; in 5
other patients this was accompanied by trisomy 8. Among 10 cases of
t(3;21)-associated acute myeloid leukemia, 8 were secondary tumors after
chemotherapy for other neoplasms that had been treated with regimens including
fludarabine and 5-fluorouracil in 3 patients each and etoposide in 2 patients.
The immunophenotype of the blasts in all 22 tested cases was similar, with
uniform expression of myeloid markers and CD34 and variable expression of CD7 and
CD9, but minimal morphological myeloid maturation. Dysplastic micromegakaryocytes
and bone marrow fibrosis were observed predominantly in CMPD cases. RT-PCR
followed by DNA sequencing showed that the AML1-/MDS1-/EVI1 (AME) fusion
transcript was detected in all 5 cases assessed. Among the patients with CMPD, 8 
died of disease (at a median of 6.5 mos) and 5 achieved disease remission with
bone marrow transplantation. Among patients with acute myeloid
leukemia/myelodysplastic syndrome, 7 died of disease (at a median of 2 mos) and 2
had persistent leukemia with short follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Activation of AME through t(3;21) defines a highly aggressive,
therapy-related leukemic blast syndrome. Prior treatment with hydroxyurea or
other antimetabolites is implicated as a contributory cause.

2006 American Cancer Society

PMID: 16532439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Curr Hematol Malig Rep. 2006 Mar;1(1):34-8. doi: 10.1007/s11899-006-0015-6.

Arsenic trioxide as a treatment for myelodysplastic syndrome.

Sekeres MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. sekerem@ccf.org

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a heterogeneous bone marrow disorder primarily 
affecting older adults, for whom the only curative therapy, bone marrow
transplantation, is rarely an option. New therapies, or novel applications of
historical therapies, are desperately needed. Arsenic trioxide (ATO), which acts 
through proapoptotic, antiproliferative, and antiangiogenesis mechanisms, has
been used successfully to treat a variety of hematologic malignancies, including 
MDS. As monotherapy or in combination with other agents, it can effect
hematologic improvement in 22% to 26% of patients, with tolerable side effects.
MDS patients whose cells express the EVI1 mutation in particular may derive
benefit from this therapy.

PMID: 20425329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Oncogene. 2006 Jun 15;25(25):3565-75. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Evi1 is a survival factor which conveys resistance to both TGFbeta- and
taxol-mediated cell death via PI3K/AKT.

Liu Y(1), Chen L, Ko TC, Fields AP, Thompson EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

In hematopoietic cells the transforming potential of the ecotropic viral
integration site 1 (Evi1) oncogene is thought to be dependent upon the ability to
inhibit TGFbeta signaling. Although Evi1 has recently been implicated in certain 
epithelial cancers, the effects of Evi1 on transformation and TGFbeta signaling
in epithelial cells are not completely understood. Herein, we have determined the
effects of Evi1 on TGFbeta signaling in intestinal epithelial cells. Stable
expression of Evi1 in non-transformed intestinal epithelial cells inhibited
induction of some Smad3-dependent TGFbeta target genes, such as PAI1. However,
TGFbeta-mediated induction of cellular adhesion signaling components such as
integrin1 and paxillin was not inhibited by Evi1; nor did Evi1 inhibit
TGFbeta-mediated epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Likewise, Evi1 did not
inhibit TGFbeta-mediated downregulation of cyclin D1 or block TGFbeta-mediated
growth inhibition. However, Evi1 did inhibit TGFbeta-mediated apoptosis by a
process that involves phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) and its downstream
effector AKT. The ability of Evi1 to suppress apoptosis is not restricted to
TGFbeta-mediated cell death, since Evi1 also protects intestinal epithelial cells
from taxol-mediated apoptosis. Evi1 is overexpressed in some human colon cancer
cell lines, and overexpression is associated with amplification of the Evi1 gene.
Knockdown of Evi1 by siRNA inhibited AKT phosphorylation in HT-29 human colon
cancer cells and increased their sensitivity to taxol-mediated apoptosis. These
data indicate that Evi1 functions as a survival gene in intestinal epithelial
cells and colon cancer cells, activating PI3K/AKT and conveying resistance to
both physiological and therapeutic apoptotic stimuli.

PMID: 16462766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Drug News Perspect. 2005 Nov;18(9):555-9.

The role of adult stem cells in carcinogenesis.

Romano G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Jefferson Hospital
for the Neurosciences, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.
Gaetano.Romano@jefferson.edu

The role of adult stem cells in tissue regeneration has attracted much interest
because of its enormous therapeutic potential. Adult stem cells reside in every
tissue of the body and have the ability to self-renew and to give rise to a high 
number of differentiated progeny. These are indeed the essential steps in tissue 
regeneration, which in some cases occurs constitutively, whereas in other cases
happens in response to an injury. The identification of the key factors involved 
in self-renewal and differentiation pathways is at the top of the agenda of stem 
cell biologists. Interestingly, a number of factors that govern the fate of adult
stem cells also play a role in malignant cell transformation, such as the Wnt
cascade, Oct-4, Bmi-1 and Evi1. In addition, rare subpopulations of cancer stem
cells were identified for leukemia and other solid tumors. These rare fractions
of cancer stem cells are in large part responsible for maintaining the tumor
mass, as they have the capacity to self-renew and to generate a high number of
progeny via differentiation program. These findings can be considered a major
breakthrough in cancer research. Currently, oncologists and stem cell biologists 
have two main goals: i) the assessment of the consistency of the line that
divides adult stem cells and carcinogenesis; ii) to better characterize the
biology of cancer stem cells. This new line of investigation may allow for the
development of novel therapeutics and cancer diagnostics.

2005 Prous Science

PMID: 16421628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Eur J Haematol. 2006 Feb;76(2):124-33.

Multipoint interphase FISH analysis of chromosome 3 abnormalities in 28 childhood
AML patients.

Haltrich I(1), Kost-Alimova M, Kovács G, Klein G, Fekete G, Imreh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary. haltrich@gyer2.sote.hu

We detected non-random 3p losses and 3q gains on well-determined regions in both 
murine and human tumors using a microcell hybrid-based model system called
'elimination test'. We suggest that these are general malignancy-associated
aberrations not necessarily linked to a particular tissue of origin. To examine
chromosome 3 abnormalities, in 28 childhood acute myeloid leukemia bone marrow
samples, we performed interphase multipoint-fluorescence in situ hybridization
using 84 chromosome 3-specific probes and detected clonal chromosome 3
aberrations in nine cases, which is of a higher frequency than the previously
reported one. In 3/28 children, a chromosome 3 abnormality was detected which was
not visible using conventional cytogenetic analysis. We did not detect any 3p
deletion. Increased copy number of 3q was found in four cases with trisomy of
whole chromosome 3 and one case with 3q tetrasomy (isodisomy). We identified rare
structural rearrangements in childhood acute myeloblastic leukemia, involving
3q21 and 3q26 loci around RPN1 and MDS1/EVI1 respectively. The poor outcome in
pediatric patients with 3q rearrangements appears to be quite uniform.

PMID: 16405433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Apr;45(4):349-56.

EVI1 is consistently expressed as principal transcript in common and rare
recurrent 3q26 rearrangements.

Poppe B(1), Dastugue N, Vandesompele J, Cauwelier B, De Smet B, Yigit N, De Paepe
A, Cervera J, Recher C, De Mas V, Hagemeijer A, Speleman F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

In contrast to the well-documented involvement of EVI1 in various 3q26
aberrations, the transcriptional status of EVI1 in rare recurrent or sporadic
3q26 chromosomal defects has remained largely unexplored. Moreover, in a recent
report, the association between 3q26 alterations in myeloid proliferations and
ectopic EVI1 expression was questioned. Therefore, we performed a detailed
physical mapping of 3q26 breakpoints using a 1.3-Mb tiling path BAC contig
covering the EVI1 locus and a carefully designed quantification of both EVI1 and 
MDS/EVI1 transcripts in 30 hematological malignancies displaying 3q26
aberrations. Cases included well-known rare, recurring chromosomal aberrations
such as t(3;17)(q26;q22), t(2;3)(p21-22;q26), and t(3;6)(q26;q25), as well as 10 
new sporadic cases. Extensive 3q26 breakpoint mapping allowed unequivocal and
sensitive FISH detection of EVI1 rearrangements on both metaphases and interphase
nuclei. Real-time quantitative PCR analyses indicated that typically both
MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1, but not MDS1, were expressed in these malignancies, with EVI1
the primary transcript. In conclusion, we have demonstrated EVI1 involvement in
numerous novel sporadic and recurrent 3q26 rearrangements. Our results underscore
the feasibility of FISH as an adjunct to PCR for the identification of EVI1
deranged leukemias and identified EVI1 as the principal transcript expressed in
these malignancies.

PMID: 16342172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Gene. 2006 Mar 1;368:1-11. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

EVI1 and hematopoietic disorders: history and perspectives.

Nucifora G(1), Laricchia-Robbio L, Senyuk V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60607, United
States. nucifora@uic.edu

The ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) gene was identified almost 20 years
ago as the integration site of an ecotropic retrovirus leading to murine myeloid 
leukemia. Since its identification, EVI1 has slowly been recognized as one of the
most aggressive oncogenes associated with human leukemia. Despite the effort of
many investigators, still very little is known about this gene. The mechanism by 
which EVI1 operates in the transformation of hematopoietic cells is not known,
but it is clear that EVI1 upregulates cell proliferation, impairs cell
differentiation, and induces cell transformation. In this review, we summarize
the biochemical properties of EVI1 and the effects of EVI1 in biological models.

PMID: 16314052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2005:143-50.

New strategies for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia including antibodies
and other novel agents.

Tallman MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, 676 N. St.
Clair Street, Suite 850, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. m-tallman@northwestern.edu

The prognosis for younger adults (< or = 55-60 years) with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) has improved during the last four decades. However, there has been little
progress in the treatment of older adults. This disappointing observation is
important because the median age of patients with AML is about 70 years.
Approximately 60%-80% of younger adults with AML achieve complete remission (CR) 
with the cytotoxic agents cytarabine and an anthracycline such as daunorubicin or
idarubicin or the anthracenedione mitoxantrone. However, only 30%-40% of such
patients are alive and disease-free at 5 years. Among older adults, CR is
achieved in 40%-55%, but there are very few long-term survivors. Many studies
have evaluated the impact of alternative doses and schedules, as well as
additional cytotoxic drugs, on the prognosis for this group of patients. The
outcome has not improved substantially beyond that achieved with conventional
doses of an anthracycline and cytarabine followed by high-dose cytarabine
consolidation.Several factors identified at diagnosis can predict outcome. The
most important of these is the karyotype of the leukemic cells. Another critical 
factor is the presence of transmembrane transporter proteins, which confer
multidrug resistance and mutations in or overexpression of specific genes such as
WT1, C/EBPalpha, BAX, and BCL-2/BAX ratio, BAALC, EVI1, KIT and FLT3. The
development of specific agents directed at gene mutations, signal transduction
pathways and unique cell surface antigens provide the foundation for new
therapeutic strategies. Such agents include the immunoconjugate gemtuzumab
ozogamicin, multidrug resistance inhibitors, farnesyltransferase inhibitors,
histone deacetylase and proteosome inhibitors, antiangiogenesis agents, FLT3
inhibitors, apoptosis inhibitors, and nucleoside analogs. All of these agents can
potentially address the heterogeneous abnormalities in AML and significantly
improve the outcome for patients.

PMID: 16304372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Blood. 2006 Jan 15;107(2):733-41. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Sox4 cooperates with Evi1 in AKXD-23 myeloid tumors via transactivation of
proviral LTR.

Boyd KE(1), Xiao YY, Fan K, Poholek A, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, USA.

Myeloid leukemias in AKXD23 mice contain proviral insertions at Evi1, resulting
in transcriptional activation. Although Evi1 is clearly involved in leukemia,
gene transfer studies in mice with Evi1 fail to cause leukemia, arguing that
cooperating events are necessary. We reanalyzed AKXD-23 tumors for cooperating
proviral insertion and found that each tumor had a proviral insertion in Sox4,
which encodes an HMG-box transcription factor. RNA analysis revealed these
insertions cause increased Sox4 expression. Overexpression of Sox4 in 32Dcl3
cells markedly inhibited cytokine-induced granulocyte maturation, as documented
by morphologic and mRNA analysis. Sox4-expressing cells had higher levels of
transcripts associated with proliferation, including Evi1. Conversely, in
leukemic cells that express Sox4 and bear provirally activated Evi1, suppression 
of Sox4 with short hairpin RNAs resulted in down-regulation of both Sox4 and
Evi1. By cotransfection studies, Sox4 is able to transactivate the AKV long
terminal repeat, which likely explains how Sox4 transcriptionally up-regulates
provirally activated Evi1; however, Sox4 does not appear to regulate the native
Evi1 promoter. We propose that Sox4 proviral activation is selected for in the
setting of prior proviral activation of Evi1, because it transactivates the
relatively weak LTR of AKV leading to higher Evi1 expression and consequent block
to differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1895620
PMID: 16204320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Br J Haematol. 2005 Sep;130(6):902-11.

The Evi1 proto-oncoprotein blocks endomitosis in megakaryocytes by inhibiting
sustained cyclin-dependent kinase 2 catalytic activity.

Kilbey A(1), Alzuherri H, McColl J, Calés C, Frampton J, Bartholomew C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian
University, Glasgow, UK.

The 3q21q26 syndrome leukaemias are characterised by dystrophic megakaryocytes,
elevated platelet counts, ectopic EVI1 protein production and poor prognosis. To 
investigate the molecular basis of this disease, we developed a model system to
examine the biological activity of EVI1 in a megakaryocyte progenitor cell line. 
For this purpose, Evi1 was conditionally expressed in human erythroleukaemia
cells (HEL) that progress along the megakaryocyte lineage in the presence of
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA). TPA-stimulated HEL cells normally
undergo: (1) growth arrest; (2) altered morphology; (3) endomitosis and (4)
characteristic changes in gene expression, including reduction of the
erythroid-specific glycophoryn A and elevation of the specific glycoproteins
GPIIIa and GPVI. Enforced Evi1 expression alone had no effect upon HEL cell
proliferation or differentiation but a phenotype was manifest upon stimulation to
differentiate. Evi1-expressing, TPA-treated HEL cells still showed growth arrest,
had reduced and enhanced glycophoryn A and GPIIIa mRNA's, respectively, but
failed to significantly elevate GPVI mRNA. This was accompanied by inhibition of 
endomitosis and altered cell morphology. Sustained CDK2 catalytic activity,
typically associated with megakaryocyte endomitosis, was dramatically decreased
in TPA-stimulated Evi1-expressing HEL cells because of significantly reduced
levels of cyclin A. Therefore, enforced Evi1 expression could inhibit
megakaryocyte differentiation although retention of some characteristic molecular
changes, in combination with a block in endomitosis and altered morphology,
suggest a defect in lineage progression. These results suggest that ectopic Evi1 
expression contributes to a defective megakaryocyte differentiation programme and
is likely to contribute to the phenotype observed in 3q21q26 syndrome leukaemias.

PMID: 16156860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7603-11.

The distal zinc finger domain of AML1/MDS1/EVI1 is an oligomerization domain
involved in induction of hematopoietic differentiation defects in primary cells
in vitro.

Senyuk V(1), Li D, Zakharov A, Mikhail FM, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and The Cancer Center, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA. vsenyuk@uic.edu

AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME) is a chimeric transcription factor produced by the
(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation. This chromosomal translocation is associated with 
de novo and therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia and with the blast crisis of
chronic myelogenous leukemia. AME is obtained by in-frame fusion of the AML1 and 
MDS1/EVI1 (ME) genes. The mechanisms by which AME induces a neoplastic
transformation in bone marrow cells are unknown. AME interacts with the
corepressors CtBP and HDAC1, and it was shown that AME is a repressor in contrast
to the parent transcription factors AML1 and ME, which are transcription
activators. Studies with murine bone marrow progenitors indicated that the
introduction of a point mutation that destroys the CtBP-binding consensus impairs
but does not abolish the disruption of cell differentiation and replication
associated with AME expression, suggesting that additional events are required.
Several chimeric proteins, such as AML1/ETO, BCR/ABL, and PML/RARa, are
characterized by the presence of a self-interaction domain critical for
transformation. We report that AME is also able to oligomerize and displays a
complex pattern of self-interaction that involves at least three oligomerization 
regions, one of which is the distal zinc finger domain. Although the deletion of 
this short domain does not preclude the self-interaction of AME, it significantly
reduces the differentiation defects caused in vitro by AME in primary murine bone
marrow progenitors. The addition of a point mutation that inhibits CtBP binding
completely abrogates the effects of AME on differentiation, suggesting that AME
induces hematopoietic differentiation defects through at least two separate but
cooperating pathways.

PMID: 16140925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Blood. 2005 Dec 1;106(12):3932-9. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

Insertional mutagenesis identifies genes that promote the immortalization of
primary bone marrow progenitor cells.

Du Y(1), Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer
Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Retroviruses can induce hematopoietic disease via insertional mutagenesis of
cancer genes and provide valuable molecular tags for cancer gene discovery. Here 
we show that insertional mutagenesis can also identify genes that promote the
immortalization of hematopoietic cells, which normally have only limited
self-renewal. Transduction of mouse bone marrow cells with
replication-incompetent murine stem cell virus (MSCV) expressing only neo,
followed by serial passage in liquid culture containing stem cell factor (SCF)
and interleukin-3 (IL-3), produced immortalized immature myeloid cell lines with 
neutrophil and macrophage differentiation potential in about 50% of the infected 
cultures. More than half of the lines have MSCV insertions at Evi1 or Prdm16.
These loci encode transcription factor homologs and are validated human myeloid
leukemia genes. Integrations are located in intron 1 or 2, where they promote
expression of truncated proteins lacking the PRDI-BF1-RIZ1 homologous (PR)
domain, similar to what is observed in human leukemias with EVI1 or PRDM16
mutations. Evi1 overexpression alone appears sufficient to immortalize immature
myeloid cells and does not seem to require any other cooperating mutations. Genes
identified by insertional mutagenesis by their nature could also be involved in
immortalization of leukemic stem cells, and thus represent attractive drug
targets for treating cancer.

PMCID: PMC1895096
PMID: 16109773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Int J Hematol. 2005 Jul;82(1):1-8.

Runx1/AML1 in normal and abnormal hematopoiesis.

Yamagata T(1), Maki K, Mitani K.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Runx1/AML1 (also known as CBFA2 and PEBP23B) is a Runt family transcription
factor critical for normal hematopoiesis. Runx1 forms a heterodimer with CBF3 and
binds to the consensus PEBP2 sequence through the Runt domain. Runx1 enhances
gene transcription by interacting with transcriptional coactivators such as p300 
and CREB-binding protein. However, Runx1 can also suppress gene transcription by 
interacting with transcriptional corepressors, including mSin3A, TLE (mammalian
homolog of Groucho), and histone deacetylases. Runx1 not only is critical for
definitive hematopoiesis in the fetus but also is required for normal
megakaryocytic maturation and T-lymphocyte and B-lymphocyte development in adult 
mice. Runx1 has been identified in leukemia-associated chromosomal
translocations, including t(8;21) (Runx1-ETO/MTG8), t(16;21) (Runx1-MTG16),
t(3;21) (Runx1-Evi1), t(12;21) (TEL-Runx1), and t(X;21) (Runx1-Fog2). The
molecular mechanism of leukemogenesis by these fusion proteins is discussed.
Various mutant mice expressing these fusion proteins have been created. However, 
expression of the fusion protein is not sufficient by itself to cause leukemia
and likely requires additional events for leukemogenesis. Point mutations in a
Runx1 allele cause haploinsufficiency and a biallelic null for Runx1, which are
associated with familial platelet disorder with a propensity for acute myeloid
leukemia (FPD/AML) and AML-M0, respectively. Thus, the correct protein structure 
and the precise dosage of Runx1 are essential for the maintenance of normal
hematopoiesis.

PMID: 16105753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Nov;44(3):265-70.

Novel RUNX1-PRDM16 fusion transcripts in a patient with acute myeloid leukemia
showing t(1;21)(p36;q22).

Sakai I(1), Tamura T, Narumi H, Uchida N, Yakushijin Y, Hato T, Fujita S,
Yasukawa M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine,
Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan. ikusakai@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

The t(1;21)(p36;q22) is a recurrent chromosome abnormality associated with
therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Although involvement of RUNX1 has
been detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, the partner gene
has not been reported previously. We identified a novel RUNX1 partner gene,
MDS1/EVI1-like-gene 1 (PRDM16), in an AML patient with t(1;21). Alternative
splicing of the fusion gene generates five different fusion transcripts. In two
of them, the PRDM16 reading frame is maintained in the fusion with RUNX1,
suggesting that the RUNX1-PRDM16 gene fusion results in the production of a
protein that is highly homologous to the RUNX1-MDS1/EVI1 chimeric protein. It is 
suggested that PRDM16 and MDS1/EVI1 share a common molecular mechanism for the
leukemogenesis of RUNX1-associated leukemia. Characterization of the RUNX1-PRDM16
fusion protein and comparison with the RUNX1-MDS1/EVI1 protein will facilitate
the understanding of the mechanisms underlying RUNX1-associated leukemia.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16015645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Gene. 2005 Aug 15;356:160-8.

Regulation of the expression of the oncogene EVI1 through the use of alternative 
mRNA 5'-ends.

Aytekin M(1), Vinatzer U, Musteanu M, Raynaud S, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)KIMCL, Abteilung fuer Humangenetik, Medizinische Universitaet Wien,
Waehringerstr. 10, A-1090 Wien, Austria.

The EVI1 gene plays important roles in development and leukemogenesis. Recently, 
human EVI1 has been shown to give rise to at least six different mRNA variants
with alternative 5'-ends, only some of which are conserved in mice. In order to
gain a basic understanding of the regulation and potential biological importance 
of these alternative transcripts, we confirmed their expression by Northern blot,
and, using real time quantitative RT-PCR, compared their abundance and stability 
under different conditions. The general expression patterns of the EVI1 5'-end
variants in a panel of 20 human tissues were similar, but particularly high or
low levels of some of them were noted in certain tissues. Pronounced differences 
in the expression of the 5'-end variants were noted in response to all-trans
retinoic acid: in a human teratocarcinoma cell line, only the EVI1 transcript
variants containing alternative exons 1a and 1b were upregulated in response to
this agent. This induction required transcriptional activity of RNA polymerase,
but was also associated with a substantial increase in the stability of these
mRNA variants.

PMID: 16014322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 2;280(35):30712-22. Epub 2005 Jul 8.

Identification of binding sites of EVI1 in mammalian cells.

Yatsula B(1), Lin S, Read AJ, Poholek A, Yates K, Yue D, Hui P, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510-8023, USA.

The leukemia-associated protein EVI1 possesses seven zinc fingers within an
N-terminal domain (amino acids 1-250) that binds to GACAAGATA. Single amino acid 
missense mutants of EVI1 were developed that failed to bind DNA either in vitro, 
as assessed by gel shift assay, or in vivo, as shown by transactivation studies. 
Specifically, mutation R205N lacks high affinity binding to the GACAAGATA motif. 
Putative EVI1 target genes were identified by using an EVI1-(1-250)-VP16 fusion
protein that acts as a transcriptional activator with the binding specificity of 
EVI1. Sixteen genes induced in NIH 3T3 cells by wild type EVI1-VP16 but not by
mutant forms were identified. Sequence analysis revealed evolutionarily conserved
GACAAGATA-like motifs within 10 kb of their transcription start sites, and by
chromatin immunoprecipitation in fibroblasts, we showed occupancy of many of
these sites by EVI1-VP16. To assess whether native EVI1 binds to these sites in
EVI1-transformed myeloid cells, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation in
32Dcl3 and NFS58 cells, using anti-EVI1 antisera, and we showed that the majority
of these sites is bound by wild type EVI1. These putative target genes include
Gadd45g, Gata2, Zfpm2/Fog2, Skil (SnoN), Klf5 (BTEB2), Dcn, and Map3k14 (Nik). In
this study we demonstrated for the first time that the N-terminal DNA binding
domain of EVI1 has the capacity to bind to endogenous genes. We hypothesized that
these genes play a critical role in EVI1-induced transformation.

PMID: 16006653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2005 Jun 18;37(3):236-9.

[Role of molecular screening for common fusion genes in the diagnosis and
classification of leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu YL(1), Zhang Y, Zhu P, Yang Y, Du JW, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the value of common fusion genes analysis in the diagnosis
and classification of leukemia by multiplex RT-PCR.
METHODS: The multiplex RT-PCR, including 8 parallel PCR reactions, could screen
86 mRNA breakpoints or splice variants at the same time, which was important for 
the diagnosis and prognosis of leukemia. Bone marrow samples from 161 cases of
leukemia and 8 cases of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) were involved in the
study. The distribution of common fusion genes in leukemia was analyzed by the
method mentioned above in combination with clinical and morphological features.
RESULTS: Ten fusion genes were detected in 115 cases of leukemia, including
AML1/ETO, PML/RAR alpha, PLZF/RAR alpha, dupMLL, MLL/AF6, MLL/AF10,
CBFbeta/MYH11, BCR/ABL, Hox11, and EVI1 BCR/ABL was positive in all the 52 cases 
of chronic myeloid leukemia; PML/RAR alpha was found in 21 of 25 acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), and PLZF/RAR alpha was detected in one case of APL.
Sixteen cases of 17 AML1/ETO-positive acute leukemia (AL) belonged to FAB-M2
subtype, and one case was mixed leukemia. Three of 4 AL cases carrying
CBFbeta/MYH11 were M4 subtype, and one was M5 subtype. MLL aberrations were found
in 16 AL, in which all MLL/AF6 translocation existed in M5 subtype with classic
monoblastic characters. Furthermore, BCR/ABL was detected in 5 acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cases. Fusion genes were also found in 2 MDS cases, 
of which AML1/ETO positive-MDS-RAEB progressed to AML rapidly.
CONCLUSION: Screening of common fusion genes by multiplex RT-PCR is an important 
tool which could provide useful and reliable molecular genetic information for
the diagnosis and treatment of leukemia.

PMID: 15968309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Oncol Rep. 2005 Jul;14(1):287-90.

Comparative genomics on FGF20 orthologs.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

We cloned and characterized human FGF20 in August, 2000. Ohmachi et al claimed
the same gene as a novel FGF family member in October, 2000, and Jeffers et al in
April, 2001. FGF20 is up-regulated in colorectal cancer due to the activation of 
WNT/beta-catenin pathway. FGF20 is applicable as the mucosal protective agent for
inflammatory bowel disease and chemotherapy/radiation-induced oral mucositis, and
also as the inducer of dopaminergic neurons for Parkinson's disease. FGF20 is a
target of pharmacogenomics in the field of oncology and regenerative medicine.
Here, comparative genomics analyses on FGF20 orthologs were performed. Zebrafish 
fgf20 gene, consisting of three exons, was located within BX323810.8 genome
sequence. Zebrafish fgf20 (208 aa) showed 76.9%, 76.4%, 76.0% and 75.5%
total-amino-acid identity with human FGF20, Xenopus fgf20, rat Fgf20 and mouse
Fgf20, respectively. Fgf20 orthologs were well conserved among vertebrates. Human
FGF20 gene was linked to EFHA2 gene in head-to-head manner with an interval of
about 25 kb. FGF20-EFHA2 locus at human chromosome 8p22 and FGF9-EFHA1 locus at
human chromosome 13q12.11 were paralogous regions (paralogons) within the human
genome. The 5'-flanking promoter region, exonic regions except 3'-UTR, and middle
regions within intron 1 were conserved between human FGF20 and mouse Fgf20 genes.
Double TCF/LEF binding sites, double EVI1-binding sites, TGIF, PAX4, E47 and
AREB6-binding sites were conserved between human FGF20 promoter and mouse Fgf20
promoter.

PMID: 15944804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Oncol Rep. 2005 Jul;14(1):291-4.

Comparative genomics on Fgf11 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Human FGF19 is the ortholog of rodent Fgf15, and 22 FGF family genes exist within
the human genome as well as within the rodent genome. Mouse Fgf11 refSeq
NM_010198.1 and rat Fgf11 RefSeq NM_130816.1 correspond only to the coding
region. Here, complete coding sequences of mouse, rat and dog Fgf11 orthologs
were determined by using bioinformatics. Mouse Fgf11, rat Fgf11 and dog Fgf11
genes, consisting of five exons, were located within AL603707.5, AC098923.8 and
AC126237.5 genome sequences, respectively. Human FGF11 showed 97.8%, 96.9%, 96.9%
and 68.9% total-amino-acid identity with dog, mouse, rat and zebrafish Fgf11
orthologs, respectively. Rat Fgf11 showed Val205Met amino-acid substitution
compared with rat Fgf11 RefSeq NP_570829.1. Met 205 of rat Fgf11 determined in
this study was conserved among vertebrate Fgf11 orthologs. N-terminal signal
peptide was not identified within vertebrate Fgf11 orthologs. Two Asn-linked
glycosylation sites were identified within zebrafish fgf11, but not within
mammalian Fgf11 orthologs. The 5'-flanking region, exonic regions, and intronic
regions except intron 3 were well conserved between human FGF11 and mouse Fgf11
genes. Match program revealed that EVI1, ELK1, AP1 and E47-binding sites were
conserved between human FGF11 and mouse Fgf11 promoter regions. Human FGF11 mRNA 
was expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells, neuroblastoma, retinoblastoma, and
brain tumors. This is the first report on the dog Fgf11 gene as well as on
comparative genomics analyses of Fgf11 orthologs.

PMID: 15944803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Blood. 2005 Oct 1;106(7):2530-3. Epub 2005 Jun 2.

Recurrent retroviral vector integration at the Mds1/Evi1 locus in nonhuman
primate hematopoietic cells.

Calmels B(1), Ferguson C, Laukkanen MO, Adler R, Faulhaber M, Kim HJ, Sellers S, 
Hematti P, Schmidt M, von Kalle C, Akagi K, Donahue RE, Dunbar CE.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD,
USA.

Recent reports linking insertional activation of LMO2 following gene therapy for 
X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID) have led to a re-evaluation of
risks following gene therapy with retroviral vectors. In our analysis of 702
integration sites in rhesus macaques that underwent transplantation up to 7 years
earlier with autologous CD34+ cells transduced with amphotropic murine leukemia
virus (MLV)-derived retroviral vectors containing marker genes, we detected
insertion into one locus, the Mds1/Evi1 region, a total of 14 times in 9 animals.
Mds1/Evi1 integrations were observed stably long term, primarily in myeloid
cells. We hypothesize that this over-representation likely results from an impact
on the self-renewal and engraftment potential of CD34+ progenitor cells via
insertional mutagenesis at this specific locus. There is no evidence of ongoing
in vivo clonal expansion of the Mds1/Evi1 populations, and all animals are
hematologically normal without evidence for leukemia. Characterization of
integration sites in this relevant preclinical model provides critical
information for gene therapy risk assessment as well as identification of genes
controlling hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC1895268
PMID: 15933056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Blood. 2005 Sep 15;106(6):2147-55. Epub 2005 May 24.

Dysplastic definitive hematopoiesis in AML1/EVI1 knock-in embryos.

Maki K(1), Yamagata T, Asai T, Yamazaki I, Oda H, Hirai H, Mitani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, 880
Kitakobayashi, Mibu-machi, Shimotsuga-gun, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan.

The AML1/EVI1 chimeric gene is created by the t(3;21)(q26;q22) chromosomal
translocation seen in patients with leukemic transformation of myelodysplastic
syndrome or blastic crisis of chronic myelogenous leukemia. We knocked-in the
AML1/EVI1 chimeric gene into mouse Aml1 genomic locus to explore its effect in
developmental hematopoiesis in vivo. AML1/EVI1/+ embryo showed defective
hematopoiesis in the fetal liver and died around embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) as a 
result of hemorrhage in the central nervous system. The peripheral blood had
yolk-sac-derived nucleated erythroblasts but lacked erythrocytes of the
definitive origin. Although E12.5 fetal liver contained progenitors for
macrophage only, E13.5 fetal liver contained multilineage progenitors capable of 
differentiating into dysplastic myelocyte and megakaryocyte. No erythroid
progenitor was detected in E12.5 or E13.5 fetal liver. Hematopoietic progenitors 
from E13.5 AML1/EVI1/+ fetal liver were highly capable of self-renewal compared
with those from wild-type liver. Maintained expression of PU.1 gene and decreased
expression of LMO2 and SCL genes may explain the aberrant hematopoiesis in
AML1/EVI1/+ fetal liver.

PMID: 15914564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Science. 2005 May 20;308(5725):1171-4.

Clonal dominance of hematopoietic stem cells triggered by retroviral gene
marking.

Kustikova O(1), Fehse B, Modlich U, Yang M, Düllmann J, Kamino K, von Neuhoff N, 
Schlegelberger B, Li Z, Baum C.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Transplantation, University Hospital Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52,
20251 Hamburg, Germany.

Gene marking with replication-defective retroviral vectors has been used for more
than 20 years to track the in vivo fate of cell clones. We demonstrate that
retroviral integrations themselves may trigger nonmalignant clonal expansion in
murine long-term hematopoiesis. All 29 insertions recovered from clones
dominating in serially transplanted recipients affected loci with an established 
or potential role in the self-renewal or survival of hematopoietic stem cells.
Transcriptional dysregulation occurred in all 12 insertion sites analyzed. These 
findings have major implications for diagnostic gene marking and the discovery of
genes regulating stem cell turnover.

PMID: 15905401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Gene Expr Patterns. 2005 Jun;5(5):601-8.

Evi-1 expression in Xenopus.

Mead PE(1), Parganas E, Ohtsuka S, Morishita K, Gamer L, Kuliyev E, Wright CV,
Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105, USA. paul.mead@stjude.org

The Evi-1 gene was first identified as a site for viral integration in murine
myeloid leukemia. Evi-1 is a zinc finger transcription factor that has been
implicated in the development of myeloid neoplasia. In humans, disruption of the 
Evi-1 locus, by chromosomal rearrangements, is associated with myeloid leukemia
and myelodyplastic syndromes. Here, we report the cloning and developmental
pattern of expression of Xenopus Evi-1. xEvi-1 is expressed during oogenesis and 
during embryonic development. In situ hydridization reveals that xEvi-1 has a
dynamic expression profile during early embryonic development. Expression of
Evi-1 is detected by in situ hybridization in the pronephric tissue, the brain
and in neural crest derivatives of the head and neck.

PMID: 15905132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. EMBO J. 2005 Jun 1;24(11):1976-87. Epub 2005 May 12.

Oncogenic transcription factor Evi1 regulates hematopoietic stem cell
proliferation through GATA-2 expression.

Yuasa H(1), Oike Y, Iwama A, Nishikata I, Sugiyama D, Perkins A, Mucenski ML,
Suda T, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Differentiation, The Sakaguchi Laboratory, School of
Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

The ecotropic viral integration site-1 (Evi1) is an oncogenic transcription
factor in murine and human myeloid leukemia. We herein show that Evi1 is
predominantly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in embryos and adult
bone marrows, suggesting a physiological role of Evi1 in HSCs. We therefore
investigate the role and authentic target genes of Evi1 in hematopoiesis using
Evi1-/- mice, which die at embryonic day 10.5. HSCs in Evi1-/- embryos are
markedly decreased in numbers in vivo with defective self-renewing proliferation 
and repopulating capacity. Notably, expression rate of GATA-2 mRNA, which is
essential for proliferation of definitive HSCs, is profoundly reduced in HSCs of 
Evi1-/- embryos. Restoration of the Evi1 or GATA-2 expression in Evi1-/- HSCs
could prevent the failure of in vitro maintenance and proliferation of HSC
through upregulation of GATA-2 expression. An analysis of the GATA-2 promoter
region revealed that Evi1 directly binds to GATA-2 promoter as an enhancer. Our
results reveal that GATA-2 is presumably one of critical targets for Evi1 and
that transcription factors regulate the HSC pool hierarchically.

PMCID: PMC1142611
PMID: 15889140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Blood. 2005 Aug 15;106(4):1154-63. Epub 2005 May 3.

Drug therapy for acute myeloid leukemia.

Tallman MS(1), Gilliland DG, Rowe JM.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, 676 N St Clair 
St, Ste 850, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. m-tallman@northwestern.edu

Erratum in
    Blood. 2005 Oct 1;106(7):2243.

Although improvement in outcomes has occurred in younger adults with acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) during the past 4 decades, progress in older adults has
been much less conspicuous, if at all. Approximately 50% to 75% of adults with
AML achieve complete remission (CR) with cytarabine and an anthracycline such as 
daunorubicin or idarubicin or the anthracenedione mitoxantrone. However, only
approximately 20% to 30% of the patients enjoy long-term disease survival.
Various postremission strategies have been explored to eliminate minimal residual
disease. The optimal dose, schedule, and number of cycles of postremission
chemotherapy for most patients are not known. A variety of prognostic factors can
predict outcome and include the karyotype of the leukemic cells and the presence 
of transmembrane transporter proteins, which extrude certain chemotherapy agents 
from the cell and confer multidrug resistance and mutations in or over
expressions of specific genes such as WT1, CEBPA, BAX and the ratio of BCL2 to
BAX, BAALC, EVI1, KIT, and FLT3. Most recently, insights into the molecular
pathogenesis of AML have led to the development of more specific targeted agents 
and have ushered in an exciting new era of antileukemia therapy. Such agents
include the immunoconjugate gemtuzumab ozogamicin, multidrug resistance
inhibitors, farnesyl transferase inhibitors, histone deacetylase and proteosome
inhibitors, antiangiogenesis agents, Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3)
inhibitors, and apoptosis inhibitors.

PMID: 15870183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Mar 7;11(9):1267-72.

Copy number changes of target genes in chromosome 3q25.3-qter of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma: TP63 is amplified in early carcinogenesis but
down-regulated as disease progressed.

Yen CC(1), Chen YJ, Pan CC, Lu KH, Chen PC, Hsia JY, Chen JT, Wu YC, Hsu WH, Wang
LS, Huang MH, Huang BS, Hu CP, Chen PM, Lin CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital and National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan,
China.

AIM: By using comparative genomic hybridization, gain of 3q was found in 45-86%
cases of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (EC-SCC). Chromosome 3q25.3-qter is
the minimal common region with several oncogenes found within this region.
However, amplification patterns of these genes in EC-SCC have never been
reported. The possible association of copy number changes of these genes with
pathologic characteristics is still not clear.
METHODS: Real-time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) was performed to analyze the copy
number changes of 13 candidate genes within this region in 60 primary tumors of
EC-SCC, and possible association of copy number changes with pathologic
characteristics was analyzed by statistics. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) study was 
also performed on another set of 111 primary tumors of EC-SCC to verify the
association between TP63 expression change and lymph node metastasis status.
RESULTS: The average copy numbers (+/-SE) per haploid genome of individual genes 
in 60 samples were (from centromere to telomere): SSR3: 4.19 (+/-0.69); CCNL1:
5.24 (+/-0.67); SMC4L1: 2.01 (+/-0.16); EVI1: 2.02 (+/-0.12); hTERC: 5.28
(+/-0.54); SKIL: 2.71 (+/-0.14); EIF5A2: 1.95 (+/-0.12); ECT2: 9.18 (+/-1.68);
PIK3CA: 8.13 (+/-1.17); EIF4G1: 1.07 (+/-0.05); SST: 3.07 (+/-0.25); TP63: 2.51
(+/-0.22); TFRC: 2.42 (+/-0.19). Four clusters of amplification were found: SSR3 
and CCLN1 at 3q25.31; hTERC and SKIL at 3q26.2; ECT2 and PIK3CA at
3q26.31-q26.32; and SST, TP63 and TFRC at 3q27.3-q29. Patients with lymph node
metastasis had significantly lower copy number of TP63 in the primary tumor than 
those without lymph node metastasis. IHC study on tissue arrays also showed that 
patients with lymph node metastasis have significantly lower TP63 staining score 
in the primary tumor than those without lymph node metastasis.
CONCLUSION: This study showed that different amplification patterns were seen
among different genes within 3q25.3-qter in EC-SCC, and several novel candidate
oncogenes (SSR3, SMC4L1, ECT2, and SST) were identified. TP63 is amplified in
early stage of EC-SCC carcinogenesis but down-regulated in advanced stage of
disease.

PMCID: PMC4250671
PMID: 15761962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Curr Hematol Rep. 2005 Jan;4(1):59-63.

Arsenic trioxide as a treatment for myelodysplastic syndrome.

Sekeres MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195,USA. sekerem@ccf.org

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a heterogeneous bone marrow disorder primarily 
affecting older adults, for whom the only curative therapy, bone marrow
transplantation, is rarely an option. New therapies, or novel applications of
historical therapies, are desperately needed. Arsenic trioxide (ATO), which acts 
through pro-apoptotic, antiproliferative, and anti-angiogenesis mechanisms, has
been used successfully to treat a variety of hematologic malignancies, including 
MDS. As monotherapy or in combination with other agents, it can effect
hematologic improvement in 22% to 26% of patients, with tolerable side effects.
MDS patients whose cells express the EVI1 mutation in particular may derive
benefit from this therapy.

PMID: 15610661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 7;280(1):428-36. Epub 2004 Nov 1.

EVI1 abrogates interferon-alpha response by selectively blocking PML induction.

Buonamici S(1), Li D, Mikhail FM, Sassano A, Platanias LC, Colamonici O, Anastasi
J, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Center, University of Illinois, Chicago,
Illinois 60607, USA.

EVI1 is an oncogene frequently associated with chronic and acute myeloid
leukemia. In hematopoietic cells, EVI1 impairs several pathways including
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) is a 
powerful cytokine that controls the immune response and limits the expansion of
several tissues including bone marrow. These properties contribute to the
effectiveness of IFN-alpha in the treatment of many neoplastic disorders
especially chronic myeloid leukemia. We report here that in murine hematopoietic 
progenitors the expression of EVI1 completely abrogates the antiproliferative and
apoptotic effects of IFN-alpha. EVI1 does not repress the JAK/STAT signaling
pathway or the activation of many IFN-responsive genes. On the contrary, EVI1
prolongs the phosphorylation of STAT1 and the activation of an IFN-dependent
reporter gene. However, EVI1 specifically represses the IFN-dependent induction
of the tumor suppressor PML and blocks the apoptotic pathways activated by PML.
We show that the position of the ISRE, which is located within the first exon of 
PML, is critical to block PML induction by IFN-alpha. The relocation of the ISRE 
to a position upstream of the transcription start site is sufficient to
re-establish the response to IFN in the presence of EVI1. Our data suggest that
stabilized STAT1 phosphorylation and prolonged binding of the STAT1 complex to
the first exon could impair PML transcription and inhibit the activation of
PML-dependent apoptotic pathways resulting in loss of IFN response. These results
point to a novel mechanism utilized by an oncogene to escape normal cell response
to growth-controlling cytokines.

PMID: 15519999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Clin Invest. 2004 Sep;114(5):713-9.

EVI1 induces myelodysplastic syndrome in mice.

Buonamici S(1), Li D, Chi Y, Zhao R, Wang X, Brace L, Ni H, Saunthararajah Y,
Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Center, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2005 Aug;115(8):2296.

Myelodysplasia is a hematological disease in which genomic abnormalities
accumulate in a hematopoietic stem cell leading to severe pancytopenia,
multilineage differentiation impairment, and bone marrow (BM) apoptosis.
Mortality in the disease results from pancytopenia or transformation to acute
myeloid leukemia. There are frequent cytogenetic abnormalities, including
deletions of chromosomes 5, 7, or both. Recurring chromosomal translocations in
myelodysplasia are rare, but the most frequent are the t(3;3)(q21;q26) and the
inv(3)(q21q26), which lead to the inappropriate activation of the EVI1 gene
located at 3q26. To better understand the role of EVI1 in this disease, we have
generated a murine model of EVI1-positive myelodysplasia by BM infection and
transplantation. We find that EVI1 induces a fatal disease of several stages that
is characterized by severe pancytopenia. The disease does not progress to acute
myeloid leukemia. Comparison of in vitro and in vivo results suggests that EVI1
acts at two levels. The immediate effects of EVI1 are hyperproliferation of BM
cells and downregulation of EpoR and c-Mpl, which are important for terminal
erythroid differentiation and platelet formation. These defects are not fatal,
and the mice survive for about 10 months with compensated hematopoiesis. Over
this time, compensation fails, and the mice succumb to fatal peripheral
cytopenia.

PMCID: PMC514587
PMID: 15343390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Sep 7;101(36):13312-7. Epub 2004 Aug 23.

The leukemic fusion gene AML1-MDS1-EVI1 suppresses CEBPA in acute myeloid
leukemia by activation of Calreticulin.

Helbling D(1), Mueller BU, Timchenko NA, Hagemeijer A, Jotterand M, Meyer-Monard 
S, Lister A, Rowley JD, Huegli B, Fey MF, Pabst T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Oncology, University Hospital, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland.

The leukemic fusion gene AML1-MDS1-EVI1 (AME) encodes a chimeric transcription
factor that results from the t(3,21)(q26;q22) translocation seen in patients with
acute myeloid leukemia, with therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome, or with
chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis. The myeloid transcription factor CEBPA 
is crucial for normal granulopoiesis. Here, we found that conditional expression 
of AME suppresses CEBPA protein by 90.8% and DNA-binding activity by 93.9%. In
contrast, CEBPA mRNA levels remained unchanged. In addition, we detected no
differences in CEBPA mRNA levels in leukemic blasts of patients carrying the AME 
translocation (n = 8) compared to acute myeloid leukemia patients with a normal
karyotype (n = 9). CEBPA protein and binding activity, however, were reduced
significantly (100% and 92.1%, respectively) in AME patient samples. Furthermore,
we observed that calreticulin (CRT), a putative inhibitor of CEBPA translation,
was strongly activated after induction of AME in the cell-line system (14.8-fold)
and in AME patient samples (12.2-fold). Moreover, inhibition of CRT by small
interfering RNA powerfully restored CEBPA levels. These results identify CEBPA as
a key target of the leukemic fusion protein AME and suggest that modulation of
CEBPA by CRT may represent a mechanism involved in the differentiation block in
AME leukemias.

PMCID: PMC516564
PMID: 15326310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Ann Hematol. 2004 Dec;83(12):784-8. Epub 2004 Aug 18.

Myeloid/natural killer cell blast crisis representing an additional
translocation, t(3;7)(q26;q21) in Philadelphia-positive chronic myelogenous
leukemia.

Henzan H(1), Yoshimoto G, Okeda A, Nagasaki Y, Hirano G, Takase K, Tanimoto T,
Miyamoto T, Fukuda T, Nagafuji K, Harada M.

Author information: 
(1)Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan.

We encountered a patient in blast crisis (BC) with chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML) who showed immunophenotypic features similar to those previously described 
in acute myeloid/natural killer (NK) cell precursor leukemia. The blasts were
positive for CD7, CD33, CD34, and CD56. Cytogenetic analysis disclosed a
Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and t(3;7)(q26;q21). Molecular analysis did not
detect any EVI1/CDK6 chimeric transcript generated by t(3;7)(q26;q21), but did
indicate overexpression of EVI1, which occurs frequently in progression to
myeloid BC in CML. Three cases of myeloid/NK cell precursor BC in CML have been
reported, but this case is the first to present with Ph and EVI1 abnormality.
These observations suggested that a myeloid/NK cell precursor might have been
involved in the Ph-positive clone and have been a target for blastic
transformation of CML, although EVI1 expression is not specific for
transformation to BC from myeloid/NK lineage.

PMID: 15322764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Leuk Res. 2004 Aug;28(8):791-803.

Arsenic trioxide and thalidomide combination produces multi-lineage hematological
responses in myelodysplastic syndromes patients, particularly in those with high 
pre-therapy EVI1 expression.

Raza A(1), Buonamici S, Lisak L, Tahir S, Li D, Imran M, Chaudary NI, Pervaiz H, 
Gallegos JA, Alvi MI, Mumtaz M, Gezer S, Venugopal P, Reddy P, Galili N, Candoni 
A, Singer J, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Myeloid Diseases and MDS Center, Rush University,
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, 2242 West Harrison Street, Suite
108, Chicago, IL 60612-3515, USA. azra_raza@rush.edu

Twenty-eight myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) patients were treated with arsenic
trioxide (ATO) and thalidomide. Seven patients responded including one complete
hematologic and cytogenetic response and one with regression in spleen size. Two 
trilineage responses were seen in patients with inv(3)(q21q26.2). Three of five
patients who had high pre-therapy EVI1 levels showed unexpectedly good responses 
while two died early in the first cycle. In vitro studies using 32Dcl3 cells
forced to express EVI1 confirmed increased sensitivity of these cells to ATO.
Both low/high risk MDS may benefit significantly from therapy with
ATO/thalidomide, and those with high pre-therapy EVI1 expression may be uniquely 
sensitive.

PMID: 15203277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Jul;40(3):179-89.

Molecular heterogeneity in AML/MDS patients with 3q21q26 rearrangements.

Lahortiga I(1), Vázquez I, Agirre X, Larrayoz MJ, Vizmanos JL, Gozzetti A,
Calasanz MJ, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Patients with 3q21q26 rearrangements seem to share similar clinicopathologic
features and a common molecular mechanism, leading to myelodysplasia or acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). The ectopic expression of EVI1 (3q26) has been implicated
in the dysplasia that characterizes this subset of myeloid neoplasias. However,
lack of EVI1 expression has been reported in several cases, and overexpression of
EVI1 was detected in 9% of AML cases without 3q26 abnormalities. We report the
molecular characterization of seven patients with inv(3)(q21q26), t(3;3)(q21;q26)
or related abnormalities. EVI1 expression was detected in only one case, and thus
ectopic expression of this gene failed to explain all of these cases. GATA2
(3q21) was found to be overexpressed in 5 of the 7 patients. GATA2 is highly
expressed in stem cells, and its expression dramatically decreases when erythroid
and megakaryocytic differentiation proceeds. No mutations in GATA1 were found in 
any patient, excluding loss of function of GATA1 as the cause of GATA2
overexpression. We report finding molecular heterogeneity in patients with
3q21q26 rearrangements in both breakpoints and in the expression pattern of the
genes near these breakpoints. Our data suggest that a unique mechanism is not
likely to be involved in 3q21q26 rearrangements.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15138998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Leukemia. 2004 Jun;18(6):1108-14.

Translocation t(2;3)(p15-23;q26-27) in myeloid malignancies: report of 21 new
cases, clinical, cytogenetic and molecular genetic features.

Stevens-Kroef M(1), Poppe B, van Zelderen-Bhola S, van den Berg E, van der
Blij-Philipsen M, Geurts van Kessel A, Slater R, Hamers G, Michaux L, Speleman F,
Hagemeijer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, The
Netherlands.

Chromosomal rearrangements involving 3q26 either due to inversion or
translocation with various partner chromosomes are a recurrent finding in
malignant myeloid disorders. Typically, these chromosome aberrations contribute
to ectopic expression of or to the formation of fusion genes involving the EVI1
proto-oncogene. Chromosomal translocations involving the short arm of chromosome 
2 (p15-p23) and the distal part of the long arm of chromosome 3 (q26-q27) are a
rare but recurrent finding in patients with myeloid malignancies, and are assumed
to be part of this spectrum of disorders. Thus far, however, these translocations
have been poorly studied. Here, we present 21 new cases with myelodysplasia,
acute myeloid leukemia or CML in blast crisis, which upon karyotyping showed the 
presence of a t(2;3). Furthermore, an extensive literature review disclosed 29
additional cases. Morphological, clinical and cytogenetic assessment revealed the
typical hallmarks of 3q26/EVI1 rearrangements, that is, trilineage dysplasia and 
dysmegakaryopoiesis, poor prognosis and additional monosomy 7. Molecular
cytogenetic analysis and PCR in selected samples indicated that in most cases the
translocation indeed targets the EVI1 locus. Mapping of the chromosome 2
breakpoints confirmed the initially suspected cytogenetic breakpoint
heterogeneity at the 2p arm.

PMID: 15085164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. N Engl J Med. 2004 Apr 15;350(16):1617-28.

Prognostically useful gene-expression profiles in acute myeloid leukemia.

Valk PJ(1), Verhaak RG, Beijen MA, Erpelinck CA, Barjesteh van Waalwijk van
Doorn-Khosrovani S, Boer JM, Beverloo HB, Moorhouse MJ, van der Spek PJ,
Löwenberg B, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. p.valk@erasmusmc.nl

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Apr 15;350(16):1676-8.
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Apr 15;350(16):1595-7.

BACKGROUND: In patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) a combination of
methods must be used to classify the disease, make therapeutic decisions, and
determine the prognosis. However, this combined approach provides correct
therapeutic and prognostic information in only 50 percent of cases.
METHODS: We determined the gene-expression profiles in samples of peripheral
blood or bone marrow from 285 patients with AML using Affymetrix U133A GeneChips 
containing approximately 13,000 unique genes or expression-signature tags. Data
analyses were carried out with Omniviz, significance analysis of microarrays, and
prediction analysis of microarrays software. Statistical analyses were performed 
to determine the prognostic significance of cases of AML with specific molecular 
signatures.
RESULTS: Unsupervised cluster analyses identified 16 groups of patients with AML 
on the basis of molecular signatures. We identified the genes that defined these 
clusters and determined the minimal numbers of genes needed to identify
prognostically important clusters with a high degree of accuracy. The clustering 
was driven by the presence of chromosomal lesions (e.g., t(8;21), t(15;17), and
inv(16)), particular genetic mutations (CEBPA), and abnormal oncogene expression 
(EVI1). We identified several novel clusters, some consisting of specimens with
normal karyotypes. A unique cluster with a distinctive gene-expression signature 
included cases of AML with a poor treatment outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene-expression profiling allows a comprehensive classification of
AML that includes previously identified genetically defined subgroups and a novel
cluster with an adverse prognosis.

Copyright 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMID: 15084694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2003;103(1-2):202D.

Assignment of the chicken orthologue of the human protooncogene EVI1 (Ectotropic 
viral integration site 1) to chromosome GGA 9qter. Conserved and compared synteny
between avian, mouse and human.

Coullin P, Wittzell H, Morin V, Zoorob R.

PMID: 15008144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Oncogene. 2004 Jan 15;23(2):569-79.

Both AML1 and EVI1 oncogenic components are required for the cooperation of
AML1/MDS1/EVI1 with BCR/ABL in the induction of acute myelogenous leukemia in
mice.

Cuenco GM(1), Ren R.

Author information: 
(1)Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, Department of Biology,
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454-9110, USA.

We have previously shown that BCR/ABL, a fusion protein generated by the
t(9;22)(q34;q11) translocation found in the vast majority of chronic myelogenous 
leukemia (CML), cooperates with AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME), a fusion transcription
factor generated by a t(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation identified as a secondary
mutation in some cases of CML during the blast phase (CML-BC), in the rapid
induction of an acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) in mice. In this study, we
evaluated the leukemogenic potential of EVI1-, MDS1/EVI1- and AML1-related
oncoproteins (AML1Delta, AML1/MDS1). We found that ectopic expression of either
EVI1 or MDS1/EVI1 impaired hematopoiesis. However, neither EVI1 nor MDS1/EVI1 was
sufficient for inducing AML in mice, although EVI1 did induce some hematologic
neoplasia other than AML with a low efficiency. In addition, unlike AME, none of 
the EVI1- or AML1-related oncoproteins examined were capable of fully cooperating
with BCR/ABL in the induction of AML. The results indicate that both the AML1 and
EVI1 oncogenic components are required for the leukemogenic potential of AME and 
for the cooperation of AME and BCR/ABL in the induction of AML.

PMID: 14724585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Oncogene. 2004 Jan 8;23(1):311-6.

Molecular characterization of a t(1;3)(p36;q21) in a patient with MDS. MEL1 is
widely expressed in normal tissues, including bone marrow, and it is not
overexpressed in the t(1;3) cells.

Lahortiga I(1), Agirre X, Belloni E, Vázquez I, Larrayoz MJ, Gasparini P, Lo Coco
F, Pelicci PG, Calasanz MJ, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Navarra, C/Irunlarrea s/n, Pamplona
31008, Spain.

Patients with myeloid malignancies and either the 3q21q26 syndrome or
t(1;3)(p36;q21) have been reported to share similar clinicopathological features 
and a common molecular mechanism for leukemogenesis. Overexpression of MDS1/EVI1 
(3q26) or MEL1/PRDM16 (1p36), both members of the PR-domain family, has been
directly implicated in the malignant transformation of this subset of neoplasias.
The breakpoints in both entities are outside the genes, and the 3q21 region,
where RPN1 is located, seems to act as an enhancer. MEL1 has been reported to be 
expressed in leukemia cells with t(1;3) and in the normal uterus and fetal
kidney, but neither in bone marrow (BM) nor in other tissues, suggesting that
this gene is specific to t(1;3)-positive MDS/AML. We report the molecular
characterization of a t(1;3)(p36;q21) in a patient with MDS (RAEB-2). In contrast
to previous studies, we demonstrate that MEL1, the PR-containing form, and MEL1S,
the PR-lacking form, are widely expressed in normal tissues, including BM. The
clinicopathological features and the breakpoint on 1p36 are different from cases 
previously described, and MEL1 is not overexpressed, suggesting a heterogeneity
in myeloid neoplasias with t(1;3).

PMID: 14712237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Int J Hematol. 2003 Dec;78(5):432-8.

Molecular cytogenetic analyses of HIG, a novel human cell line carrying
t(1;3)(p36.3;q25.3) established from a patient with chronic myelogenous leukemia 
in blastic crisis.

Hosoya N(1), Ogawa S, Motokura T, Hangaishi A, Wang L, Qiao Y, Nannya Y, Kogi M, 
Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Chromosomal abnormalities involving 1p36, 3q21, and/or 3q26 have been reported in
a subset of myeloid neoplasms having characteristic dysmegakaryopoiesis, and the 
overexpression of EVI1 on 3q26 or of MEL1 on 1p36 has been implicated in their
pathogenesis. We describe molecular cytogenetic analyses of a novel human cell
line, HIG, established from a unique case in which a novel translocation
t(1;3)(p36;q26) appeared as the sole additional chromosomal abnormality at the
time of blastic transformation of chronic myelogenous leukemia. The patient
displayed clinical features resembling those of the 3q21q26 syndrome. The HIG
cell line retained der(1)t(1;3)(p36;q26) but lost t(9;22)(q34;q11). To identify
the relevant gene that would be deregulated by this translocation, we molecularly
cloned the translocation's breakpoints. They were distant from the breakpoint
cluster regions of the 3q21q26 syndrome or t(1;3)(p36;q21), and neither the EVI1 
nor the MEL1 transcript was detected in the HIG cell line. None of the genes
located within 150 kilobase pairs of the breakpoints were aberrantly expressed,
suggesting that in this case other gene(s) more distant from the breakpoints are 
deregulated by possible remote effects. Further analyses of the deregulated genes
in the HIG cell line should provide important insight into the mechanisms
involved in these types of leukemias.

PMID: 14704036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Haematologica. 2003 Dec;88(12):1427-9.

Deletion of sequences telomeric of the EVI1 gene in 3q26 associated with a novel 
pericentric inv(3)(p25q26) in a patient with acute myelogenous leukemia.

Wieser R, Lechner K, Valent P, Fonatsch C.

PMID: 14688000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Haematologica. 2003 Nov;88(11):1221-8.

Association of 3q21q26 syndrome with different RPN1/EVI1 fusion transcripts.

Martinelli G(1), Ottaviani E, Buonamici S, Isidori A, Borsaru G, Visani G,
Piccaluga PP, Malagola M, Testoni N, Rondoni M, Nucifora G, Tura S, Baccarani M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology and Medical Oncology "L. & A. Seràgnoli", University
of Bologna, Italy. gmartino@kaiser.alma.unibo.it

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Patients with acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML) with
features of myelodysplastic syndrome and abnormalities of megakaryocytopoiesis
often have cytogenetic aberrations of 3q21 and 3q26 bands involving the
paracentric inversion [inv(3) (q21q26)] or a reciprocal translocation [t(3;3)
(q21;q26)]. These abnormalities frequently cause inappropriate expression of the 
EVI1 gene located at 3q26. Other genes that have been implicated at the
rearrangement breakpoint are GR6 and RPN1 (both on 3q21). The aim of this study
was to investigate the expression of the EVI1 fusion genes in AML patients with
3q21q26 syndrome.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We used reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction to
evaluate the expression of EVI1 and GR6, and particularly of the fusion genes
RPN1-EVI1 and GR6-EVI1 in 9 AML patients with either inv(3)(q21q26) (7 cases) or 
t(3;3)(q21;q26) (2 cases).
RESULTS: EVI1 and GR6 were always expressed, as was RPN1-EVI1; GR6-EVI1 was
absent. In 8/9 patients, the part of EVI1 retained in RPN1-DEVI1 contained blocks
B and C of the PR domain commonly found in the MDS1-EVI1 gene. In the remaining
patient [with inv(3) (q21q26)], only block C was retained: we named this variant 
fusion gene RPN1-DEVI1. This patient lacked the micromegakaryocytopoiesis
frequently found in 3q21q26 syndrome.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: These findings support the hypothesis that EVI1
activation plays a dominant role in the pathogenesis of the 3q21q26 syndrome.
EVI1 expression might occur either as a consequence of rearrangements leading to 
the formation of different fusion transcripts, such as RPN1-EVI1 and RPN1-DEVI1
or following disruption of the PR activation domain of the MDS1-EVI1 gene.

PMID: 14607750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Exp Hematol. 2003 Nov;31(11):1066-72.

Low expression of MDS1-EVI1-like-1 (MEL1) and EVI1-like-1 (EL1) genes in
favorable-risk acute myeloid leukemia.

Barjesteh van Waalwijk van Doorn-Khosrovani S(1), Erpelinck C, Löwenberg B,
Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: The expression of an MDS1-EVI1-like-1 (MEL1) gene is reported in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with translocation
t(1;3)(p36;q21). MEL1 (at chromosome band 1p36.3) is thought to be
transcriptionally activated as a result of juxtaposition to the RPN1 gene at
3q21. It is not known whether MEL1 expression is restricted to cases with this
particular translocation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using real-time polymerase chain reaction, we measured
MEL1 expression levels, normal bone marrow, and distinct blood cell fractions in 
162 de novo AML patients. We also investigated the existence of an EVI1-like gene
(EL1) by applying the same method. The existence of these transcripts was
confirmed by Northern blot analysis.
RESULTS: MEL1 expression was detected in 87% (141/162) of de novo AML patients.
The EL1 transcript also was detected in the majority of the patients. EL1
expression levels highly correlated with MEL1 expression levels in AML cases.
Variable MEL1/EL1 expression levels were observed. However, all the patients with
favorable-risk karyotypes, i.e., with t(15;17), t(8;21), or inv(16), showed low
MEL1/EL1 expression levels. Expression analysis of MEL1/EL1 compared with
MDS1-EVI1/EVI1 in distinct normal marrow or blood cell fractions revealed that 1)
all four gene products are expressed in CD34(+) progenitor cell fractions; 2)
both MEL1 and EVI1 are turned down in neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages;
while 3) MDS1-EVI1 and EL1 remain expressed in mature blood cell fractions.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that simultaneous low MEL1/EL1 expression in AML is 
abnormal and that favorable disease is highly associated with this abnormal
phenotype.

PMID: 14585371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 15;9(13):4705-13.

TERC identified as a probable target within the 3q26 amplicon that is detected
frequently in non-small cell lung cancers.

Yokoi S(1), Yasui K, Iizasa T, Imoto I, Fujisawa T, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

PURPOSE: Cell lines derived from non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) revealed
frequent high-level gains of chromosomal DNA at 3q23-q29 when examined by
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). Within this amplicon, a minimal common
region of amplification in lung tumors had been mapped to 3q26 by earlier
studies. The aim of the present work was to identify specific targets of the 3q26
amplification in NSCLCs.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined genomic alterations in 19 NSCLC cell lines (10
derived from squamous cell carcinomas and 9 from adenocarcinomas) by using CGH
and fluorescence in situ hybridization. We determined amplification and
expression levels of four candidates (EVI1, TERC, SNO, and PIK3CA) in those cell 
lines and also in 25 primary NSCLC tumors. Because the TERC gene encodes the RNA 
component of human telomerase, we examined telomerase activity by the telomeric
repeat amplification protocol (TRAP) assay.
RESULTS: Copy numbers of EVI1 and TERC increased more than those of SNO and
PIK3CA in our panel of NSCLC cell lines. Significant correlation between
amplification and expression levels was observed only for TERC (P = 0.006),
however, among these four candidate genes. Expression of TERC was also
up-regulated in 24 (96%) of 25 primary NSCLC tumors compared with their
nontumorous counterparts (P = 0.0001), and elevated expression of TERC was
associated with high levels of telomerase activity (P = 0.048).
CONCLUSIONS: TERC is a likely target of the 3q26 amplification, and, therefore,
may be a useful biomarker for diagnosis and an attractive, novel target for
molecular therapy of NSCLC.

PMID: 14581340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 12;278(50):49806-11. Epub 2003 Oct 10.

EVI1 promotes cell proliferation by interacting with BRG1 and blocking the
repression of BRG1 on E2F1 activity.

Chi Y(1), Senyuk V, Chakraborty S, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and The Cancer Center, University of Illinois,
Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

EVI1 is a complex protein required for embryogenesis and inappropriately
expressed in many types of human myeloid leukemia. Earlier we showed that the
forced expression of EVI1 in murine hematopoietic precursor cells leads to their 
abnormal differentiation and increased proliferation. In this report, we show
that EVI1 physically interacts with BRG1 and its functional homolog BRM in
mammalian cells. We found that the C terminus of EVI1 interacts strongly with
BRG1 and that the central and C-terminal regions of BRG1 are involved in
EVI1-BRG1 interaction. Using reporter gene assays, we demonstrate that EVI1
activates the E2F1 promoter in NIH3T3 cells but not in BRG1-negative SW13 cells. 
Ectopic expression of BRG1 is able to repress the E2F1 promoter in
vector-transfected SW13 cells but not in EVI1-transfected SW13 cells. Finally, we
show that EVI1 up-regulates cell proliferation in BRG1-positive 32Dcl3 cells but 
not in BRG1-negative SW13 cells. Taken together, these data support the
hypothesis that the interaction with BRG1 is important for up-regulation of
cell-growth by EVI1.

PMID: 14555651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Ann Hematol. 2004 Feb;83(2):78-83. Epub 2003 Oct 10.

A novel chromosomal translocation t(3;7)(q26;q21) in myeloid leukemia resulting
in overexpression of EVI1.

Storlazzi CT(1), Anelli L, Albano F, Zagaria A, Ventura M, Rocchi M, Panagopoulos
I, Pannunzio A, Ottaviani E, Liso V, Specchia G.

Author information: 
(1)DAPEG, Section of Genetics, University of Bari, Via Amendola 165/A, 70126
Bari, Italy. c.storlazzi@biologia.uniba.it

The EVI1 proto-oncogene encodes a nuclear zinc finger protein that acts as a
transcription repressor factor. In myeloid leukemia it is often activated by
chromosomal rearrangements involving band 3q26, where the gene has been mapped.
Here we report two leukemia cases [a chronic myeloid leukemia blast crisis
(CML-BC) and an acute myeloid leukemia (AML) M4] showing a t(3;7)(q26;q21)
translocation in a balanced and unbalanced form, respectively. Fluorescent in
situ hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed that both patients showed a
breakpoint on chromosome 3 inside the clone RP11-33A1 containing the EVI1
oncogene and, on chromosome 7, inside the clone RP11-322M5, partially containing 
the CDK6 oncogene which is a D cyclin-dependent kinase gene, observed to be
overexpressed and disrupted in many hematological malignancies. Reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis showed overexpression
of EVI1 in both cases, but excluded the presence of any CDK6/ EVI1 fusion
transcript. CDK6 expression was also detected. Together, these data indicate that
EVI1 activation is likely due not to the generation of a novel fusion gene with
CDK6 but to a position effect dysregulating its transcriptional pattern.

PMID: 14551738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Hum Pathol. 2003 Aug;34(8):809-13.

Detection of NPM/MLF1 fusion in t(3;5)-positive acute myeloid leukemia and
myelodysplasia.

Arber DA(1), Chang KL, Lyda MH, Bedell V, Spielberger R, Slovak ML.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA, USA.

Balanced translocations are rare in myelodysplasia (MDS) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) with multilineage dysplasia; however, the t(3;5)(q25;q35) and
insertion variant occur in a subset of patients. To evaluate the possible genes
involved in this translocation, we studied 6 cases with a t(3;5) by fluorescence 
in situ hybridization with probes directed against the nucleophosmin (NPM), EVI1,
and Ribophorin genes, as well as a newly developed myeloid leukemia factor 1
(MLF1) BAC clone. The histologic spectrum of the cases was variable, ranging from
refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia to AML with multilineage
dysplasia in the World Health Organization classification. An NPM/MLF1 fusion was
identified in 5 of 6 cases, whereas the EVI1 and Ribophorin genes were not
involved in any of the cases. The NPM/MLF1-positive cases were predominantly
young adult males (median age, 33 years) who responded well to hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation. These findings suggest that an NPM/MLF1 fusion is the
primary molecular abnormality in t(3;5) MDS and AML with multilineage dysplasia, 
and also that cases with NPM/MLF1 may be clinically distinct from other
MDS-associated disease.

PMID: 14506644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2003 Sep-Oct;31(2):206-12.

The role of EVI1 in normal and leukemic cells.

Buonamici S(1), Chakraborty S, Senyuk V, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Center, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

One of the genes associated with both murine and human myeloid leukemia is EVI1
(ecotropic viral integration 1 site). EVI1 was first identified as a common locus
of retroviral integration in myeloid tumors found in AKXD mice. The exact
mechanism by which EVI1 induces leukemogenesis is not clear. Studies of the
function of EVI1 in the bone marrow and in cell lines have shown that the
inappropriate expression of EVI1 prohibits terminal differentiation of the bone
marrow progenitor cells in granulocytes and erythroid cells, but strongly favors 
hematopoietic differentiation along the megakaryocytic lineage. We summarize
recent data showing that EVI1 is a complex transcription factor with multiple
functions, and this complexity is further demonstrated by the ability of EVI1 to 
interact with coactivators and corepressors and to abrogate cellular response to 
cytokines.

PMID: 12972028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 8;307(4):980-6.

P/CAF and GCN5 acetylate the AML1/MDS1/EVI1 fusion oncoprotein.

Senyuk V(1), Sinha KK, Chakraborty S, Buonamici S, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Molecular Biology Research Building, M/C 737,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 900 South Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607,
USA.

Lysine acetyltransferases modulate the activity of many genes by modifying the
lysine residues of both core histones and transcription-related factors. These
modifications are tightly controlled in the cell because they are involved in
vital processes such as cell cycle progression, differentiation, and apoptosis.
Therefore, any deregulation of acetylation/deacetylation equilibrium or
inappropriate modifications could lead to different diseases. Since previous
studies have shown that some oncoproteins also undergo this modification,
acetylation could be involved in the processes of cell transformation and
oncogenesis. Here, we report that AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME), a repressor produced by
the t(3;21) associated with human leukemia, physically interacts with the
acetyltransferases P/CAF and GCN5. Our data suggest that AME has at least two
binding sites for these acetyltransferases, one of which is in the Runt domain.
Both P/CAF and GCN5 efficiently acetylate AME in vivo in the central region. AME 
acetylation has no effect on its interaction with the co-repressor CtBP1.
Finally, we demonstrate that the co-expression of AME and either P/CAF or GCN5
abrogates the repression of an AML1-dependent reporter gene.

PMID: 12878208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Blood. 2003 Nov 1;102(9):3323-32. Epub 2003 Jun 19.

A novel EVI1 gene family, MEL1, lacking a PR domain (MEL1S) is expressed mainly
in t(1;3)(p36;q21)-positive AML and blocks G-CSF-induced myeloid differentiation.

Nishikata I(1), Sasaki H, Iga M, Tateno Y, Imayoshi S, Asou N, Nakamura T,
Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Miyazaki Medical College, Kiyotake, Miyazaki,
889-1692, Japan. kmorishi@post.miyazaki-med.ac.jp

We have identified a novel gene MEL1 (MDS1/EVI1-like gene 1) encoding a zinc
finger protein near the breakpoint of t(1; 3)(p36;q21)-positive human acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. Here, we studied the structure, expression pattern,
and function of MEL1 in leukemia cells. In this study, we have identified 3
transcription start sites, 1 in exon 1 and 2 in exon 2, and 2 kinds of
translation products, 170 kDa (MEL1) and 150 kDa (MEL1S). Notably, the 150-kDa
band of MEL1S was detected mainly in the t(1;3)(p36;q21)-positive AML cells. By
immunoblot analysis and proteolytic mapping, it is suggested that the 150-kDa
band of MEL1S in the leukemia cells is translated from the internal initiation
codon ATG597 in exon 4 and is mostly lacking the amino-terminal PR domain of
MEL1. By the cyclic amplification and selection of targets (CASTing) method for
identifying consensus sequences, it was shown that the consensus sequences of
MEL1 were included in 2 different consensus sequences for DNA-binding domain 1
and 2 (D1-CONS and D2-CONS) of EVI1. In reporter gene assays, MEL1S activated
transcription via binding to D2-CONS; however, the fusion of MEL1 or MEL1S to
GAL4 DNA-binding domain (DBD) made them GAL4 binding site-dependent
transcriptional repressors. Moreover, overexpression of MEL1S blocked
granulocytic differentiation induced by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF) in interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent murine myeloid L-G3 cells, while MEL1
could not block the differentiation. Thus, it is likely that overexpression of
the zinc finger protein lacking the PR domain (EVI1 and MEL1S) in the leukemia
cells is one of the causative factors in the pathogenesis of myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 12816872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Leukemia. 2003 Mar;17(3):643-5.

A discriminating screening is necessary to ascertain EVI1 expression by RT-PCR in
malignant cells from the myeloid lineage without 3q26 rearrangement.

Zoccola D, Legros L, Cassuto P, Fuzibet JG, Nucifora G, Raynaud SD.

PMID: 12646959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Immunol. 2003 Mar 15;170(6):3125-33.

Identification of a functionally impaired positive regulatory domain I binding
factor 1 transcription repressor in myeloma cell lines.

Györy I(1), Fejér G, Ghosh N, Seto E, Wright KL.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Department of
Interdisciplinary Oncology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

B cell differentiation into a plasma cell requires expression of the positive
regulatory domain zinc finger protein 1 gene (PRDM1) that encodes the positive
regulatory domain I binding factor 1 (PRDI-BF1 or Blimp-1) protein. It represses 
the transcription of specific target genes, including c-myc, the MHC class II
trans-activator, Pax-5, and CD23b. In this study we demonstrate the presence of
an alternative protein product of the PRDM1 gene. The new protein, PRDI-BF1 beta,
has a disrupted PR domain and lacks the amino-terminal 101 aa of the originally
described protein. PRDI-BF1 beta has a dramatic loss of repressive function on
multiple target genes, but maintains normal DNA-binding activity, nuclear
localization, and association with histone deacetylases and deacetylase activity.
Myeloma cell lines express the highest levels of PRDM1 beta mRNA relative to the 
full-length form, while primary cells and several other cell lines have very low,
but detectable, levels of PRDM1 beta. RNA analysis and analysis of the PRDM1
promoters demonstrate that PRDI-BF1 beta is generated from the same gene by
alternative transcription initiation using an internal promoter. These newly
described features of the PRDM1 gene are highly analogous to the PRDM2 (RIZ) and 
PRDM3 (MDS1-EVI1) genes, in which each express a truncated protein missing the PR
domain. The expression of each of the truncated proteins is elevated in cancerous
cells and may play an important role in the disease.

PMID: 12626569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Am J Hematol. 2003 Feb;72(2):135-7.

Acute myelogenous leukemia with the t(3;12)(q26;p13) translocation: case report
and review of the literature.

Voutsadakis IA(1), Maillard N.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hématologie, Institut Gustave-Roussy, Villejuif, France.
ivoutsadakis@yahoo.com

Translocations involving the EVI1/MDS1 gene at 3q26 and the TEL gene at 12p13 are
comparatively common in acute leukemia, but a translocation between the two genes
has been reported only in a handful of cases. We report an additional case of
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) preceded by a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)
with the translocation t(3;12)(q26;p13) in a 36-year-old woman. The translocation
was present early in the disease and long before the MDS progressed to AML 3
years after diagnosis. At the time of progression to AML, an additional
chromosomal abnormality, a monosomy 22, was discovered. The patient was treated
with the protocol MAQ, which comprised mitoxantrone, aracytine, and quinine, as
her blasts expressed the p-glycoprotein, but she failed to obtain remission. A
second treatment with the same protocol resulted in only minimal response. The
patient was treated again with high-dose Ara-C and idarubicine in an attempt to
achieve a response before allogeneic unrelated transplantation, but she did not
respond to the treatment and died shortly thereafter. A review of the literature 
revealed 12 other cases of the t(3;12)(q26;p13) translocation. Characteristics of
those cases are reviewed in this article.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12555218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 Jan;36(1):80-9.

Quantitative comparison of the expression of EVI1 and its presumptive antagonist,
MDS1/EVI1, in patients with myeloid leukemia.

Vinatzer U(1), Mannhalter C, Mitterbauer M, Gruener H, Greinix H, Schmidt HH,
Fonatsch C, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Biologie der Universitaet Wien, Vienna, Austria.

The EVI1 gene in chromosome band 3q26 exhibits a number of properties consistent 
with a role as an oncogene, and its expression is activated in most myeloid
leukemia patients with, as well as in a minority of patients without, 3q26
rearrangements. A splice variant of this gene, MDS1/EVI1, acts as its antagonist 
at least in some tissue culture assays. We established real-time quantitative
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RTQ-RT-PCR) assays for these
mRNA variants to compare their expression levels in a quantitatively reliable
manner. EVI1 was overexpressed to highly variable extents in all patients with,
as well as in 14% of patients without, 3q26 rearrangements. In some of these
samples, MDS1/EVI1 was also transcribed at elevated levels compared to those of
healthy controls. However, although the induction of MDS1/EVI1 was comparable to,
or higher than, that of EVI1 in three of five samples with a normal EVI1 locus,
this was true for only two of 13 patients with a 3q26 aberration. We further
provide preliminary evidence that the RTQ-RT-PCR assay may be useful for disease 
monitoring in patients overexpressing EVI1.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12461752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Blood. 2003 Feb 1;101(3):837-45. Epub 2002 Oct 3.

High EVI1 expression predicts poor survival in acute myeloid leukemia: a study of
319 de novo AML patients.

Barjesteh van Waalwijk van Doorn-Khosrovani S(1), Erpelinck C, van Putten WL,
Valk PJ, van der Poel-van de Luytgaarde S, Hack R, Slater R, Smit EM, Beverloo
HB, Verhoef G, Verdonck LF, Ossenkoppele GJ, Sonneveld P, de Greef GE, Löwenberg 
B, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

The proto-oncogene EVI1 encodes a DNA binding protein and is located on
chromosome 3q26. The gene is aberrantly expressed in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
patients carrying 3q26 abnormalities. Two mRNAs are transcribed from this locus: 
EVI1 and a fusion of EVI1 with MDS1 (MDS1-EVI1), a gene located 5' of EVI1. The
purpose of this study was to investigate which of the 2 gene products is involved
in transformation in human AML. To discriminate between EVI1 and MDS1-EVI1
transcripts, distinct real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
assays were developed. Patients with 3q26 abnormalities often showed high EVI1
and MDS1-EVI1 expression. In a cohort of 319 AML patients, 4 subgroups could be
distinguished: EVI1(+) and MDS1-EVI1(-) (6 patients; group I), EVI1(+) and
MDS1-EVI1(+) (26 patients; group II), EVI1(-) and MDS1-EVI1(+) (12 patients;
group III), and EVI1(-) and MDS1-EVI1(-) (275 patients; group IV). The only 4
patients with a 3q26 aberration belonged to groups I and II. Interestingly, high 
EVI1 and not MDS1-EVI1 expression was associated with unfavorable karyotypes (eg,
-7/7q-) or complex karyotypes. Moreover, a significant correlation was observed
between EVI1 expression and 11q23 aberrations (mixed lineage leukemia [MLL] gene 
involvement). Patients from groups I and II had significantly shorter overall and
event-free survival than patients in groups III and IV. Our data demonstrate that
high EVI1 expression is an independent poor prognostic marker within the
intermediate- risk karyotypic group.

PMID: 12393383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47197-204. Epub 2002 Oct 7.

Two nonconsensus sites in the Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein EBNA3A cooperate to 
bind the co-repressor carboxyl-terminal-binding protein (CtBP).

Hickabottom M(1), Parker GA, Freemont P, Crook T, Allday MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Imperial
College of Science Technology and Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Wright-Fleming
Institute, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom.

CtBP (carboxyl-terminal binding protein) has been shown to be a highly conserved 
co-repressor of transcription that is important in development, cell cycle
regulation, and transformation. Viral proteins E1A and EBNA3C and all the various
Drosophila and vertebrate transcription factors to which CtBP has been reported
to bind contain a conserved "PXDLS" CtBP-interaction domain. Here we show that
EBNA3A binds CtBP both in vitro and in vivo but that this interaction does not
require a near consensus (98)PLDLR(102) motif in the NH(2) terminus of EBNA3A.
However, further deletion and mutation analysis revealed that CtBP interacts with
this viral protein through a cryptic, bipartite motif located in the COOH
terminus of EBNA3A. The two components of this binding domain are similar to the 
canonical PXDLS motif but do not include the highly conserved, and normally
critical, first proline residue. These nonconsensus sites, (857)ALDLS(861) and
(886)VLDLS(890), synergize to produce very efficient binding to CtBP. Interaction
with CtBP was shown to be important in the repression of transcription by EBNA3A 
and in the ability of EBNA3A to cooperate with activated Ras to immortalize and
transform primary rat embryo fibroblasts. Similar bipartite sequences can be
found in other viral and cellular proteins that can interact with CtBP, including
the retinoblastoma-interacting protein-methyltransferase RIZ, the oncoprotein
EVI1, and Marek's disease virus transforming protein Meq.

PMID: 12372828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Oncogene. 2002 Oct 17;21(47):7247-55.

Large-scale identification of novel potential disease loci in mouse leukemia
applying an improved strategy for cloning common virus integration sites.

Joosten M(1), Vankan-Berkhoudt Y, Tas M, Lunghi M, Jenniskens Y, Parganas E, Valk
PJ, Löwenberg B, van den Akker E, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Hematology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Dr. Molewaterplein 
50, 3015GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The identification of common virus integration sites (cVIS) in retrovirally
induced tumors in mice provides a powerful strategy to isolate novel transforming
genes. Applying virus LTR-specific inverse-PCR and RT-PCR combined with automated
sequencing on CasBr-M Murine Leukemia Virus (MuLV) induced myeloid leukemias, 126
virus integration sites were cloned. Using locus- and LTR-specific primers, a
nested-PCR/Southern-blotting procedure was developed on genomic DNA from a large 
panel of MuLV-induced leukemias, to analyse whether a particular virus insertion 
represented a cVIS. In fact 39 out of 41 integrations analysed this way appeared 
to represent a common virus integration. We recognized six previously cloned
cVISs, i.e. Evi1, Hoxa7, c-Myb, Cb2/Evi11, Evi12, and His1 and 33 novel common
insertions, designated Cas-Br Virus Integration Site (Casvis). Among this group
we found integrations in or near genes encoding nuclear proteins, e.g. Dnmt-2,
Nm23-M2, Ctbp1 or Erg, within receptor genes, e.g. Cb2 or mrc1, novel putative
signaling or transporter genes, the ringfinger-protein gene Mid1 and a panel of
genes encoding novel proteins with unknown function. The finding that 39 out of
41 integrations analysed represented a cVIS, suggests that the majority of the
other virus insertions that were not yet analysed by the PCR/Southern-blotting
method are located in a cVIS as well and may therefore also harbor novel disease 
genes.

PMID: 12370816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cancer Res. 2002 Jul 1;62(13):3636-40.

Genomic copy number analysis of non-small cell lung cancer using array
comparative genomic hybridization: implications of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase pathway.

Massion PP(1), Kuo WL, Stokoe D, Olshen AB, Treseler PA, Chin K, Chen C, Polikoff
D, Jain AN, Pinkel D, Albertson DG, Jablons DM, Gray JW.

Author information: 
(1)UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94143-0808, USA.

Genomic abnormalities at 348 loci encoding genes that may contribute to lung
cancer transformation and progression were assessed using array comparative
genomic hybridization in 21 squamous carcinomas (SqCas) and 16 adenocarcinomas
(AdCas). Hierarchical clustering showed a clear pattern of gains and losses for
the SqCas, whereas the pattern for AdCas was less distinct. Cross-validated
classification using a K-nearest-neighbor assigned, on average, 32 of 37 samples 
to their proper histological subtype. The most noticeable differences between
SqCas and AdCas were gain of chromosome 3q22-q26 and loss of chromosome 3p. These
occurred almost exclusively in SqCas. The region of recurrent increase is
approximately 30 Mb in extent, ranging from EVI1 to TFRC. PIK3CA, the alpha
catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), is in this region. The
PIK3CA copy number increase was validated using fluorescence in situ
hybridization to lung cancer tissue microarrays. Activity of the downstream PI3K 
effector protein kinase B (PKB) was higher in SqCas than in AdCas and was
correlated with PIK3CA copy number (r = 0.75), suggesting that these copy number 
increases contribute to activation of PI3K signaling in SqCas of the lung.

PMID: 12097266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Oncogene. 2002 May 9;21(20):3232-40.

The leukemia-associated transcription repressor AML1/MDS1/EVI1 requires CtBP to
induce abnormal growth and differentiation of murine hematopoietic cells.

Senyuk V(1), Chakraborty S, Mikhail FM, Zhao R, Chi Y, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Cancer Center, University of Illinois at Chicago,
900 South Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The leukemia-associated fusion gene AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME) encodes a chimeric
transcription factor that results from the (3;21)(q26;q22) translocation. This
translocation is observed in patients with therapy-related myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS), with chronic myelogenous leukemia during the blast crisis
(CML-BC), and with de novo or therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (AML). AME
is obtained by in-frame fusion of the AML1 and MDS1/EVI1 genes. We have
previously shown that AME is a transcriptional repressor that induces leukemia in
mice. In order to elucidate the role of AME in leukemic transformation, we
investigated the interaction of AME with the transcription co-regulator CtBP1 and
with members of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) family. In this report, we show
that AME physically interacts in vivo with CtBP1 and HDAC1 and that these
co-repressors require distinct regions of AME for interaction. By using reporter 
gene assays, we demonstrate that AME represses gene transcription by
CtBP1-dependent and CtBP1-independent mechanisms. Finally, we show that the
interaction between AME and CtBP1 is biologically important and is necessary for 
growth upregulation and abnormal differentiation of the murine hematopoietic
precursor cell line 32Dc13 and of murine bone marrow progenitors.

PMID: 12082639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Science. 2002 Apr 19;296(5567):497.

Murine leukemia induced by retroviral gene marking.

Li Z(1), Düllmann J, Schiedlmeier B, Schmidt M, von Kalle C, Meyer J, Forster M, 
Stocking C, Wahlers A, Frank O, Ostertag W, Kühlcke K, Eckert HG, Fehse B, Baum
C.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institute, D-20251 Hamburg, Germany.

PMID: 11964471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Apr 5;292(3):609-16.

EVI1 is expressed in megakaryocyte cell lineage and enforced expression of EVI1
in UT-7/GM cells induces megakaryocyte differentiation.

Shimizu S(1), Nagasawa T, Katoh O, Komatsu N, Yokota J, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Miyazaki Medical College, Miyazaki, Japan.

3q21q26 syndrome, an acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS) with chromosomal translocations or inversions between the bands 3q21 and
3q26, is frequently associated with dysmegakaryocytopoiesis and increased
platelet counts at the initial diagnosis. Since the EVI1 gene at 3q26 is
transcriptionally activated in 3q21q26 syndrome, we assessed the role of EVI1
gene expression in the abnormal megakaryocytic differentiation in 3q21q26
syndrome. RT-PCR analysis of various types of hematopoietic cells revealed that
the EVI1 gene is expressed specifically in CD34(+) cells, megakaryocytes, and
platelets. UT-7 is a human immature megakaryoblastic leukemia cell line with
dependence for the growth on granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) (designated at UT-7/GM) and with a differentiation capacity to erythroid
(UT-7/EPO) and megakaryocytic lineages (UT-7/TPO) by erythropoietin (EPO) and
thrombopoietin (TPO), respectively. Among three UT-7 sublines, UT-7/GM, UT-7/EPO,
and UT-7/TPO, expression of the EVI1 gene was detected at low levels in UT-7/GM
and UT-7/EPO cells, but was detected at a higher level in UT-7/TPO cells. When
UT-7/GM cells were cultured with TPO, the level of EVI1 expression was increased,
along with increased numbers of polynuclear megakaryocytes and expression of the 
platelet factor 4 (PF-4) gene. Furthermore, forced expression of the EVI1 gene in
UT-7/GM cells changed their morphology to polynuclear megakaryocytes, stopped
their growth, and induced cell death within a month. These data indicate that
expression of the EVI1 gene is involved in progression of megakaryocytic
differentiation and, thus, the dysmegakaryocytopoiesis in 3q21q26 syndrome could 
be partly due to an enhanced differentiation capacity of leukemia cells and/or
megakaryocytes by constitutive expression of the EVI1 gene.

PMID: 11922610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Acta Haematol. 2002;107(2):76-94.

Cytogenetic and molecular genetic evolution of chronic myeloid leukemia.

Johansson B(1), Fioretos T, Mitelman F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Sweden.

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is genetically characterized by the presence of
the reciprocal translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11), resulting in a BCR/ABL gene fusion
on the derivative chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. In 2-10%
of the cases, this chimeric gene is generated by variant rearrangements,
involving 9q34, 22q11, and one or several other genomic regions. All chromosomes 
have been described as participating in these variants, but there is a marked
breakpoint clustering to chromosome bands 1p36, 3p21, 5q13, 6p21, 9q22, 11q13,
12p13, 17p13, 17q21, 17q25, 19q13, 21q22, 22q12, and 22q13. Despite their
genetically complex nature, available data indicate that variant rearrangements
do not confer any specific phenotypic or prognostic impact as compared to CML
with a standard Ph chromosome. In most instances, the t(9;22), or a variant
thereof, is the sole chromosomal anomaly during the chronic phase (CP) of the
disease, whereas additional genetic changes are demonstrable in 60-80% of cases
in blast crisis (BC). The secondary chromosomal aberrations are clearly
nonrandom, with the most common chromosomal abnormalities being +8 (34% of cases 
with additional changes), +Ph (30%), i(17q) (20%), +19 (13%), -Y (8% of males),
+21 (7%), +17 (5%), and monosomy 7 (5%). We suggest that all these aberrations,
occurring in >5% of CML with secondary changes, should be denoted major route
abnormalities. Chromosome segments often involved in structural rearrangements
include 1q, 3q21, 3q26, 7p, 9p, 11q23, 12p13, 13q11-14, 17p11, 17q10, 21q22, and 
22q10. No clear-cut differences as regards type and prevalence of additional
aberrations seem to exist between CML with standard t(9;22) and CML with
variants, except for slightly lower frequencies of the most common changes in the
latter group. The temporal order of the secondary changes varies, but the
preferred pathway appears to start with i(17q), followed by +8 and +Ph, and then 
+19. Molecular genetic abnormalities preceding, or occurring during, BC include
overexpression of the BCR/ABL transcript, upregulation of the EVI1 gene,
increased telomerase activity, and mutations of the tumor suppressor genes RB1,
TP53, and CDKN2A. The cytogenetic evolution patterns vary significantly in
relation to treatment given during CP. For example, +8 is more common after
busulfan than hydroxyurea therapy, and the secondary changes seen after
interferon-alpha treatment or bone marrow transplantation are often unusual,
seemingly random, and occasionally transient. Apart from the strong phenotypic
impact of addition of acute myeloid leukemia/myelodysplasia-associated
translocations and inversions, such as inv(3)(q21q26), t(3;21)(q26;q22), and
t(15;17)(q22;q12-21), in CML BC, only a few significant differences between
myeloid and lymphoid BC are discerned, with i(17q) and TP53 mutations being more 
common in myeloid BC and monosomy 7, hypodiploidy, and CDKN2A deletions being
more frequent in lymphoid BC. The prognostic significance of the secondary
genetic changes is not uniform, although abnormalities involving chromosome 17,
e.g., i(17q), have repeatedly been shown to be ominous. However, the clinical
impact of additional cytogenetic and molecular genetic aberrations is most likely
modified by the treatment modalities used.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11919388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Am J Hematol. 2002 Jan;69(1):80-2.

Expression of the TEL/EVI1 fusion transcript in a patient with chronic
myelogenous leukemia with t(3;12)(q26;p13).

Nakamura Y(1), Nakazato H, Sato Y, Furusawa S, Mitani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Tochigi,
Japan.

The t(3;12)(q26;p13) translocation is a recurrent chromosomal aberration observed
in myeloid malignancies. It has been shown that the translocation results in the 
fusion of the TEL (ETV6) gene at 12p13 and the EV11 gene at 3q26. We report the
first case with Philadelphia (Ph)-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)
expressing the TEL/EVI1 fusion transcript. A 26-year-old man was initially
diagnosed as having the chronic phase of Ph-positive CML. The t(3;12)(q26;p13)
emerged 16 months prior to the myeloid blastic crisis. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction detected the TEL/EVI1 transcript without 
the intervening 5' non-coding exon of EVI1, suggesting that inappropriate
expression of the EVI1 protein driven by the TEL promotor could play a critical
role in progression to the blast crisis of CML.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11835339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Exp Hematol. 2002 Feb;30(2):142-9.

Leukemic predisposition of pSca-1/Cb2 transgenic mice.

Joosten M(1), Valk PJ, Jordà MA, Vankan-Berkhoudt Y, Verbakel S, van den Broek M,
Beijen A, Löwenberg B, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Hematology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: The gene encoding the peripheral cannabinoid receptor Cb2 is located
in the common virus integration site Evi11 and is associated with hematopoietic
malignancies in mice. To determine the effect of Cb2 overexpression on
hematopoietic development in vivo, Cb2 transgenic mice were generated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A Cb2 expression vector was constructed containing a Cb2
cDNA fragment cloned into the 14kb Sca-1 (Ly-6E.1) gene. Two transgenic lines in 
which Cb2 expression is controlled by the Sca-1 promoter were generated, and the 
effect on hematopoietic development was studied. Expression of Cb2 mRNA or
protein was studied by RNase protection analysis and ligand binding assays,
respectively. Leukemic predisposition was investigated by injecting newborn
transgenic as well as control animals with Cas-Br-M murine leukemia virus
(Cas-Br-M MuLV).
RESULTS: Although increased expression of the Cb2 gene was observed in
hematopoietic tissues, follow-up of more than 1 year did not reveal any
hematologic defect. Interestingly, infection of newborn pSca-1/Cb2 transgenic
mice with Cas-Br-M MuLV revealed that significantly more transgenic mice
developed leukemia than virus-treated control littermates. Because these studies 
provide evidence for the cooperative potential of Cb2 in leukemia progression, we
wished to identify genes that may collaborate with Cb2 in leukemic
transformation. Our study suggests that Evi1, another common target for proviral 
integration in mouse leukemias, may be overexpressed in virus-induced leukemias
in pSca-1/Cb2 transgenic mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The data indicate that hematopoietic precursor cells that express
high levels of Cb2 possess increased susceptibility for leukemia development and 
that Cb2 and Evi1 might collaborate in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 11823049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 13;20(57):8236-48.

Cooperation of BCR-ABL and AML1/MDS1/EVI1 in blocking myeloid differentiation and
rapid induction of an acute myelogenous leukemia.

Cuenco GM(1), Ren R.

Author information: 
(1)Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, Department of Biology,
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454, USA.

The development of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), which is characterized by a 
block of myeloid differentiation, is a multi-step process that involves several
genetic abnormalities, but the molecular mechanisms by which these genetic
alterations cooperate in leukemogenesis are poorly understood. The human chronic 
myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a model for multi-step leukemogenesis. BCR-ABL, a
constitutively active tyrosine kinase, is a fusion protein generated by the
t(9;22)(q34;q11) translocation found in the vast majority of CML patients.
BCR-ABL efficiently induces a myeloproliferative disorder (MPD) in mice, but
progression to CML blast phase requires additional mutations. The AML1/MDS1/EVI1 
(AME) transcription factor fusion protein, is a product of the human
t(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation found as a secondary mutation in some cases of CML
during the blast phase. We have previously shown that AME can induce an AML in
mice but with a greatly extended latency, suggesting a requirement for additional
mutations. Here we demonstrate that AME alone does not block myeloid
differentiation in vivo during the 4-month pre-leukemia stage, yet co-expression 
of BCR-ABL and AME in mice can block myeloid differentiation and rapidly induce
an AML. Our results suggest that block of myeloid differentiation and induction
of AML involves cooperation between mutations that dysregulate protein tyrosine
kinase signaling and those that disrupt hematopoietic gene transcription.

PMID: 11781838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Nihon Rinsho. 2001 Dec;59(12):2316-21.

[Disease-related gene and tumor progression].

[Article in Japanese]

Mitani K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine.

Chronic myelogenous leukemia is a stem cell tumor characterized by the t(9;
22)(q34; 11) translocation generating the BCR/ABL chimeric gene. The BCR/ABL
fusion gene shows several functions, including inhibition of adhesion to stroma
cells and extracellular matrix, activation of mitogenic signalings, inhibition of
apoptosis, and degradation of inhibitory proteins, and thereby causes
transformation of hematopoietic progenitors. Among its functions, the signal
transduction pathways activated by the fusion gene are Ras and MAP kinase
pathways, Jak-Stat pathways, PI3 kinase pathways, and Myc pathways. Molecular
mechanisms in blastic crisis remains largely unknown. However, loss of functions 
of tumor suppressor genes such as p53, RB, and p16, activation of oncogene Ras,
overexpression of Evi-1 might be involved in disease progression.

PMID: 11766332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Chin Med J (Engl). 1999 Dec;112(12):1112-8.

Evi-1 and MDS1-Evi-1 genes in pathogenesis of myelodysplastic syndromes and
post-MDS acute myeloid leukemia.

Xu K(1), Wang L, Hao Y, Shao Z, Meng Q, Li K, Chao H, Tang K, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Chinese Academy Medical Sciences & Peking Union
Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate expression of Evi-1 and MDS1-Evi-1 genes in
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and post-MDS acute myeloid leukemia (post-MDS
AML), and its role in pathogenesis or progression of MDS and post-MDS AML.
METHODS: Expression of Evi-1 and MDS1-Evi-1 genes was examined in 31 MDS, 11
post-MDS AML, and 34 de novo AML patients by a semi-quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Evi-1 expression was not detected in bone marrow samples of 8 normal
controls, but low MDS1-Evi-1 expression levels (MDS1-Evi-1/GAPDH < 0.1) were
detected in 3 of the 8 controls. Evi-1 RNA was expressed in 1 of 8 RA, 8 of 13
RAEB and 6 of 9 RAEB-T patients, and the percentage of Evi-1 expression in
RAEB(T) patients was higher than that in RA (P < 0.05). MDS1-Evi-1 expression was
detected in 5 of 8 RA, 9 of 13 RAEB and 5 of 9 RAEB-T patients, and MDS1-Evi-1
expression levels (MDS1-Evi-1/GAPDH > 0.1) were markedly higher than those in the
controls. Evi-1 expression was gradually increased in 4 of 5 RAEB-T patients with
transformation from MDS to AML. The percentages of Evi-1 and MDS1-Evi-1
expression in post-MDS AML patients were significantly (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05
respectively) higher than those in de novo AML. The colonies of hematopoietic
progenitor cells were decreased in Evi-1 and MDS1-Evi-1-positive MDS patients as 
compared with those in Evi-1 and MDS1-Evi-1-negative patients.
CONCLUSION: Abnormal expression of the Evi-1 gene and overexpression of
MDS1-Evi-1 gene may play a role in the pathogenesis or progression of MDS and
post-MDS AML.

PMID: 11721451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 1999 Jun;20(6):331-3.

[Advances in the study of Evi1 and mds1 genes].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu K, Wang L, Hao Y.

PMID: 11721391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):44936-43. Epub 2001 Sep 21.

Interaction of EVI1 with cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding protein 
(CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) results in reversible acetylation of
EVI1 and in co-localization in nuclear speckles.

Chakraborty S(1), Senyuk V, Sitailo S, Chi Y, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and The Cancer Center, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

EVI1 is a very complex protein with two domains of zinc fingers and is
inappropriately expressed in many types of human myeloid leukemias. Using
reporter gene assays, several investigators showed that EVI1 is a transcription
repressor, and recently it was shown that EVI1 interacts with the co-repressor
carboxyl-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1). Earlier, we showed that the
inappropriate expression of EVI1 in murine hematopoietic precursor cells leads to
their abnormal differentiation and to increased proliferation. Using biochemical 
assays, we have identified two groups of transcription co-regulators that
associate with EVI1 presumably to regulate gene expression. One group of
co-regulators includes the CtBP1 and histone deacetylase. The second group
includes the two co-activators cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding
protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF), both of which have histone 
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. All of these proteins require separate regions 
of EVI1 for efficient interaction, and they divergently affect the ability of
EVI1 to regulate gene transcription in reporter gene assays. Confocal microscopy 
analysis shows that in the majority of the cells, EVI1 is nuclear and diffused,
whereas in about 10% of the cells EVI1 localizes in nuclear speckles. However, in
the presence of the added exogenous co-repressors histone deacetylase or CtBP1,
all of the nuclei have a diffuse EVI1 staining, and the proteins do not appear to
reside together in obvious nuclear structures. In contrast, when CBP or P/CAF are
added, defined speckled bodies appear in the nucleus. Analysis of the staining
pattern indicates that EVI1 and CBP or EVI1 and P/CAF are contained within these 
structures. These nuclear structures are not observed when CBP is substituted
with a point mutant HAT-inactive CBP with which EVI1 also physically interacts.
Finally, we show that the interaction of EVI1 with either CBP or P/CAF leads to
acetylation of EVI1. These results suggest that the assembly of EVI1 in nuclear
speckles requires the intact HAT activity of the co-activators.

PMID: 11568182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2001 Sep;129(2):155-60.

A unique AML1 (CBF2A) rearrangement, t(1;21)(p32;q22), observed in a patient with
acute myelomonocytic leukemia.

Cherry AM(1), Bangs CD, Jones P, Hall S, Natkunam Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA
94305, USA. athena.cherry@medcenter.stanford.edu

The AML1 (CBFA2) gene is the most frequent target of chromosomal rearrangements
observed in human acute leukemia. These rearrangements include the commonly
reported t(8;21)(q22;q22) or AML1/ETO fusion in AML-M2, the t(3;21)(q26;q22) or
AML1 fusion with one of three genes, MDS1, EAP or EVI1, in therapy-related AML
and MDS, as well as in blast crisis in CML and the t(12;21)(p13;q22) or TEL/AML1 
fusion in B-cell ALL. In addition to the t(3;21), other AML1 translocations have 
also been reported in therapy-related MDS and AML, particularly after treatment
with topoisomerase II inhibitors. AML1 gene rearrangements have also been
observed less frequently with numerous other chromosomal partners. Here, we
describe a patient with AML-M4 and a previously unreported rearrangement
involving the AML1 locus and an unknown locus on the short arm of chromosome 1 at
1p32.

PMID: 11566347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Br J Haematol. 2001 Sep;114(3):566-73.

The leukaemia-associated transcription factors EVI-1 and MDS1/EVI1 repress
transcription and interact with histone deacetylase.

Vinatzer U(1), Taplick J, Seiser C, Fonatsch C, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Biologie der Universitaet Wien, Wien, Austria.

EVI-1 and its variant form, MDS1/EVI1, have been reported to act in an
antagonistic manner and be differentially regulated in samples from patients with
acute myeloid leukaemia and rearrangements of the long arm of chromosome 3. Here,
we show that both EVI-1 and MDS1/EVI1 can repress transcription from a reporter
construct containing EVI-1 binding sites and interact with histone deacetylase in
mammalian cells. This interaction can be recapitulated in vitro and is mediated
by a previously characterized transcription repression domain, whose activity is 
alleviated by the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A.

PMID: 11552981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Aug 24;286(3):559-65.

SNO is a probable target for gene amplification at 3q26 in squamous-cell
carcinomas of the esophagus.

Imoto I(1), Pimkhaokham A, Fukuda Y, Yang ZQ, Shimada Y, Nomura N, Hirai H,
Imamura M, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan.

Amplification of the 3q26 region appears to occur frequently among esophageal
squamous cell carcinomas (ESCs). We examined ESC cell lines for amplification and
expression levels of four genes in this region: SNO and EVI1, which encode
proteins antagonizing transforming growth factor-beta signaling, and two other
putative target genes, TERC and PIK3CA. Amplification of SNO was accompanied by
significant increases in its expression level, suggesting that this gene is
activated in an amplification-dependent manner. SNO was also amplified in 5 of 44
primary ESCs (11.4%). However, expression levels of EVI1, TERC, and PIK3CA did
not correlate with their copy-numbers, even though EVI1 and TERC showed the same 
amplification pattern as SNO. Taken together, the data suggest that of the four
candidates, SNO is the most probable target in the 3q26 amplicon for involvement 
in the progression of ESC.

PMID: 11511096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Hematol. 2001 Jun;73(4):429-37.

Chromosome and molecular abnormalities in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Fenaux P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service des Maladies du Sang, CHU de Lille, France. pfenaux@chru-lille.fr

Cytogenetic abnormalities are seen in approximately 50% of cases of
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and 80% of cases of secondary MDS (following
chemotherapy or radiotherapy). These abnormalities generally consist of partial
or complete chromosome deletion or addition (del5q, -7, +8, -Y, del20q), whereas 
balanced or unbalanced translocations are rarely found in MDS. Fluorescence
hybridization techniques (fluorescence in situ hybridization [FISH], multiplex
FISH, and spectral karyotyping) are useful in detecting chromosomal anomalies in 
cases in which few mitoses are obtained or rearrangements are complex. Ras
mutations are the molecular abnormalities most frequently found in MDS, followed 
by p15 gene hypermethylation, FLT3 duplications, and p53 mutations, but none of
these abnormalities are specific for MDS. The rare cases of balanced
translocations in MDS have allowed the identification of genes whose
rearrangements appear to play a role in the pathogenesis of some cases of MDS.
These genes include MDS1-EVI1 in t(3;3) or t(3;21) translocations, TEL in
t(5;12), HIP1 in t(5;7), MLF1 in t(3;5), and MEL1 in t(1;3). Genes more
frequently implicated in the pathogenesis of MDS cases, such as those involving
del5q, remain unknown, although some candidate genes are currently being studied.
Cytogenetic and known molecular abnormalities generally carry a poor prognosis in
MDS and can be incorporated into prognostic scoring systems such as the
International Prognostic Scoring System.

PMID: 11503956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2001 Mar;42(3):162-6.

[Molecular mechanism of leukemogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Hirai H.

PMID: 11345775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 13;276(28):25834-40. Epub 2001 Apr 27.

Evi-1 transforming and repressor activities are mediated by CtBP co-repressor
proteins.

Palmer S(1), Brouillet JP, Kilbey A, Fulton R, Walker M, Crossley M, Bartholomew 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Glasgow Caledonian University, School of Biological & Biomedical Sciences,
City Campus, Cowcaddens Rd., Glasgow, G4 OBA, Scotland.

Ectopic production of the EVI1 transcriptional repressor zinc finger protein is
seen in 4--6% of human acute myeloid leukemias. Overexpression also transforms
Rat1 fibroblasts by an unknown mechanism, which is likely to be related to its
role in leukemia and which depends upon its repressor activity. We show here that
mutant murine Evi-1 proteins, lacking either the N-terminal zinc finger DNA
binding domain or both DNA binding zinc finger clusters, function as dominant
negative mutants by reverting the transformed phenotype of Evi-1 transformed Rat1
fibroblasts. The dominant negative activity of the non-DNA binding mutants
suggests sequestration of transformation-specific cofactors and that recruitment 
of these cellular factors might mediate Evi-1 transforming activity. C-terminal
binding protein (CtBP) co-repressor family proteins bind PLDLS-like motifs. We
show that the murine Evi-1 repressor domain has two such sites, PFDLT (site a,
amino acids 553--559) and PLDLS (site b, amino acids 584--590), which
independently can bind CtBP family co-repressor proteins, with site b binding
with higher affinity than site a. Functional analysis of specific CtBP binding
mutants show site b is absolutely required to mediate both transformation of Rat1
fibroblasts and transcriptional repressor activity. This is the first
demonstration that the biological activity of a mammalian cellular
transcriptional repressor protein is mediated by CtBPs. Furthermore, it suggests 
that CtBP proteins are involved in the development of some acute leukemias and
that blocking their ability to specifically interact with EVI1 might provide a
target for the development of pharmacological therapeutic agents.

PMID: 11328817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Blood. 2001 May 1;97(9):2815-22.

The corepressor CtBP interacts with Evi-1 to repress transforming growth factor
beta signaling.

Izutsu K(1), Kurokawa M, Imai Y, Maki K, Mitani K, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Japan.

Evi-1 is a zinc finger nuclear protein whose inappropriate expression leads to
leukemic transformation of hematopoietic cells in mice and humans. This was
previously shown to block the antiproliferative effect of transforming growth
factor beta (TGF-beta). Evi-1 represses TGF-beta signaling by direct interaction 
with Smad3 through its first zinc finger motif. Here, it is demonstrated that
Evi-1 represses Smad-induced transcription by recruiting C-terminal binding
protein (CtBP) as a corepressor. Evi-1 associates with CtBP1 through one of the
consensus binding motifs, and this association is required for efficient
inhibition of TGF-beta signaling. A specific inhibitor for histone deacetylase
(HDAc) alleviates Evi-1-mediated repression of TGF-beta signaling, suggesting
that HDAc is involved in the transcriptional repression by Evi-1. This identifies
a novel function of Evi-1 as a member of corepressor complexes and suggests that 
aberrant recruitment of corepressors is one of the mechanisms for Evi-1-induced
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 11313276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 1998 Jun;19(6):315-9.

[Study on expression of Evi1 and MDS1-Evi1 genes in myelodysplastic syndromes].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu K(1), Wang L, Hao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, CAMS and PUMC, Tianjin 300020.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate expression of Evi1 and MDS1-Evi1 genes in
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and its role in pathogenesis of MDS.
METHODS: Expression of Evi1 and MDS1-Evi1 genes was examined in 31 MDS, 11 post
MDS acute myeloid leukemia (post MDS AML) and 34 de novo AML patients by a
semi-quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Evi1 expression was not detected in 8 normal controls, but low MDS1-Evi1
expression levels (MDS1-Evi1/GAPDH < 0.1) detected in 3 of the 8 controls. Evi1
mRNA was expressed in 1 of 8 RA, 8 of 13 RAEB and 6 of 9 RAEB-t patients, and the
percentage of Evi1 expression in RAEB(t) patients was higher than that in RA(P < 
0.05). MDS1-Evi1 expression was detected in 5 of 8 RA, 9 of 13 RAEB and 5 of 9
RAEB-t patients, and MDS1-Evi1 expression levels (MDS1-Evi1/GAPDH > 0.1) in the
patients were markedly higher than those in the controls. Evi1 expression was
gradually increased in 4 of 5 RAEB-t patients with transformation from MDS to
AML. The percentages of Evi-1 and MDS1-Evi1 expression in post MDS AML patients
were higher than those in de novo AML (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05, respectively). The 
numbers of colony formation of progenitor cells in Evi1 and MDS1-Evi1-positive
MDS patients were decreased as compared with Evi1 and MDS1-Evi1-negative
patients.
CONCLUSION: Abnormal expression of Evi1 and overexpression of MDS1-Evi1 might
play a certain role in the pathogenesis or progression of MDS and post MDS AML.

PMID: 11243114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;91(1-4):52-6.

Fusion genes in leukemia: an emerging network.

Bohlander SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany. sbohlan@gwdg.de

The molecular analysis of recurring chromosome rearrangements, especially of
translocations and inversions, has provided us with valuable insight into the
pathogenesis of hematological malignancies. Many translocations result in the
fusion of genes located at the translocation breakpoints. In recent years we have
witnessed a rapid rise in the number of chromosome translocations in leukemias
being characterized at the molecular level. However, the number of genes being
newly identified as translocation fusion genes has not risen at the same pace.
This is due to the fact that several genes are involved in more than one
translocation forming fusion genes with a number of other partner genes. Not only
does one find star-shaped topologies, with one gene forming fusions with several 
others (e.g. ETV6/PDGFRB, ETV6/JAK2, ETV6/ABL etc.), but also networks connecting
several genes with more than one fusion partner (e.g. ETV6/RUNX1 (AML1),
RUNX1/CBFA2T1 (ETO), ETV6/EVI1, RUNX1/EVI1, ETV6/ABL, BCR/ABL). The emergence of 
such networks with the "recycling" of genes in new fusion combinations suggests
that there is a rather limited number of genes which can be altered to cause
leukemia.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11173830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Br J Haematol. 2001 Jan;112(1):208-11.

EVI1 expression in acute myeloid leukaemia.

Langabeer SE(1), Rogers JR, Harrison G, Wheatley K, Walker H, Bain BJ, Burnett
AK, Goldstone AH, Linch DC, Grimwade D; MRC Adult Leukaemia Working Party.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London Hospitals and Medical
School, London, UK. s.langabeer@ucl.ac.uk

Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) with 3q26 cytogenetic abnormalities is associated
with overexpression of EVI1, dysmegakaryopoiesis and poor prognosis. Screening
for EVI1 transcripts was performed in 336 cases of AML, including 139 patients
with acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL). Expression was detected in 7 out of 10 
cases with and 23 out of 326 without 3q26 abnormalities including one APL case.
Among cases lacking 3q abnormalities, detection of EVI1 transcripts was neither
associated with characteristic dysmegakaryopoietic features, nor predictive of a 
poor outcome, indicating that screening will probably not assist in treatment
stratification. This study nevertheless demonstrates that deregulation of EVI1,
although rare in APL, is a relatively frequent event in AML.

PMID: 11167805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Leukemia. 2000 Nov;14(11):1876-84.

Erythroid defects and increased retrovirally-induced tumor formation in Evi1
transgenic mice.

Louz D(1), van den Broek M, Verbakel S, Vankan Y, van Lom K, Joosten M, Meijer D,
Löwenberg B, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

Aberrant expression of the Evi1 (ecotropic virus integration site 1)
proto-oncogene has been associated with hematopoietic malignancies in both mice
and man. To determine the effect of enforced expression of Evi1 in vivo, we
developed a transgenic mouse model utilizing the murine Sca-1 (Ly-6E.1) promoter.
Here, we describe the generation and analysis of three independent lines of Evi1 
transgenic mice. Transgenic animals of two founder lines developed normally.
These mice did not show any obvious hematological abnormalities but showed a
significant reduction in the number of bone marrow colony-forming unit erythroid 
(CFU-E)-derived colonies. This implies a defect of normal erythroid hematopoiesis
affecting relatively late erythroid progenitor cells. We also show that when
newborn Evi1 transgenic mice of these two lines were infected with Cas-Br-M MuLV,
tumor incidence was greatly enhanced in comparison with nontransgenic
littermates, indicating an increased susceptibility for leukemia development.
Interestingly, analysis of a third founder line revealed that all male progeny
consistently displayed severely impaired erythropoiesis with major defects in the
bone marrow, spleen and peripheral blood. Taken together, our results present the
first evidence of Evi1 disturbing normal erythropoiesis in vivo and provides
evidence for cooperative potential of Evi1 in tumor progression.

PMID: 11069022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Blood. 2000 Nov 1;96(9):3209-14.

A novel gene, MEL1, mapped to 1p36.3 is highly homologous to the MDS1/EVI1 gene
and is transcriptionally activated in t(1;3)(p36;q21)-positive leukemia cells.

Mochizuki N(1), Shimizu S, Nagasawa T, Tanaka H, Taniwaki M, Yokota J, Morishita 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

The reciprocal translocation t(1;3)(p36;q21) occurs in a subset of
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML), which is
frequently characterized by trilineage dysplasia, in particular
dysmegakaryocytopoiesis, and poor prognosis. Previously, the breakpoint cluster
region (BCR) at 3q21 was identified within a 60-kilobase (kb) region centromeric 
to the BCR of 3q21q26 syndrome and that at 1p36.3 within a 90-kb region. In this 
study, genes were searched near the breakpoints at 1p36.3, and a novel gene was
isolated that encoded a zinc finger protein with a PR domain, which is highly
homologous to the MDS1/EVI1 gene. The novel gene, designated as MEL1
(MDS1/EVI1-like gene 1), with 1257 amino acid residues is 64% similar in
nucleotide and 63% similar in amino acid sequences to MDS1/EVI1 with the same
domain structure. The MEL1 gene is expressed in leukemia cells with t(1;3) but
not in other cell lines or bone marrow, spleen, and fetal liver, suggesting that 
MEL1 is specifically in the t(1;3)(p36;q21)-positive MDS/AML. On the basis of the
positional relationship between the EVI1 and MEL1 genes in each translocation, it
was suggested that both genes are transcriptionally activated by the
translocation of the 3q21 region with the Ribophorin I gene. Because of the
transcriptional activation of the EVI1 family genes in both
t(1;3)(p36;q21)-positive MDS/AML and 3q21q26 syndrome, it is suggested that they 
share a common molecular mechanism for the leukemogenic transformation of the
cells.

PMID: 11050005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Leukemia. 2000 Oct;14(10):1857-8.

Breakpoint analysis by fluorescence in situ hybridization in myelodysplastic
syndromes with t(3;12)(q26;p13) and expression of EVI1.

van de Loosdrecht AA, Kok K, de Vries B, van der Veen AY, van den Berg E,
Esselink MT, Marynen P, Vellenga E, van Imhoff GW.

PMID: 11021761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Blood. 2000 Mar 15;95(6):2126-31.

A new ETV6/TEL partner gene, ARG (ABL-related gene or ABL2), identified in an
AML-M3 cell line with a t(1;12)(q25;p13) translocation.

Iijima Y(1), Ito T, Oikawa T, Eguchi M, Eguchi-Ishimae M, Kamada N, Kishi K,
Asano S, Sakaki Y, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cytogenetics, Department of Clinical Pathology, Research
Institute, International Medical Center of Japan, Tokyo, Japan.

The ETV6/TEL gene has been reported to fuse to PDGFRbetab MDS1/EVI1, BTL, ACS2,
STL, JAK2, ABL, CDX2, TRKC, AML1, and MN1. Among them, PDGFRbeta, ABL, JAK2, and 
TRKC are tyrosine kinases (TK). We identified a novel ETV6 partner gene, ARG
(ABL-related gene or ABL2), another TK gene in a cell line established from a
patient with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML-M3) with a t(15;17)(q22;q11.2) and a
t(1;12)(q25;p13), which has the remarkable feature to differentiate to mature
eosinophils in culture with all-trans retinoic acid and cytokines. The ETV6/ARG
transcripts consisted of exon 1 to 5 of ETV6 and the 3' portion of ARG starting
from exon 1B or exon 2, resulting in an open reading frame for a fusion protein
consisting of the entire PNT oligomerization domain of ETV6 and all of the
functional domains of ARG including the TK domain. This is the same protein
structure as identified in the other ETV6 TK fusion proteins. The reciprocal
ARG/ETV6 transcript was not expressed, and the normal ETV6 allele was not deleted
or rearranged. Although the ABL is known to be involved in various human
malignancies, ARG has not been involved in human malignancies despite its high
homology to ABL. Thus, this is the first report showing involvement of ARG in
human leukemia. The ETV6/ARG protein may be involved in the unique
differentiation capacity of this cell line. (Blood. 2000;95:2126-2131)

PMID: 10706884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Virology. 2000 Mar 15;268(2):308-18.

Phenotyping of Evi1, Evi11/Cb2, and Evi12 transformed leukemias isolated from a
novel panel of cas-Br-M murine leukemia virus-infected mice.

Joosten M(1), Valk PJ, Vankan Y, de Both N, Löwenberg B, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, 3000 DR, The
Netherlands.

Cas-Br-M murine leukemia virus (MuLV) is a slow-transforming retrovirus that
potently induces leukemias in mice and therefore is well suited for retroviral
insertional mutagenesis. We used Cas-Br-M MuLV in NIH/Swiss mice to establish a
new panel of mainly myeloid leukemias. All tumors found in leukemic animals were 
classified by gross pathology, morphology, and immunophenotype, as well as the
incidence of known common virus integration sites (VISs) in MuLV-induced myeloid 
malignancies (i.e., Evi1, Evi11/Cb2, Evi12, Fli1, and c-Myb). Interestingly, male
mice were more susceptible than females to the induction of leukemia by Cas-Br-M 
MuLV. Seventy-four of the Cas-Br-M MuLV-inoculated mice developed a severe
splenomegaly, sometimes in association with a thymoma. Although most of the
immunophenotyped Cas-Br-M MuLV tumors were of myeloid origin (58%), numerous
T-cell leukemias (21%) and mixed myeloid/T-cell leukemias (21%) were found. The
myeloid leukemias and myeloid compartment of the mixed leukemias were further
characterized by immunophenotyping with stem cell-, myeloid-, and
erythroid-specific antibodies. The known Cas-Br-M MuLV common VISs (Evi1,
Evi11/Cb2, and Evi12) were demonstrated in 19%, 12%, and 20% of the cases,
respectively, whereas no Fli1 and c-Myb rearrangements were found. Integrations
into Evi1 were restricted to myeloid leukemias, whereas those in Evi11/Cb2 and
Evi12 were identified in myeloid as well as T-lymphoid leukemias. This panel of
well characterized Cas-Br-M MuLV-induced hematopoietic tumors may be useful for
the isolation and characterization of new proto-oncogenes involved in myeloid or 
T-cell leukemias.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10704339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 15;97(4):1760-5.

Human AML1/MDS1/EVI1 fusion protein induces an acute myelogenous leukemia (AML)
in mice: a model for human AML.

Cuenco GM(1), Nucifora G, Ren R.

Author information: 
(1)Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, Department of Biology,
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454, USA.

The human t(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation is found as a secondary mutation in some
cases of chronic myelogenous leukemia during the blast phase and in
therapy-related myelodysplasia and acute myelogenous leukemia. One result of this
translocation is a fusion between the AML1, MDS1, and EVI1 genes, which encodes a
transcription factor of approximately 200 kDa. The role of the AML1/MDS1/EVI1
(AME) fusion gene in leukemogenesis is largely unknown. In this study, we
analyzed the effect of the AME fusion gene in vivo by expressing it in mouse bone
marrow cells via retroviral transduction. We found that mice transplanted with
AME-transduced bone marrow cells suffered from an acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML) 5-13 mo after transplantation. The disease could be readily transferred
into secondary recipients with a much shorter latency. Morphological analysis of 
peripheral blood and bone marrow smears demonstrated the presence of myeloid
blast cells and differentiated but immature cells of both myelocytic and
monocytic lineages. Cytochemical and flow cytometric analysis confirmed that
these mice had a disease similar to the human acute myelomonocytic leukemia. This
murine model for AME-induced AML will help dissect the molecular mechanism of AML
and the molecular biology of the AML1, MDS1, and EVI1 genes.

PMCID: PMC26509
PMID: 10677531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;31(12):1367-71.

The transcription factor Evi-1.

Hirai H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Japan. hhirai-tky@umin.ac.jp

Evi-1 is a transcription factor with two sets of zinc finger domains. The
temporally and spatially restricted pattern of Evi-1 expression in embryonic
tissues suggests a role of Evi-1 in organogenesis and morphogenesis in mouse
development. Mice lacking Evi-1, which die within the first few weeks of life
with multiple defects in embryonic development, suggest that Evi-1 is essential
for developmental cell proliferation, vascularization, and cell-specific
signaling at midgestation. In hematopoietic cells, Evi-1 expression is restricted
at a transient stage of myeloid cell differentiation. Constitutive expression of 
Evi-1 in hematopoietic cells, which is caused by retroviral insertions or
chromosomal translocations and inversions, is closely associated with myelogenous
leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes in mice and humans. In the aspect of
potential therapeutic approaches, some pharmaceutical drugs or antisense
oligonucleotides that repress Evi-1 expression would be useful for the treatment 
of Evi-1-induced neoplastic tumors.

PMID: 10641791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Leukemia. 1999 Dec;13(12):1932-42.

Leukemogenesis by CBF oncoproteins.

Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The AML1 and CBFbeta subunits of core binding factor (CBF) are involved in
several chromosomal abnormalities frequently associated with acute leukemias. As 
a result, the CBFbeta-SMMHC, AML1-ETO and AML1-MDS1/EVI1 fusion proteins are
expressed in subsets of acute myeloid leukemia, and TEL-AML1 is expressed in
B-lineage acute lymphocytic leukemia. These CBF oncoproteins likely contribute to
leukemogenesis in part by inhibiting endogenous CBF. As a result they are
expected to inhibit differentiation and perhaps apoptosis. In addition, the
domains unique to each fusion protein may also contribute to leukemogenesis via
unique mechanisms.

PMID: 10602413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Leukemia. 1999 Nov;13(11):1639-45.

Forced expression of the leukemia-associated gene EVI1 in ES cells: a model for
myeloid leukemia with 3q26 rearrangements.

Sitailo S(1), Sood R, Barton K, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Institute and Department of Medicine, Loyola University Medical
Center, 2160 S First Avenue, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Chromosome band 3q26 is the locus of two genes, MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1. The proteins 
encoded by these genes are nuclear factors each containing two separate
DNA-binding zinc finger domains. The proteins are identical, aside from the
N-terminal extension of MDS1/EVI1, which is missing in EVI1. However, they have
opposite functions as transcription factors. In contrast to MDS1/EVI1, EVI1 is
often activated inappropriately by chromosomal rearrangements at 3q26 leading to 
inappropriate expression of the protein in hematopoietic cells and to myeloid
leukemias, which are often characterized by abnormal megakaryopoiesis. We
previously showed that the two proteins affect replication and differentiation of
progenitor hematopoietic cell lines in opposite ways: whereas EVI1 inhibits the
response of 32Dc13 cells to G-CSF and TGFbeta1, MDS1/EVI1 has no effect on the
G-CSF-induced differentiation of the 32Dc13 cells, and it enhances the
growth-inhibitory effect of TGFbeta1. In the present study, we analyzed the
endogenous expression of the two genes during in vitro hematopoietic
differentiation of murine embryonic stem (ES) cells and evaluated the effects of 
their forced expression on the ability of ES cells to produce differentiated
hematopoietic colonies. We found that the expression of the two genes is
independently and tightly controlled during differentiation. In addition, the
forced expression of EVI1 led to a much higher rate of cell growth before and
during differentiation, whereas the expression of MDS1/EVI1 repressed cell growth
and strongly reduced the number of differentiated hematopoietic colonies.
Finally, our study also found that the forced expression of EVI1 resulted in the 
differentiation of abnormally high numbers of megakaryocytic colonies, thus
providing one of the first experimental models showing a clear correlation
between inappropriate expression of EVI1 and abnormalities in megakaryopoiesis.

PMID: 10557037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Sep 14;96(19):10705-10.

Identification of a zinc finger protein whose subcellular distribution is
regulated by serum and nerve growth factor.

Chittka A(1), Chao MV.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Weill Graduate School of Cornell University Medical
College, New York, NY 10021, USA.

A subclass of zinc finger proteins containing a unique protein motif called the
positive regulatory (PR) domain has been described. The members include the
PRDI-BF1/Blimp-1 protein, the Caenorhabditis elegans egl-43 and EVI1 gene
products, and the retinoblastoma interacting protein RIZ. Here we describe a
member of this family, SC-1, that exhibits several distinctive features. First,
SC-1 interacts with the p75 neurotrophin receptor and is redistributed from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus after nerve growth factor (NGF) treatment of transfected
COS cells. The translocation of SC-1 to the nucleus was specific for p75, as NGF 
binding to the TrkA receptor did not lead to nuclear localization of SC-1. Thus, 
SC-1 provides a downstream transducer for the effects of NGF through the p75
neurotrophin receptor. Under normal growth conditions, SC-1 was found
predominantly in the cytoplasm. On serum-starvation, SC-1 also translocated into 
the nucleus. A direct correlation between nuclear expression of SC-1 with the
loss of BrdUrd incorporation was observed. These results imply that SC-1 may be
involved in events associated with growth arrest.

PMCID: PMC17947
PMID: 10485890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Sep;113(2):172-6.

Emergence of unusual cytogenetic abnormalities under interferon-alpha therapy in 
patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia.

Maloisel F(1), Uettwiller F, Laplace A, Lioure B, Herbrecht R, Mark M, Dufour P.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Onco-Hématologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de 
Hautepierre, France.

New treatments that may change the course of a disease or have potential
carcinogenicity can result in the emergence of new cytogenetic or clinical
disorders. We report here the cytogenetic evolution of 52 cases of Philadelphia
(Ph)-positive myelogenous leukemia (CML) receiving interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha)
therapy compared with that of 59 Ph-positive CML cases treated with busulfan (BU)
or hydroxyurea (HY). Twenty-one percent of the CML patients receiving IFN-alpha
displayed unusual secondary abnormalities, among which alteration of the long arm
of chromosome 3, del(7), and del(9) were recurrent. The frequency of these
unusual secondary changes was significantly higher than in CML cases after Bu or 
Hy treatment (P = 0.02). Three of the 11 IFN-alpha-treated CML patients displayed
cytogenetic evolution in the chronic phase and, in two cases, the cytogenetic
findings were transient, inasmuch as they disappeared upon withdrawal of
IFN-alpha. In addition, a majority of cytogenetic abnormalities involved
chromosome 3 at bands 3q21 and 3q26, which corresponds to the locus of EVI1, a
gene implicated in the development or progression of human myeloid leukemias.
Possible explanations include: toxicity of IFN-alpha by effect on bone marrow
stroma, immune-modulating effects of IFN-alpha, and mutagenic effects of
IFN-alpha. The mechanisms underlying these cytogenetic changes remain to be
elucidated. However, our data suggest that IFN-alpha induces additional
cytogenetic abnormalities even in the chronic phase through its immune-modulating
effects and that these unusual cytogenetic abnormalities do not alter the history
of CML.

PMID: 10484986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Leukemia. 1999 Sep;13(9):1359-66.

Activation of EVI1 transcripts with chromosomal translocation joining the
TCRVbeta locus and the EVI1 gene in human acute undifferentiated leukemia cell
line (Kasumi-3) with a complex translocation of der(3)t(3;7;8).

Suzukawa K(1), Kodera T, Shimizu S, Nagasawa T, Asou H, Kamada N, Taniwaki M,
Yokota J, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

A cell line (Kasumi-3) established from acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M0) had
unique phenotypes of undifferentiated leukemia cells with expression of both T
cell and myeloid antigens. Kasumi-3 cells with t(3;7)(q26;q22) highly expressed a
6 kb transcript of EVI1, which is located on chromosome 3q26. Therefore, we
further characterized the chromosomal breakpoint by pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis near EVI1. We identified and isolated the chromosomal breakpoint 
at approximately 80 kb upstream from the 5' end of EVI1. Sequence analysis of the
breakpoint revealed that the whole Vbeta region from T cell receptor beta
(TCRbeta) at 7q35 was translocated to the upstream of EVI1. A 1.0 kb TCRbeta
transcript was expressed in the Kasumi-3 cells, suggesting that TCRbeta
rearrangement occurred as Dbeta-Jbeta joining events. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis revealed that the inverted chromosome 7q22-q35 segment
between TCRbeta and the region proximal to the erythropoietin gene at 7q22 was
translocated to the region distal to EVI1 in der(3). Since the telomeric region
of chromosome 8 q was also translocated to the inverted chromosome 7q22-q35
segment in der(3), the chromosomal abnormalities of der(3) were defined as being 
der(3)t(3;7;8)(3pter-3q26::7q35-7q22::8q22 -8qter). It is suggested that a
translocated enhancer element in the TCRbeta locus and/or loss of a negative
regulatory element near EVI1 might function to enhance the EVI1 expression.
Therefore, the enhanced EVI1 expression may contribute to the development of a
subset of undifferentiated leukemia.

PMID: 10482986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Cell Growth Differ. 1999 Aug;10(8):565-73.

Ecotropic viral integration site-1 is activated during, and is sufficient for,
neuroectodermal P19 cell differentiation.

Kazama H(1), Kodera T, Shimizu S, Mizoguchi H, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Expression of the ecotropic viral integration site-1 (Evi1) proto-oncogene during
murine embryonal development is observed by in situ hybridization in primary head
folds and neural crest-derived cells associated with the peripheral nervous
system and embryonic mesoderm. To elucidate whether expression of Evi1 is
involved in early neuroectodermal or mesodermal differentiation, we used murine
embryonal carcinoma P19 cells as a model for the study of early embryonic
differentiation. After retinoic acid (RA) treatment with aggregation, expression 
of Evi1 was detected during neural differentiation in P19 cells. However, Evi1
was not expressed in P19 cells during mesodermal differentiation after DMSO
treatment with aggregation. Enforced expression of Evi1 in P19 cells induced
neuron-specific microtubule-associated protein-2 microtubule-associated protein-2
and TrkA expression in the absence of RA under monolayer culture. After
incubation with RA with aggregation, the Evi1 clones expressed
microtubule-associated protein-2 continuously but did not express glial
fibrillary acidic protein as an astrocyte marker protein until 12 days of
culture. Thus, the overexpression of Evi1 leads to neural differentiation of P19 
cells and blocks further differentiation into astrocytes by RA treatment,
suggesting that Evi1 might be an important transcription factor for regulation of
early neuroectodermal differentiation.

PMID: 10470856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Rinsho Ketsueki. 1999 Jun;40(6):518-20.

[Detection of t(3 ; 21) (q26 ; q22) with AML1/EVI1 mRNA during progression of
myelodysplastic syndrome to acute myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Japanese]

Choi I(1), Goto T, Nagano M, Muta K, Yufu Y, Uike N, Kozuru M, Abe Y, Nisimura J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, National Kyushu Cancer Center.

A 74-year-old woman had myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) in 1986. In June 1994, she
suffered exacerbation of pancytopenia with no chromosomal abnormalities, but
AML1/EVI1 chimeric mRNA was detected by RT-PCR. Two months later, an increase in 
bone marrow blasts (5%) was noted, and chromosomal analysis detected t(3 ; 21)
(q26 ; 22), del(7) (q22), del(11) (q23). In 1995, the marrow blasts increased to 
30% and the patient died of disease progression. The AML1/EVI1 gene has been
shown to cause blast crisis in chronic myelogenous leukemia. This case suggested 
that the AML1/EVI1 gene may be involved in the progression of MDS together with
del(7) (q22) and del(11) (q23).

PMID: 10422292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Front Biosci. 1999 Jun 15;4:D528-32.

The retinoblastoma protein-interacting zinc finger gene RIZ in 1p36-linked
cancers.

Huang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
shuang@burnham-inst.org

Mutations or changes in protooncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are casually
linked to human cancer pathogenesis. The RIZ gene is isolated based on the
capacity its gene products to bind to the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor
protein. Consistent with a potential role in the Rb pathway, RIZ may play an
important role in human cancer pathogenesis. RIZ maps to human chromosome band
1p36, a region commonly altered in many types of human cancers. RIZ is the
founding member of the PR-domain family of zinc finger genes. Similar to other
members of this family, RIZ is involved in human cancers in an unusual yin-yang
fashion. Two products are produced from the RIZ locus which differ by the
presence or absence of the PR domain; the PR-plus product RIZ1 is commonly lost
or underexpressed whereas the PR-minus product RIZ2 is always present in cancer
cells. This yin-yang imbalance in the amount of the two RIZ products may be an
important cause of malignancy.

PMID: 10369808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Leukemia. 1999 Mar;13(3):348-57.

MDS1/EVI1 enhances TGF-beta1 signaling and strengthens its growth-inhibitory
effect but the leukemia-associated fusion protein AML1/MDS1/EVI1, product of the 
t(3;21), abrogates growth-inhibition in response to TGF-beta1.

Sood R(1), Talwar-Trikha A, Chakrabarti SR, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Institute, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

MDS1/EVI1, located on chromosome 3 band q26, encodes a zinc-finger DNA-binding
transcription activator not detected in normal hematopoietic cells but expressed 
in several normal tissues. MDS1/EVI1 is inappropriately activated in myeloid
leukemias following chromosomal rearrangements involving band 3q26. The
rearrangements lead either to gene truncation, and to expression of the
transcription repressor EVI1, as seen in the t(3;3)(q21;q26) and inv(3)(q21q26), 
or to gene fusion, as seen in the t(3;21)(q26;q22) which results in the fusion
protein AML1/MDS1/EVI1. This fusion protein contains the DNA-binding domain of
the transcription factor AML1 fused in-frame to the entire MDS1/EVI1 with the
exclusion of its first 12 amino acids. In this report, we have analyzed the
response of the hematopoietic precursor cell line 32Dcl3, expressing either the
normal protein MDS1/EVI1 or the fusion protein AML1/MDS1/EVI1, to factors that
control cell differentiation or cell replication. The 32Dcl3 cells are
IL-3-dependent for growth and they differentiate into granulocytes when exposed
to G-CSF. They are growth-inhibited by TGF-beta1. We show that whereas the
expression of MDS1/EVI1 has no effect on granulocytic differentiation induced by 
G-CSF, expression of AML1/MDS1/EVI1 blocks differentiation resulting in cell
death. This effect is similar to that previously described by others for 32Dcl3
cells that express transgenic Evil. Furthermore, we show that whereas the
expression of the fusion protein AML1/MDS1/EVI1 completely abrogates the
growth-inhibitory effect of TGF-beta1 and allows 32Dcl3 cells to proliferate,
expression of the normal protein MDS1/EVI1 has the opposite effect, and it
strengthens the response of cells to the growth-inhibitory effect of TGF-beta1.
By using the yeast two-hybrid system, we also show that EVI1 (contained in its
entirety in MDS1/EVI1 and AML1/MDS1/EVI1) physically interacts with SMAD3, which 
is an intracellular mediator of TGF-beta1 signaling. Finally, we have correlated 
the response of the cells to G-CSF or TGF-beta1 with the ability of the normal
and fusion proteins to activate or repress promoters which they can directly
regulate by binding to the promoter site. We propose that mutations of MDS1/EVI1 
either by gene truncation resulting in the transcription repressor EVI1 or by
gene fusion to AML1 lead to an altered cellular response to growth and
differentiation factors that could result in leukemic transformation. The
different response of myeloid cells ectopically expressing the normal or the
fusion protein to G-CSF and TGF-beta1 could depend on the different
transactivation properties of these proteins resulting in divergent expression of
downstream genes regulated by the two proteins.

PMID: 10086725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Nov 27;252(3):691-6.

Comparative expression analysis of the antagonistic transcription factors EVI1
and MDS1-EVI1 in murine tissues and during in vitro hematopoietic
differentiation.

Wimmer K(1), Vinatzer U, Zwirn P, Fonatsch C, Wieser R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Biologie der Universität Wien, Währingerstrasse 10, 
Wien, A-1090, Austria.

An alternative form of the transcription factor EVI1, MDS1-EVI1, which previously
had been believed to exist only in the context of leukemic fusion mRNAs, has
recently been shown to be expressed also in normal human tissues. Moreover, it
acts as an antagonist of EVI1, activating transcription of reporter constructs
repressed by EVI1. We cloned the murine homolog of MDS1-EVI1 as well as mMds1 and
show localization of mMds1 close to mEvi1 on chromosome 3. Using RT-PCR, we
demonstrate widespread expression of both Evi1 forms in the adult mouse, as well 
as their upregulation during in vitro hematopoietic differentiation. Our data
underscore the biological importance of both EVI1 and MDS1-EVI1 and provide the
basis for further studies of their function in the mouse model system.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9837768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Oncogene. 1998 Sep 24;17(12):1527-38.

Identification of candidate target genes for EVI-1, a zinc finger oncoprotein,
using a novel selection strategy.

Kim JH(1), Hui P, Yue D, Aycock J, Leclerc C, Bjoring AR, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University, Department of Pathology, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8023,
USA.

We have sought to identify and isolate target genes for the zinc finger protein, 
EVI-1, which has been implicated in the genesis of myelogenous leukemia both in
mouse and human. We have approached this with a two-step selection: we first
selected for genomic fragments of mouse DNA that bind to the protein with high
affinity; second, we employed cDNA hybrid selection to identify gene sequences
contained within these fragments. We show that we have constructed a sublibrary
of genomic fragments that contains a significant fraction of the EVI-1-binding
sites in the mouse genome. Our data has allowed us to estimate that there are
approximately 4300 binding sites per haploid genome in the mouse. We further
demonstrate that by using cDNA hybrid selection, it is relatively straightforward
to isolate cDNAs that correspond to genes embedded in the EVI-1-binding
sublibrary. Several of these are novel, but are represented in databases of
anonymous human or mouse cDNAs (expressed sequence tags). One selected gene is
Itpr2, encoding the inositol trisphosphate type two receptor, which is
transcriptionally regulated during myelopoiesis. Finally, using a chimeric
EVI-1-VP16-fusion protein under the control of a tetracycline-regulated system,
we have shown that this chimeric activator can directly regulate Itpr2.

PMID: 9794230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Blood. 1998 Oct 15;92(8):2879-85.

CBFA2(AML1) translocations with novel partner chromosomes in myeloid leukemias:
association with prior therapy.

Roulston D(1), Espinosa R 3rd, Nucifora G, Larson RA, Le Beau MM, Rowley JD.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, and the Cancer
Research Center, The University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, 
IL, USA.

CBFA2(AML1) has emerged as a gene critical in hematopoiesis; its protein product 
forms the DNA-binding subunit of the heterodimeric core-binding factor (CBF) that
binds to the transcriptional regulatory regions of genes, some of which are
active specifically in hematopoiesis. CBFA2 forms a fusion gene with ETO and
MDS1/EVI1 in translocations in myeloid leukemia and with ETV6(TEL) in the
t(12;21) common in childhood pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We have analyzed
samples from 30 leukemia patients who had chromosome rearrangements involving
21q22 by using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Our analysis showed
that 7 of them involved CBFA2 and new translocation partners. Two patients had a 
t(17;21)(q11.2;q22), whereas the other 5 had translocations involving 1p36, 5q13,
12q24, 14q22, or 15q22. Five of these novel breakpoints in CBFA2 occurred in
intron 6; this same intron is involved in the t(3;21). One breakpoint mapped to
the t(8;21) breakpoint region in intron 5, and 1 mapped 5' to that region. All 7 
CBFA2 rearrangements resulted from balanced translocations. All 7 patients had
myeloid disorders (acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome); 2 were de
novo and 5 had treatment histories that included topoisomerase II targeting
agents. The association of therapy-related disorders with translocations
involving CBFA2 was significant by Fisher's exact test (P < .003). These results 
provide further evidence that this region of CBFA2 is susceptible to breakage in 
cells exposed to topoisomerase II inhibitors.

Copyright 1998 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 9763573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Int J Hematol. 1998 Jun;67(4):361-8.

A novel variant of acute myelomonocytic leukemia carrying t(3;12)(q26;p13) with
characteristics of 3q21q26 syndrome.

Iwase S(1), Furukawa Y, Horiguchi-Yamada J, Nemoto T, Takahara S, Kawano T,
Sekikawa T, Ito K, Yamazaki Y, Kikuchi J, Morishita K, Yamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Aoto), Jikei University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Chromosomal translocation often results in aberrant activation of the genes with 
oncogenic potential and, thus, plays an important role in leukemogenesis. We
report a unique case of acute myelomonocytic leukemia carrying a rare reciprocal 
translocation, t(3;12)(q26;p13). This patient displayed typical clinical features
of 3q21q26 syndrome such as abnormal thrombopoiesis and rapid disease
progression. Blastic cells from the patient strongly expressed the EVI1 gene,
which is located on 3q26 and is normally suppressed in bone marrow cells.
Expression of the TEL gene, located on 12p13, was also observed, but fusion
transcript between two genes was not found. No structural alterations of the EVI1
and TEL genes were detected by Southern blot and PCR analyses. We reviewed
previous literature and found 10 other cases with t(3;12)(q26;p13). These
patients comprise a unique disease group with features including dyshematopoiesis
and poor prognosis. However, characteristics related to 3q21q26 syndrome were
observed only in the present case. Further investigation is required to elucidate
the molecular basis of this particular entity.

PMID: 9695409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 26;273(26):15933-9.

The PR domain of the Rb-binding zinc finger protein RIZ1 is a protein binding
interface and is related to the SET domain functioning in chromatin-mediated gene
expression.

Huang S(1), Shao G, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Oncogenes and Tumor Suppressor Genes, The Burnham Institute, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The PR domain, first noted as the PRDI-BF1-RIZ1 homologous region, defines a
sub-class of zinc finger genes that appear to function as negative regulators of 
tumorigenesis. This family includes the MDS1-EVI1 gene inactivated in myeloid
leukemia, the PRDI-BF1/BLIMP1 transcription repressor of c-myc involved in
driving B-cell differentiation, and the RIZ gene, which encodes proteins capable 
of binding to the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb). The PR domain of 
MDS1-EVI1 is disrupted by translocations linked to myeloid leukemia, resulting in
the activation of the PR-minus oncogenic product EVI1. Remarkably similar to
MDS1-EVI1, RIZ gene also normally produces two protein products of different
length, and the smaller protein RIZ2 lacks the PR domain of RIZ1 but is otherwise
identical to RIZ1. These observations raise considerable interest to determine
the function of PR. We show here that RIZ1 PR domain mediates protein-protein
interaction. Recombinant fusion proteins of PR can bind to in vitro translated
RIZ1 and RIZ2 proteins. The binding can be disrupted by amino acid substitutions 
at conserved residues of PR, suggesting that binding is specific. Of the three
conserved exons of PR, the first two appear dispensable for binding, whereas the 
third exon is required. A region in the carboxyl terminus of RIZ proteins was
mapped to be necessary and sufficient for PR binding. We also found that the PR
domain shares significant sequence identity to the SET domain present in
chromosomal proteins that function in modulating gene expression from yeast to
mammals. Our data suggest that the PR domain is a derivative of SET domain and
may function as protein binding interface in the regulation of chromatin-mediated
gene expression.

PMID: 9632640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Leuk Lymphoma. 1997 Dec;28(1-2):43-50.

Detection of the Der (21)t(12;21) chromosome forming the TEL-AML1 fusion gene in 
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kobayashi H(1), Satake N, Kaneko Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Third Clinical Department, Saitama Cancer Center Hospital, Ina, Japan.

The t(12;21) (p13;q22) is observed in approximately 20-25% of childhood B-lineage
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cases in both Asian and Caucasian populations.
This translocation results in the fusion of TEL, a recently described ETS-like
gene on 12p13, and AML1, which was shown to be involved in the formation of
fusion genes with ETO and EVI1 in myeloid leukemias. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
analysis are useful in detecting this translocation which is not readily
identified with routine cytogenetic techniques. The t(12;21) is associated with a
distinct subgroup of patients characterized by an age between 1 and 10 years, an 
early B immunophenotype, and a good prognosis. A high incidence of the deletion
of non-translocated TEL is another characteristic of leukemic cells with this
translocation. TEL-AML1 hybrid protein thought to be critical in leukemogenesis
possesses the HLH domain of TEL fused to almost the entire AML1 protein, although
the detailed mechanisms of leukemogenesis remain obscure. RT-PCR combined with
FISH analysis of posttreatment samples appears to be useful in detecting early
relapse or minimal residual disease and thus, is expected to optimize the
treatment strategy for patients with t(12;21).

PMID: 9498702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Leukemia. 1997 Dec;11(12):2022-31.

The EVI1 gene in myeloid leukemia.

Nucifora G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Institute and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola
University Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Leukemia is an acquired genetic disease caused by the accumulation of chromosomal
abnormalities which modify either the biochemical property or the level of
expression of proteins. Frequent genetic abnormalities identified in human
leukemia are chromosomal rearrangements such as chromosomal translocations and
inversions. Chromosome band 3q26 is the site of the breakpoint of recurring
translocations and inversions observed in patients with myeloid leukemias. Two
genes located at 3q26 have been implicated in development or progression of
myeloid leukemia. They are MDS1 and EVI1. MDS1, first identified as part of a
fusion transcript resulting from the t(3;21)(q26;q22), encodes a small protein of
unknown function. EVI1 encodes a zinc finger protein inappropriately
overexpressed by chromosomal rearrangements (in man) or by retroviral insertion
(in the mouse). Both genes are rearranged by the t(3;21)(q26;q22) and by the
t(3;12)(p13;q22). As a result of the translocation, they are expressed as fusion 
genes either with AML1 or with TEL. EVI1 and MDS1 are unusual in that they can
either encode separate proteins, or they can be expressed as one protein which we
named MDS1/EVI1. EVI1 and MDS1/EVI1 have opposite functions as transcription
factors. In this report, we review the current information on the two genes, and 
on their involvement in myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 9447815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1997 Sep;45(7):556-60.

[Molecular abnormalities and clonality in myelodysplastic syndromes].

[Article in French]

Fenaux P(1), Preudhomme C.

Author information: 
(1)Service des Maladies du Sang, CHU de Lille, France.

Few genes have a proven role in the pathogenesis of myelodysplastic syndromes
(MDS). The most common abnormalities involve the RAS genes, most notably the
N-RAS gene, and are present in 10% of cases at diagnosis and in 30% to 40% during
the course of the disease. Mutations of the p53 are found in 5% to 10% of cases. 
Mutations of the cFMS genes are less common, abnormalities of the NF1 genes seem 
to occur only in children, and abnormalities of the RB genes are exceedingly
rare. A few instances of t(5;12) or t(3;21) translocation have been demonstrated,
and their study has provided evidence that the TEL, EVI1, MDS1, and AML1 genes
are involved in some cases of MDS. The presence in MDS of recurrent chromosome 7,
5q, and 20q deletions suggests that these chromosomal segments may bear tumor
suppressor genes involved in MDS. The gene(s) involved remain(s) to be
identified. Clonality studies have shown that stem cell involvement usually
occurs at the myeloid level and that normal multipotent stem cells persist in
many patients with MDS. This opens up the promising possibility that
transplantation of autologous multipotent stem cells may be an effective
therapeutic approach.

PMID: 9404479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Cancer Res. 1997 Sep 15;57(18):3914-9.

Activation of a novel gene in 3q21 and identification of intergenic fusion
transcripts with ecotropic viral insertion site I in leukemia.

Pekarsky Y(1), Rynditch A, Wieser R, Fonatsch C, Gardiner K.

Author information: 
(1)Eleanor Roosevelt Institute, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.

We have identified a novel gene, GR6, located within the leukemia breakpoint
region of 3q21, that is normally expressed in early fetal development but not in 
adult peripheral blood. GR6 is activated in the UCSD-AML1 cell line and in a
leukemic sample, both of which carry a t(3;3)(q21;q26). In UCSD-AML1, we have
also identified fusion transcripts between the ecotropic viral insertion site I
(EVI1) gene in 3q26 and GR6 and between EVI1 and Ribophorin I that maps 30 kb
telomeric to GR6 in 3q21. All fusions splice the 5' ends of the 3q21 genes into
exon 2 of the EVI1 gene, an event that is similar to the normal intergenic
splicing of MDS1-EVI1 and to those previously documented in leukemias with
t(3;21) and t(3;12), in which acute myelogenous leukemia 1-EVI1 fusions and
ETV6-EVI1 fusions, respectively, occur. The Ribophorin I-EVI1 fusion in
particular may be a common occurrence in t(3;3).

PMID: 9307271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 17;272(42):26360-6.

Transcriptional repression mediated by the PR domain zinc finger gene RIZ.

Xie M(1), Shao G, Buyse IM, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Center, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

The RIZ (G3B or MTB-Zf) zinc finger gene is structurally related to the myeloid
leukemia gene, MDS1-EVI1, and the transcription repressor/differentiation factor,
PRDI-BF1/BLIMP1, through a conserved amino-terminal motif, the PR domain. Similar
to MDS1-EVI1, RIZ gene normally produces two protein products that differ by the 
PR domain. The smaller protein RIZ2 lacks the PR domain of RIZ1 but is otherwise 
identical to RIZ1. Here we show that RIZ proteins bind to GC-rich or Sp-1-binding
elements and repress transcription. Both RIZ1 and RIZ2 repressed the herpes
simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSV-TK) promoter, one of the best characterized
eukaryotic promoters. Recombinant RIZ1 proteins were able to bind to HSV-TK
promoter. This binding was mediated by the GC-rich Sp-1 elements of the promoter 
and the first three zinc finger motifs of RIZ1. RIZ also encodes a repressor
domain that was mapped to the central region of the protein. Fusion of this
region to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain generated GAL4 site-dependent
transcriptional repressors. We also show that RIZ1 protein can efficiently
repress the simian virus 40 (SV40) early promoter, which primarily consists of
Sp-1 sites; RIZ2, however, only weakly repressed this promoter, suggesting a role
for PR in modulating RIZ protein function. The data have implications for a role 
of RIZ proteins in the regulation of cellular gene promoters, many of which are
characterized by GC-rich elements.

PMID: 9334209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Br J Haematol. 1997 Aug;98(2):399-407.

Establishment of a novel human myeloid leukaemia cell line (HNT-34) with
t(3;3)(q21;q26), t(9;22)(q34;q11) and the expression of EVI1 gene, P210 and P190 
BCR/ABL chimaeric transcripts from a patient with AML after MDS with 3q21q26
syndrome.

Hamaguchi H(1), Suzukawa K, Nagata K, Yamamoto K, Yagasaki F, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Musashino Red Cross Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

A novel human myeloid leukaemia cell line (HNT-34) was established from the
peripheral blood of a 45-year-old female patient with acute myelogenous leukaemia
(AML) transformed from chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia (CMMoL) with 3q21q26
syndrome. Morphologically, the HNT-34 cells were undifferentiated blasts which
were negative for myeloperoxidase. The HNT-34 cells were positive for CD4, CD13, 
CD33 and CD34, but negative for CD41a and CD42b. The cells actively proliferated 
in suspension with a doubling time of 26-27h in the absence of any growth
factors. Neither proliferative advantage nor differentiation was observed with
the addition of G-CSE GM-CSF, IL-3, TPO, DMSO or PMA. Cytogenetic analysis showed
46,XX. t(3;3)(q21;q26), t(9;22)(q34;q11),20q-. Molecular analysis showed
expression of EVI1 gene, P210 and P190 BCR/ABL chimaeric transcripts. The
chromosomal breakpoint at 3q26 of HNT-34 cell line was located to approximately
200 kb 5' of FIM3 locus and more upstream of the MDS1. which is the same region
as that of somatic cell hybrid line H10C. The breakpoint at 3q21 was located
within the 390 kb centromeric from the breakpoint cluster region. These results
suggest that the HNT-34 cell line may be a useful tool for the elucidation of the
mechanisms of leukaemogenesis which involve the 3q21q26 syndrome and Ph1
chromosome.

PMID: 9266939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mech Dev. 1997 Jul;65(1-2):55-70.

The Evi1 proto-oncogene is required at midgestation for neural, heart, and
paraxial mesenchyme development.

Hoyt PR(1), Bartholomew C, Davis AJ, Yutzey K, Gamer LW, Potter SS, Ihle JN,
Mucenski ML.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tennessee Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Biology
Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN 37831-8080, USA.

The ecotropic viral integration site-1 (Evi1) locus was initially identified as a
common site of retroviral integration in myeloid tumors of the AKXD-23
recombinant inbred mouse strain. The full-length Evi1 transcript encodes a
putative transcription factor, containing ten zinc finger motifs found within two
domains of the protein. To determine the biological function of the Evi1
proto-oncogene, the full-length, but not an alternately spliced, transcript was
disrupted using targeted mutagenesis in embryonic stem cells. Evi1 homozygous
mutant embryos die at approximately 10.5 days post coitum. Mutants were
distinguished at 10.5 days post coitum by widespread hypocellularity,
hemorrhaging, and disruption in the development of paraxial mesenchyme. In
addition, defects in the heart, somites, and cranial ganglia were detected and
the peripheral nervous system failed to develop. These results correlated with
whole-mount in situ hybridization analyses of embryos which showed expression of 
the Evi1 proto-oncogene in embryonic mesoderm and neural crest-derived cells
associated with the peripheral nervous system. These data suggest that Evi1 has
important roles in general cell proliferation, vascularization, and cell-specific
developmental signaling, at midgestation.

PMID: 9256345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Genomics. 1997 Jun 1;42(2):356-60.

Identification of translocational breakpoints within the intron region before the
last coding exon (exon 12) of the EVI1 gene in two cases of CML-BC with
inv(3)(q21q26).

Suzukawa K(1), Taki T, Abe T, Asoh H, Kamada N, Yokota J, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Chuo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

We have previously shown that the EVI1 gene at chromosome 3q26 is
transcriptionally activated by chromosomal rearrangements in acute myelogenous
leukemias (AMLs) with inv(3)(q21q26) or t(3;3)(q21;q26). The breakpoints in
t(3;3) cases were 15 to 330 kb upstream of the EVI1 gene, while those in inv(3)
cases were 150 to 200 kb downstream and outside of the EVI1 coding region. The
EVI1 gene is also activated in chronic myelogenous leukemia-blastic crisis
(CML-BC) with inv(3)(q21q26); however, the molecular mechanism of EVI1 activation
in CML-BC is still unclear. In this paper, we have analyzed chromosomal
rearrangements in two leukemia cell lines derived from CML-BC with inv(3)(q21q26)
and have identified the breakpoints within the EVI1 coding area. The EVI1 gene
spans over 100 kb with 12 exons (10 coding exons), and the chromosomal
breakpoints are clustered in the intron region before the last coding exon (exon 
12). The nucleotide sequence of EVI1 cDNA clones from MOLM-1 cells was truncated 
at exon 11, and a novel sequence of 681 nucleotides was added at the 3' end of
the EVI1 transcripts. The novel sequence was derived from a readthrough intron
sequence 3' to the coding exon 11 adjacent to the breakpoint. The breakpoints at 
3q21 were within the breakpoint cluster area downstream of the ribophorin I gene,
suggesting that the activation mechanism of the EVI1 gene in CMLs with inv(3) is 
the same as that in AMLs with inv(3). These results indicate that expression of a
truncated EVI1 gene is an important factor in the progression of CML.

PMID: 9192861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Haematologica. 1997 May-Jun;82(3):364-70.

The AML1 gene: a transcription factor involved in the pathogenesis of myeloid and
lymphoid leukemias.

Lo Coco F(1), Pisegna S, Diverio D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biopathology, University La Sapienza of Rome, Italy.
lococo@dbu.uniroma1.it

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The AML1 gene was identified in 1991 by cloning the
t(8;21) chromosome translocation associated with FAB M2 acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). AML1 encodes a nuclear transcription factor (TF) which shows homology in
its 5' part with the Drosophila melanogaster segmentation gene, runt, and
contains a transactivation domain in the carboxyterminal portion. In the t(8;21),
AML1 is fused to the ETO (MTG8) gene, resulting in a hybrid AML1/ETO mRNA, which 
in turn is translated into a chimeric protein. The objective of this article is
to review here the main structural and biological features of AML1 and of its
fusion products, with special focus on their clinical correlations and their
potential usefulness for prognostic and monitoring studies in human leukemia.
EVIDENCE AND INFORMATION SOURCES: The material examined in the present review
includes articles and abstracts published in journals covered by the Science
Citation Index and Medline.
STATE OF ART: The normal AML-1 protein forms the alpha-subunit of the
heterodimeric TF core binding factor (or CBF), whose beta-subunit is encoded by
the CBF beta gene on chromosome 16q22. CBF beta is rearranged and fused to the
MYH11 gene in the AML M4Eo-associated inv(16) aberration. Thus, the two most
common chromosome abnormalities of AML, i.e. t(8;21) and inv(16), affect the two 
subunits of the same target protein. This suggests that the wild type CBF must
exert an important role in the control of myeloid cell growth and/or
differentiation. Evidence that AML1 is a pivotal regulator of definitive
hematopoiesis has been recently provided by analyzing AML1 knockout mice. The
chromosome region 21q22, where AML1 maps, is involved in several other karyotypic
aberrations, such as the t(3;21) translocation associated with a subset of
therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes and AML, and the blast phase of chronic
myelogenous leukemia. In this abnormality, three distinct genes: EVI1, EAP, MDS1,
located on chromosome band 3q26, have been identified that may recombine with
AML1. Finally, the recently cloned t(12;21) translocation has been found to
involve the TEL gene (coding for a novel TF) on 12p13, and AML1 on 21q22. This
alteration, which results in the production of a TEL/AML1 chimeric protein, is
restricted to pediatric B-lineage acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL), where it
represents the most frequent molecular defect known to date (up to 25% of cases).
Strikingly, the same t(12;21) is identified in only 0.05% of pediatric B-lineage 
ALL cases analyzed by conventional karyotyping. Other relevant characteristics of
TEL/AML1-positive ALL are frequent deletion of the other TEL allele and
association with an excellent prognostic outcome.
PERSPECTIVES: It is expected that future studies will provide more detailed
information on the leukemogenic effect of AML1 alterations, and better define the
prognostic relevance of detecting the hybrid proteins formed by this gene at
diagnosis and during remission.

PMID: 9234595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:273-8.

Rearrangements of the AML1/CBFA2 gene in myeloid leukemia with the 3;21
translocation: in vitro and in vivo studies.

Zent C(1), Rowley JD, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL., USA.

AML1 is involved at the breakpoint of chromosome 21 band q22 in several recurring
chromosomal translocations associated with myeloid and lymphoid leukemias. AML1
corresponds to CBFA2, and encodes one of the DNA-binding subunits of the enhancer
core binding factor CBF. Other members of this family of DNA-binding proteins are
CBFA1 and CBFA3, also known as AML3 and AML2. The three proteins are
characterized by a highly conserved domain (runt domain, > 90% homology) at the
amino end that is necessary for DNA-binding and protein dimerization, and by a
unique domain at the carboxyl end that is necessary for transactivation. Two
recurring chromosomal translocations involving AML1 associated with myeloid
leukemias are the t(8;21)(q22;q22), seen in 20% of patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) M2, and the t(3;21)(q26;q22), that occurs in myeloid leukemias
primarily following treatment with topoisomerase II inhibitors. In five patients 
with a t(3;21) whom we studied, AML1 is interrupted by the translocation
breakpoint between the runt domain and the transactivation domain, and is fused
to two genes on chromosome band 3q26: EAP, which encodes the ribosomal protein
L22, and MDS1, which encodes a small polypeptide of unknown function. In one of
the five patients we studied, a fusion with a third gene EVI1 also occurs. The
fusion of EAP to AML1 is not in frame, and leads to a protein that is terminated 
shortly after the fusion junction by introduction of a stop codon. The fusion of 
AML1 to MDS1 is in frame, and adds 127 codons to the interrupted AML1. Thus, in
the five cases that we studied, the 3;21 translocation results in expression of
two coexisting chimeric mRNAs which contain the identical runt domain at the 5'
region, but differ in the 3' region. In addition, the chimeric junction
AML1/MDS1/EVII has been detected in cells from one of our patients with the 3;21 
translocation. Several genes necessary for myeloid lineage differentiation
contain the target sequence for AML1 in their regulatory regions. We have
compared the normal AML1 to AML1/MDS1 and AML1/EAP as transcriptional regulators 
of the CSF1R promoter which contains the CBF target sequence. Our results
indicate that whereas the normal AML1 can activate the promoter, the chimeric
proteins compete with the normal AML1 and repress expression from the CSF1R
promoter. To determine the role of the chimeric proteins in cell growth, we
expressed their cDNA in rat fibroblasts. When either fusion gene is expressed,
the cells lose contact inhibition and form foci over the monolayer. However, only
cells expressing AML1/MDS1 grow as large tumors in nude mice. Thus, although both
chimeric genes have similar effects in transactivation of the CSF1R promoter,
they affect cell growth as tumor promoters differently in vivo.

PMID: 9209363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Leukemia. 1997 Mar;11(3):352-8.

The leukemia-associated gene MDS1/EVI1 is a new type of GATA-binding
transactivator.

Soderholm J(1), Kobayashi H, Mathieu C, Rowley JD, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL, USA.

EVI1, located at chromosome band 3q26, encodes a 1051 amino acid zinc finger
protein inappropriately expressed in the leukemic cells of 2-5% of acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) patients. The activation of
EVI1 often follows a chromosomal rearrangement involving band 3q26, and the two
most frequent rearrangements are the t(3;3)(q21;q26) and the inv(3)(q21q26). EVI1
exists also as a longer protein that includes 188 additional amino acids at the
N-terminus, named MDS1/EVI1. Both genes are expressed at very low levels in the
normal bone marrow. The genomic region between the first coding exon of MDS1/EVI1
and the first coding exon of EVI1 is 150-300 kb. The majority of the chromosomal 
breakpoints at the 5' end of EVI1 in the t(3;3) resulting in EVI1 activation have
been mapped in this region. As a consequence of the t(3;3), the cell would be
unable to express MDS1/EVI1, although it would express EVI1. We have compared the
transcriptional activity of MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1, and we show that MDS1/EVI1 is a
strong activator of promoters containing the AGATA motif, whereas EVI1 is a
repressor. In addition, whereas EVI1 represses activation by the GATA-1 erythroid
factor, MDS1/EVI1 does not, and is itself repressed by EVI1. By gene fusion to
the DNA-binding domain of Gal4, we further show that the activation properties of
MDS1/EVI1 are restricted to an acidic segment encoded by the second and third
exons in the 5' untranslated region of EVI1. We have also examined the relative
expression of the two genes in normal bone marrow and in the bone marrow of
leukemia patients with 3q26 rearrangements. Our results indicate that the
rearrangements at 3q26 affect expression of EVI1, but not of MDS1/EVI1. We
propose that rearrangements at 3q26 involving EVI1 could result in leukemia by a 
two-step process involving first transcriptional disruption of MDS1/EVI1, and
next by inappropriately activating expression of EVI1.

PMID: 9067573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cancer Res. 1997 Feb 15;57(4):564-9.

Fusion of ETV6 to MDS1/EVI1 as a result of t(3;12)(q26;p13) in myeloproliferative
disorders.

Peeters P(1), Wlodarska I, Baens M, Criel A, Selleslag D, Hagemeijer A, Van den
Berghe H, Marynen P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology, University of Leuven, Belgium.

We identified a fusion between ETV6 on 12p13 and MDS1/EVI1 on 3q26 in a
t(3;12)(q26;p13) found in two cases of myeloproliferative disorder. The resulting
chimeric transcript consists of the first two exons of ETV6 fused to MDS1
sequences, which in turn is fused to the second exon of the EVI1 gene. It has
recently been reported that MDS1 can be expressed in normal tissues both as a
single gene and fused to EVI1. ETV6 does not contribute any known functional
domain to the predicted fusion protein. Association with blast crisis and
myelodysplastic syndrome-derived leukemia, bad prognosis, and relative complex
karyotype are in agreement with observations made in other cases of
t(3;12)(q26;p13). Furthermore, a comparison can be made with the formation of an 
AML1/MDS1/EVI1 fusion gene in translocations (3;21)(q26;q22).

PMID: 9044825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Oncogene. 1997 Feb 6;14(5):569-77.

The Evi-1 proto-oncogene encodes a transcriptional repressor activity associated 
with transformation.

Bartholomew C(1), Kilbey A, Clark AM, Walker M.

Author information: 
(1)The Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Glasgow, Scotland.

The myeloid transforming gene Evi-1 encodes a protein with two zinc finger
domains, designated ZF1 and ZF2, with distinct DNA binding specificities. For the
first time we demonstrate that Evi-1 has transcriptional repressor activity which
is directly proportional to the amount of Evi-1 protein in cells. Repression has 
been observed with two distinct promoters: the minimal HSV-1 tk promoter and a
VP16 inducible adenovirus E1b minimal promoter. Optimal repression is DNA binding
dependent and is mediated by either ZF1 or a heterologous GAL4 DNA binding domain
(GAL4DBD) but is significantly less efficient through the ZF2 binding site. Both 
GAL4DBD/Evi-1 fusion and non-fusion proteins have been used to map the repressor 
activity to a proline-rich region located within amino acids 514-724 between the 
ZF1 and ZF2 domains. Constitutive expression of mutant proteins lacking the
repressor domain are defective for transformation of Rat1 fibroblasts
demonstrating that this region is required for the oncogenic activity of the
Evi-1 protein. These studies show that the Evi-1 gene encodes a transcriptional
repressor and has important implications for the mechanism of action of the Evi-1
protein both in development and in the progression of some myeloid leukaemias.

PMID: 9053855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 31;272(5):2984-91.

The retinoblastoma interacting zinc finger gene RIZ produces a PR domain-lacking 
product through an internal promoter.

Liu L(1), Shao G, Steele-Perkins G, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Center, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

The PR domain is a newly recognized protein motif that characterizes a subfamily 
of Krüppel-like zinc finger genes. Members of the PR domain family have been
shown to play important roles in cell differentiation and malignant
transformation. The RIZ gene is the founding member of this family; it was
isolated because its gene products can bind to the retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor protein. Here, we have studied the RIZ gene structure and expression. 
By immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis we identified two different RIZ
protein products of 280 and 250 kDa, designated RIZ1 and RIZ2, respectively. The 
280-kDa RIZ1 product comigrated with the RIZ cDNA-derived polypeptide. The
250-kDa RIZ2 product lacked the NH2-terminal PR domain of RIZ1; it comigrated
with a truncated RIZ1 polypeptide that was initiated from an internal ATG codon. 
Both the full-length and the truncated RIZ1 polypeptide were located in the
nucleus as shown by transfection and immunofluorescence analysis. We identified
the RIZ2 transcripts and showed that they were produced by an internal promoter
located at the 5' boundary of coding exon 5. RNase protection analysis revealed
similar ratios of RIZ1 and RIZ2 transcripts in most adult rat tissues except in
testis, where RIZ1 was more abundant than RIZ2. These observations were
strikingly similar to those described for the MDS1-EVI1 cancer gene, which also
normally gives rise to a PR domain-lacking product, EVI1, because of an internal 
promoter.

PMID: 9006946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Leukemia. 1996 Dec;10(12):1891-6.

Refined chromosomal localization of the human thrombopoietin gene to 3q27-q28 and
exclusion as the responsible gene for thrombocytosis in patients with
rearrangements of 3q21 and 3q26.

Schnittger S(1), de Sauvage FJ, Le Paslier D, Fonatsch C.

Author information: 
(1)AG Tumorcytogenetik, Institut für Humangenetik der Medizinischen Universität
zu Lübeck, Germany.

Thrombocytosis is a characteristic clinical feature in patients with myelocytic
malignancies and chromosomal rearrangements of 3q21 and 3q26, sometimes called
the '3q21q26 syndrome'. The function of thrombopoietin (TPO) in
megakaryocytopoiesis and thrombopoiesis as well as its chromosomal location,
marked TPO as a candidate gene for malignancies with 3q rearrangements combined
with dysmegakaryopoiesis. In this study 12 cases with inv(3)(q21q26) or
t(3;3)(q21;q26) were analyzed by means of PFGE, but no rearrangements near the
TPO locus were detectable. Six YACs containing the TPO locus were isolated and
characterized. By dual color in situ hybridization using a YAC from 3q26
containing the EVI1 gene and a YAC from the TPO locus, the localization of the
human TPO gene could be refined to 3q27-q28 about 15-20 Mbp telomeric to the 3q26
breakpoints occurring in myeloid malignancies. TPO levels were analyzed in the
serum of three patients and were found to be in the normal range. These results
confirm the findings of two previous studies that thrombopoietin expression is
not the main cause of thrombocytosis in the 3q21q26 syndrome.

PMID: 8946927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Leuk Lymphoma. 1996 Nov;23(5-6):431-6.

Pattern of expression and their clinical implications of the GATA family, stem
cell leukemia gene, and EVI1 in leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes.

Ohyashiki K(1), Ohyashiki JH, Shimamoto T, Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

Transcription factors play a key role in controlling the cellular differentiation
of hematopoietic cells. Among the known transcription factors, both GATA-1 and
SCL play roles in the cellular differentiation of erythrocytic and megakaryocytic
lineages, while GATA-2 is thought to maintain and promote the proliferation of
early hematopoietic progenitors. In this review, the clinical implications of
expression of the GATA family, SCL, and EVI1 gene in various types of human
leukemia are discussed. De novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients may be
subdivided into three categories depending on the expression pattern of
transcription factors, i.e., GATA-1(+)SCL(+), GATA-1(+)SCL(-), and
GATA-1(-)SCL(-). AML patients with both GATA-1 and SCL expression have a poor
prognosis and have some characteristic clinical and hematologic features. The
EVI1 gene may be expressed through at least two pathways in hematologic
malignancies; one is related to chromosomal changes at 3q26, while the other is
related to myelodysplasia regardless of chromosomal changes at 3q26 region. These
findings suggest that the pattern of expression in transcription factors in
abnormal hematopoietic cells is reflected in the malignant phenotype and play a
role in the pathogenesis of the disease.

PMID: 9031072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Genomics. 1996 Oct 1;37(1):24-8.

The B-lymphocyte maturation promoting transcription factor BLIMP1/PRDI-BF1 maps
to D6S447 on human chromosome 6q21-q22.1 and the syntenic region of mouse
chromosome 10.

Mock BA(1), Liu L, LePaslier D, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.

The human PRDI-BF1 or BLIMP1 gene and its mouse homolog Blimp1 are members of the
recently realized PR domain family that includes the retinoblastoma interacting
zinc finger gene RIZ and the MDS1-EVI1 leukemia cancer gene. The specific
high-level expression of Blimp1 in late B and plasma cells, its induction during 
B-cell differentiation, and its ability to drive B-cell maturation suggest that
this gene may play a role in the differentiation and pathogenesis of B cells. We 
have now mapped the physical location of BLIMP1 near the marker D6S447 on human
chromosome 6q21-q22.1; we have also mapped Blimp1 to mouse Chromosome 10 at 14 cM
distal to the Myb locus and to a region homologous to the location of BLIMP1.
Deletions of the 6q21-q22 region are common in several human malignancies,
particularly in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL). The data led us to suggest
that BLIMP1 may be a candidate B-NHL tumor suppressor gene.

PMID: 8921366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Am J Hematol. 1996 Sep;53(1):30-4.

Expression of EVI1 and the Retinoblastoma genes in acute myelogenous leukemia
with t(3;13)(q26;q13-14).

Yufu Y(1), Sadamura S, Ishikura H, Abe Y, Katsuno M, Nishimura J, Nawata H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

The EVI1 DNA-binding protein gene on chromosome 3q26 has been reported to be
activated in some leukemia cells with alterations in 3q26. We present an acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML) patient with a rare chromosomal translocation,
t(3;13)(q26.2;q13-14). By reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, we
detected active transcription of the EVI1 gene in the patient's leukemia cells.
The retinoblastoma susceptibility (Rb) gene, a tumor-suppressor gene, is located 
at chromosome 13ql4 and is within the other translocation breakpoint in this
patient. The expression of the Rb gene product was found to be substantially
decreased in the patient's leukemia cells by Western blotting. Southern blot
analysis, however, revealed no gross abnormalities of the Rb gene. Although it is
unlikely that the Rb gene is directly involved in this translocation, the loss of
the Rb gene product combined with the activation of the EVI1 gene may have led to
the development of leukemia.

PMID: 8813093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Blood. 1996 Jul 15;88(2):682-9.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of t(3; 12)(q26; p13): a recurring
chromosomal abnormality involving the TEL gene (ETV6) in myelodysplastic
syndromes.

Raynaud SD(1), Baens M, Grosgeorge J, Rodgers K, Reid CD, Dainton M, Dyer M,
Fuzibet JG, Gratecos N, Taillan B, Ayraud N, Marynen P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique, URA CNRS 1462, Faculté de Médecine, Nice, France.

We have identified a new recurrent reciprocal translocation between chromosome 3 
and 12 with breakpoints at bands 3q26 and 12p13, t(3;12)(q26;p13) in the
malignant cells from five patients with acute transformation of myelodysplastic
syndrome or blast crisis of chronic myelogenous leukemia. t(3;12)(q26;p13)
appears as a rare but nonrandom event present in various myeloid leukemia
subtypes, which is frequently associated with dysplasia of megakaryocytes,
multilineage involvement, short duration of any blastic phase, and a very poor
prognosis. Here, we report the molecular cytogenetic analysis of the t(3;12).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization results indicate that the 3q26 breakpoints are
quite heterogeneous and occur 5' of MDS1, 3' of EVI1, or between MDS1 and EVI1.
Our results are very similar to those observed in other 3q26 rearrangements in
which breakpoints were shown to occur over considerable distances 5' and 3' of
EVI1. Fluorescence in situ hybridization investigations proved that, in three
myelodysplastic syndrome cases with t(3;12)(q26;p13), the 12p 13 breakpoint
occurred within the TEL gene.

PMID: 8695816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Oncogene. 1996 Jul 4;13(1):183-91.

Structurally altered Evi-1 protein generated in the 3q21q26 syndrome.

Ogawa S(1), Kurokawa M, Tanaka T, Mitani K, Inazawa J, Hangaishi A, Tanaka K,
Matsuo Y, Minowada J, Tsubota T, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

Overexpression of the Evi-1 gene appears to be a consistent feature of the
3q21q26 syndrome, an association of myeloid leukemias/myelodysplastic syndrome
with a specific chromosomal aberration involving both 3q21 and 3q26, such as
t(3;3)(q21;q26) or inv(3)(q21q26). The rearrangement in 3q26 has been reported to
occur near the Evi-1 locus, implicating that it is the critical gene deregulated 
in the 3q21q26 syndrome. Here we present a structural abnormality of Evi-1
protein in a case with the 3q21q26 syndrome. In this case carrying typical
inv(3)(q21q26), the 3q26 breakpoint is located within an intron of the Evi-1
gene, and resulted in overexpression of normally unexpressed, an aberrant form of
Evi-1 protein, in which the C-terminal 44 amino acids of wild-type Evi-1 protein 
were truncated and replaced by five amino acids. The truncated Evi-1 protein is
shown to increase AP1 activity when expressed in NIH3T3 cells as its wild-type
counterpart. We also show that the origin of this peculiar type of rearrangement 
of the Evi-1 gene is not an artifact during establishment of the cell line, but
is the event that occurred in the primary leukemic cells. Our results strongly
support that the primary target for the 3q21q26 syndrome is the Evi-1 gene, and
provide the first evidence that the structurally altered Evi-1 gene may be
involved in the 3q21q26 syndrome.

PMID: 8700545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Genomics. 1996 May 15;34(1):119-21.

Physical mapping of the retinoblastoma interacting zinc finger gene RIZ to D1S228
on chromosome 1p36.

Buyse IM(1), Takahashi EI, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, The Burnham Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, 
La Jolla, California, 92037, USA.

The retinoblastoma interacting zinc finger gene RIZ is a member of the recently
discovered PR domain family that includes the MDS1-EVI1 breakpoint gene involved 
in human leukemia. To help understand the role of RIZ in human diseases, we have 
determined the cytogenetic and physical localizations of the RIZ gene. Using
fluorescence in situ hybridization, we determined that RIZ maps to 1p36. On the
physical map, RIZ is adjacent to the polymorphic marker D1S228. We suggest that
the RIZ gene may be a candidate target of 1p36 alterations that commonly occur in
neuroendocrine, breast, liver, colon, and lymphoid tumors.

PMID: 8661032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Leukemia. 1996 May;10(5):751-6.

The molecular biology of chronic myeloid leukaemia.

Melo JV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, London, UK.

Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is characterized cytogenetically by a
t(9;22)(q34;ql1) reciprocal translocation which gives origin to a hybrid BCR-ABL 
gene, encoding a p2lO(BCR-ABL) fusion protein with elevated tyrosine kinase
activity and transforming abilities. The t(9;22) was suggested to be associated
with genomic imprinting of centromeric regions of chromosomes 9 and 22, but the
genes directly affected by the translocation, ABL and BCR, were shown not to be
imprinted. For most diagnostic and research purposes the BCR-ABL gene can be
efficiently identified by reverse-transcription and polymerase chain reaction
(RT/PCR) amplification of its fusion transcripts, which can be quantified by
competitive PCR and similar assays for assessment of residual disease in the
follow-up of therapy. In the great majority of CML patients the BCR-ABL
transcripts exhibit a b2a2 and/or a b3a2 junction; in rare cases, the only
detectable BCR-ABL transcripts have unusual junctions, such as b2a3, b3a3, e1a2
or e6a2. There is a recent suggestion that the BCR-ABL gene may not be always
'functional', since extremely low levels of BCR-ABL transcripts can be found in
leucocytes from normal individuals and, conversely, it appears that no BCR-ABL
transcription can be detected in a proportion of Ph-positive haematopoietic
progenitors from some CML patients. The role, if any, of the reciprocal ABL-BCR
hybrid gene in CML is unknown. Although its mRNA message is in frame, no ABL-BCR 
fusion protein has yet been identified in CML patients. The blast crisis of CML
has been variably associated with abnormalities of proto-oncogenes, such as RAS
and MYC, or of tumour suppressor genes, in particular RB, p53 and p16, or with
the generation of chimeric transcription factors, as in the AML1-EVI1 gene
fusion. It is likely, therefore, that multiple and alternative molecular defects,
as opposed to a single universal mechanism, underlie the acute transformation of 
the disease.

PMID: 8656667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Br J Haematol. 1996 Apr;93(1):68-74.

Establishment of a myeloid leukaemia cell line (Kasumi-4) with
t(9;22;11)(q34;q11;q13), inv(3)(q21q26) and the EVI1 gene activation from a
patient with chronic myelogenous leukaemia in blast crisis.

Asou H(1), Eguchi M, Suzukawa K, Morishita K, Tanaka K, Date M, Hamamoto K,
Kamada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Cytogenetics, Hiroshima University, Japan.

A novel human leukaemia cell line (Kasumi-4) was established from the peripheral 
blood of a 6-year-old girl suffering from chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML) in 
blast crisis. The Kasumi-4 cells had the following characteristic features:
undifferentiated blasts which were positive from CD34, CD33 and CD13 surface
markers, but negative for myeloperoxidase platelet peroxidase, CD36, CD41 and
CD42; chromosome abnormalities of t(9;22;11) (q34;q11;q13), inv(3)(q21q26); and
elevated expression of EVI1 gene which is located at chromosome band 3q26.
Megakaryocytic maturation was not observed in the liquid culture following the
addition of TPA, IL3, IL-6 or GM-CSF, b2-a2 type of BCR-ABL chimaeric messenger
RNA was detected by RT-PCR analysis. This the first leukaemia cell line with a
three-way translocation containing the the Ph chromosome and the second cell line
with an inv(3)(q21q26). This cell line appears to be useful for studying the
mechanisms of leukaemogenesis involving these chromosomal abnormalities and
related oncogenes.

PMID: 8611478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1996 Mar;87(3):269-74.

Establishment of an undifferentiated leukemia cell line (Kasumi-3) with
t(3;7)(q27;q22) and activation of the EVI1 gene.

Asou H(1), Suzukawa K, Kita K, Nakase K, Ueda H, Morishita K, Kamada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Cytogenetics, Research Institute for Nuclear Medicine and
Biology, Hiroshima.

A novel human leukemia cell line (Kasumi-3) was established from the blast cells 
of a 57-year-old man suffering from myeloperoxidase-negative acute leukemia. The 
cell line had five distinctive features, as follows. 1) Flow cytometric analyses 
showed cell surface expression of CD7, CD4, CD13, CD33, CD34, HLA-DR and c-Kit.
This phenotype is compatible with that of acute myelocytic leukemia cells with
the M0 subtype in the French-American-British classification. 2) Kasumi-3 cells
carried chromosomal abnormalities of t(3;7)(q27:q22), del(5)(q15), del(9)(q32),
and add(12)(p11). The breakpoint of 3q27 was located near the EVI1 gene, and a
high level of expression of the EVI1 gene was observed. 4) Kasumi-3 cells treated
with TPA showed maturation to monocytic lineage. 5) Treatment with either
interleukin (IL)-2, IL-3, IL-4, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating or stem
cell factor induced the proliferation of Kasumi-3 cells. Thus, the Kasumi-3 cell 
line shows the characteristic features of undifferentiated leukemia. It should,
therefore, be useful both for studying the biological characteristics of acute
myelogenous leukemia M0 subtype and for investigating the role of the EVI1 gene
in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 8613429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Feb 20;93(4):1642-7.

Intergenic splicing of MDS1 and EVI1 occurs in normal tissues as well as in
myeloid leukemia and produces a new member of the PR domain family.

Fears S(1), Mathieu C, Zeleznik-Le N, Huang S, Rowley JD, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cellular Biology, The University of
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The EVI1 gene, located at chromosome band 3q26, is overexpressed in some myeloid 
leukemia patients with breakpoints either 5' of the gene in the t(3;3)(q21;q26)
or 3' of the gene in the inv(3)(q21q26). EVI1 is also expressed as part of a
fusion transcript with the transcription factor AML1 in the t(3;21)(q26;q22),
associated with myeloid leukemia. In cells with t(3;21), additional fusion
transcripts are AML1-MDS1 and AML1-MDS1-EVI1. MDS1 is located at 3q26 170-400 kb 
upstream (telomeric) of EVI1 in the chromosomal region in which some of the
breakpoints 5' of EVI1 have been mapped. MDS1 has been identified as a single
gene as well as a previously unreported exon(s) of EVI1 We have analyzed the
relationship between MDS1 and EVI1 to determine whether they are two separate
genes. In this report, we present evidence indicating that MDS1 exists in normal 
tissues both as a unique transcript and as a normal fusion transcript with EVI1, 
with an additional 188 codons at the 5' end of the previously reported EVI1 open 
reading frame. This additional region has about 40% homology at the amino acid
level with the PR domain of the retinoblastoma-interacting zinc-finger protein
RIZ. These results are important in view of the fact that EVI1 and MDS1 are
involved in leukemia associated with chromosomal translocation breakpoints in the
region between these genes.

PMCID: PMC39995
PMID: 8643684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Feb 6;93(3):1044-8.

The chimeric genes AML1/MDS1 and AML1/EAP inhibit AML1B activation at the CSF1R
promoter, but only AML1/MDS1 has tumor-promoter properties.

Zent CS(1), Mathieu C, Claxton DF, Zhang DE, Tenen DG, Rowley JD, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The (3;21)(q26;q22) translocation associated with treatment-related
myelodysplastic syndrome, treatment-related acute myeloid leukemia, and blast
crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia results in the expression of the chimeric
genes AML1/EAP, AML1/MDS1, and AML1/EVI1. AML1 (CBFA2), which codes for the alpha
subunit of the heterodimeric transcription factor CBF, is also involved in the
t(8;21), and the gene coding for the beta subunit (CBFB) is involved in the
inv(16). These are two of the most common recurring chromosomal rearrangements in
acute myeloid leukemia. CBF corresponds to the murine Pebp2 factor, and CBF
binding sites are found in a number of eukaryotic and viral enhancers and
promoters. We studied the effects of AML1/EAP and AML1/MDS1 at the AML1 binding
site of the CSF1R (macrophage-colony-stimulating factor receptor gene) promoter
by using reporter gene assays, and we analyzed the consequences of the expression
of both chimeric proteins in an embryonic rat fibroblast cell line (Rat1A) in
culture and after injection into athymic nude mice. Unlike AML1, which is an
activator of the CSF1R promoter, the chimeric proteins did not transactivate the 
CSF1R promoter site but acted as inhibitors of AML1 (CBFA2). AML1/EAP and
AML1/MDS1 expressed in adherent Rat1A cells decreased contact inhibition of
growth, and expression of AML1/MDS1 was associated with acquisition of the
ability to grow in suspension culture. Expression of AML1/MDS1 increased the
tumorigenicity of Rat1A cells injected into athymic nude mice, whereas AML1/EAP
expression prevented tumor growth. These results suggest that expression of
AML1/EAP and AML1/MDS1 can interfere with normal AML1 function, and that
AML1/MDS1 has tumor-promoting properties in an embryonic rat fibroblast cell
line.

PMCID: PMC40027
PMID: 8577711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Oncogene. 1996 Feb 1;12(3):563-9.

Retroviral insertional activation of the EVI1 oncogene does not prevent
G-CSF-induced maturation of the murine pluripotent myeloid cell line 32Dcl3.

Khanna-Gupta A(1), Lopingco MC, Savinelli T, Zibello T, Berliner N, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06520-8023, USA.

Evi1 is a myeloid-specific protooncogene that encodes 145 kDa and 88 kDa proteins
via alternative splicing. Overexpression of the gene via retroviral insertion in 
murine tumors or chromosomal rearrangement in human tumors is associated with
myeloid leukemias and myelodysplasias; however, the mechanism by which such
overexpression leads to transformation is not clear. It has been postulated that 
overexpression of evi1 acts to block normal myelopoiesis. In attempts to assess
the effect of overexpression of evi1 on myelopoiesis, we chose to utilize the
IL-3-dependent murine 32Dcl3 cell line, which has been shown to differentiate in 
culture in response to G-CSF. Previous experiments with this cell line, which we 
have confirmed, showed that overexpression of evi1, mediated by retroviral vector
transfer, caused a block to G-CSF-induced cell survival and differentiation. We
report here that the naive 32Dcl3 cell line contains a rearrangement of the evi1 
locus and constitutively overexpresses evi1 mRNA and protein; this expression is 
downregulated only slightly during G-CSF-induced myeloid maturation. The steady
state levels, molecular weight and DNA binding characteristics of the EVI1
protein in these cells is comparable to that seen in NFS 58, a myeloid leukemia
cell line with retroviral insertion at evi1. The observed ability of the murine
32Dcl3 cells to fully differentiate in the presence of G-CSF while evi1 continues
to be expressed indicates that, at the levels expressed in naive 32Dcl3, evi1
does not block G-CSF-induced survival and differentiation. Thus, retroviral
insertions at evi1 may have been selected for in 32Dcl3 cells due to effects
other than that on G-CSF-induced cell survival.

PMID: 8637713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Br J Haematol. 1996 Feb;92(2):429-31.

t(3;21)(q26;q22) with AML1 rearrangement in a de novo childhood acute monoblastic
leukaemia.

Johansson B(1), Fioretos T, Garwicz S, Heim S, Mitelman F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Sweden.

t(3;21)(q26;q22) is a recurrent chromosomal abnormality in Philadelphia-positive 
chronic myeloid leukaemia in blast crisis and in treatment-related
myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukaemia. The molecular consequences 
of the t(3;21) are presently being unravelled; various transcripts between the
AML1 gene in 21q22 and several unrelated genes, i.e. EAP, EVI1 and MDS1, in 3q26 
are generated, resulting in the formation of a chimaeric transcription factor.
The t(3;21) has only rarely been described in de novo leukaemias and never before
in an acute leukaemia in a child. We here present the clinical, cytogenetic and
molecular genetic findings in a boy with a de novo acute monoblastic leukaemia
with t(3;21)(q26;q22) and AML1 rearrangement.

PMID: 8603012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 12;271(2):1104-10.

Zinc fingers 1-7 of EVI1 fail to bind to the GATA motif by itself but require the
core site GACAAGATA for binding.

Perkins AS(1), Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8023, USA.

EVI1 is a zinc finger oncoprotein that binds via fingers 1-7 to the sequence
GACAAGATAA. The target genes on which EVI1 acts are unknown. This binding motif
overlaps with that for the GATA transcription factors, (T/A)GATA(A/G), and GATA-1
can bind to and activate transcription via a GACAAGATAA motif. The possibility
has been raised that, when overexpressed in leukemogenesis, EVI1 may function by 
interfering with the differentiation-promoting action of GATA factors. To explore
this, we have assessed the affinity of EVI1 for the GATA binding sites derived
from erythroid-specific GATA-1 target genes, and found only low affinity
interactions. We examined the contacts between EVI1 and DNA by methylation
interference studies, which revealed extensive contacts between EVI1 and its
binding site. The importance of the contacts for high affinity binding was shown 
by in vitro quantitative gel shift studies and in vivo cotransfection studies. To
examine what types of sequences from mouse genomic DNA bind to EVI1, we isolated 
and sequenced five EVI1-binding fragments, and each showed the GACAAGATA site.
The data presented contribute to our knowledge of the binding specificity of
EVI1, and yield a clearer picture of what sequences can, and cannot, act as
targets for EVI1 action.

PMID: 8557637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1996;211:243-52.

Rearrangement of the AML1/CBFA2 gene in myeloid leukemia with the 3;21
translocation: expression of co-existing multiple chimeric genes with similar
functions as transcriptional repressors, but with opposite tumorigenic
properties.

Zent C(1), Kim N, Hiebert S, Zhang DE, Tenen DG, Rowley JD, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL, USA.

Several recurring chromosomal translocations involve the AML1 gene at 21q22 in
myeloid leukemias resulting in fusion mRNAs and chimeric proteins between AML1
and a gene on the partner chromosome. AML1 corresponds to CBFA2, one of the
DNA-binding subunits of the enhancer core binding factor CBF. Other CBF
DNA-binding subunits are CBFA1 and CBFA3, also known as AML3 and AML2. AML1, AML2
and AML3 are each characterized by a conserved domain at the amino end, the runt 
domain, that is necessary for DNA-binding and protein dimerization, and by a
transactivation domain at the carboxyl end. AML1 was first identified as the gene
located at the breakpoint junction of the 8;21 translocation associated with
acute myeloid leukemia. The t(8;21)(q22;q22) interrupts AML1 after the runt
homology domain, and fuses the 5' part of AML1 to almost all of ETO, the partner 
gene on chromosome 8. AML1 is an activator of several myeloid promoters; however,
the chimeric AML1/ETO is a strong repressor of some AML1-dependent promoters.
AML1 is also involved in the t(3;21)(q26;q22), that occurs in myeloid leukemias
primarily following treatment with topoisomerase II inhibitors. We have studied
five patients with a 3;21 translocation. In all cases, AML1 is interrupted after 
the runt domain, and is translocated to chromosome band 3q26. As a result of the 
t(3;21), AML1 is consistently fused to two separate genes located at 3q26. The
two genes are EAP, which codes for the abundant ribosomal protein L22, and MDS1, 
which encodes a small polypeptide of unknown function. In one of our patients, a 
third gene EVI1 is also involved. EAP is the closest to the breakpoint junction
with AML1, and EVI1 is the furthest away. The fusion of EAP to AML1 is not in
frame, and leads to a protein that is terminated shortly after the fusion
junction by introduction of a stop codon. The fusion of AML1 to MDS1 is in frame,
and adds 127 codons to the interrupted AML1. Thus, in the five cases that we
studied, the 3;21 translocation results in expression of two coexisting chimeric 
mRNAs which contain the identical runt domain at the 5' region, but differ in the
3' region. In addition, the chimeric transcript AML1/MDS1/EVI1 has also been
detected in cells from one patient with the 3;21 translocation as well as in one 
of our patients. Several genes necessary for myeloid lineage differentiation
contain the target sequence for AML1 in their regulatory regions. One of them is 
the CSF1R gene. We have compared the normal AML1 to AML1/MDS1, AML1/EAP and
AML1/MDS1/EVI1 as transcriptional regulators of the CSF1R promoter. Our results
indicate that AML1 can activate the promoter, and that the chimeric proteins
compete with the normal AML1 and repress expression from the CSF1R promoter.
AML1/MDS1 and AML1/EAP affect cell growth and phenotype when expressed in rat
fibroblasts. However, the pattern of tumor growth of cells expressing the
different chimeric genes in nude mice is different. We show that when either
fusion gene is expressed, the cells lose contact inhibition and form foci over
the monolayer. In addition, cells expressing AML1/MDS1 grow larger tumors in nude
mice, whereas cells expressing only AML1/EAP do not form tumors, and cells
expressing both chimeric genes induce tumors of intermediate size. Thus, although
both chimeric genes have similar effects in transactivation assays of the CSF1R
promoter, they affect cell growth differently in culture and have opposite
effects as tumor promoters in vivo. Because of the results obtained with cells
expressing one or both genes, we conclude that MDS1 seems to have tumorigenic
properties, but that AML1/EAP seems to repress the oncogenic property of
AML1/MDS1.

PMID: 8585955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1996;211:211-22.

Molecular analysis of Evi1, a zinc finger oncogene involved in myeloid leukemia.

Lopingco MC(1), Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8023, USA.

Through chromosomal rearrangements and/or proviral insertions, a number of genes 
encoding nuclear transcription factors have been identified that play key roles
in leukemogenesis. One of these is Evi1, which plays a role in both murine and
human myeloid leukemia. The exact mechanism by which Evi1 exerts its leukemogenic
effect is not clear, but it may involve the inhibition of terminal
differentiation, through the abnormal repression of genes necessary for cellular 
maturation. Our analysis of the DNA binding characteristics of EVI1 indicate a
high degree of specificity, which likely indicates that the protein acts on a
tightly defined number of targets in the cell. We are beginning to characterize
candidate target genes located in the mouse genome near EVI1 binding sites with
the expectation that these will yield insight into EVI1 function both in normal
cells and in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 8585952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Oncogene. 1995 Sep 7;11(5):833-40.

The AML1/Evi-1 fusion protein in the t(3;21) translocation exhibits transforming 
activity on Rat1 fibroblasts with dependence on the Evi-1 sequence.

Kurokawa M(1), Ogawa S, Tanaka T, Mitani K, Yazaki Y, Witte ON, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

The t(3;21) (q26;q22) chromosomal translocation associated with blastic crisis of
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) results in the formation of a chimeric protein
fusing the amino-terminal DNA-binding domain encoded by the AML1 gene to the
carboxyl-terminal-encoding portion of the Evi-1 gene. In order to evaluate
transforming activity of this protein, AML1/Evi-1 was introduced into Rat1
fibroblasts. Cells expressing the fusion product formed macroscopic colonies in
soft agar, indicating that AML1/Evi-1 is a transforming gene. It was also
demonstrated that introduction of AML1/Evi-1 into the Rat1 clones harboring
BCR/ABL also conferred enhanced capacity for anchorage independent growth.
Analyses of deletion mutants of AML1/Evi-1 revealed that removal of the second
zinc finger domain within the Evi-1 sequence totally abrogated the ability of
AML1/Evi-1 to transform Rat1 cells. We showed that the transforming effect is
correlated with the AP-1 activation induced by AML1/Evi-1. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that c-jun is transcriptionally activated in Rat1 cells transformed 
by AML1/Evi-1, suggesting that c-jun expression is under control of AML1/Evi-1.
These results indicate that the oncogenic effect of the t(3;21) translocation is 
caused by the generation of a chimeric transcriptional factor and that AML1/Evi-1
could perform a pivotal role in leukemic progression of CML.

PMID: 7675444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Oncogene. 1995 Jul 6;11(1):191-8.

The Evi-1 zinc finger myeloid transforming protein binds to genomic fragments
containing (GATA)n sequences.

Matsugi T(1), Kreider BL, Delwel R, Cleveland JL, Askew DS, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

The EVI1 gene is activated by chromosomal translocations and inversions in
approximately 5% of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and by retroviral
insertion in approximately 20% of murine myeloid leukemias. EVI1 encodes a
nuclear DNA-binding protein having 10 zinc finger motifs in two noncontiguous
domains consisting of an amino-terminal domain of seven fingers and a carboxyl
domain containing three fingers. To evaluate the sequence specificity of Evi-1
binding and potentially identify genomic targets, whole-genome PCR was utilized
to isolate multiple Sau3A fragments which specifically bind to the amino-terminal
zinc finger domain. The majority of these clones represented single copy
sequences and virtually all contained variable numbers of repeats of the GATA
motif, the target sequence for the erythroid-specific transcription factor
GATA-1. GST/Evi-1 fusion proteins containing the amino-terminal domain of zinc
fingers bound the GATA motif in these clones as well as to those present in the
human gamma-globin promoter, similar to the binding of purified GATA-1 protein.
By obtaining corresponding large genomic clones for eight of these fragments,
transcription units were found associated with two. One corresponded to the
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene and its expression was not affected
by Evi-1. The second is a novel gene whose expression is repressed in murine
myeloid cell lines that express Evi-1.

PMID: 7624127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Blood. 1995 Jul 1;86(1):1-14.

AML1 and the 8;21 and 3;21 translocations in acute and chronic myeloid leukemia.

Nucifora G(1), Rowley JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

PMID: 7795214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Blood. 1995 Jun 15;85(12):3713-8.

Ecotropic virus integration site-1 gene preferentially expressed in
post-myelodysplasia acute myeloid leukemia: possible association with GATA-1,
GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia gene expression.

Ohyashiki JH(1), Ohyashiki K, Shimamoto T, Kawakubo K, Fujimura T, Nakazawa S,
Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

We investigated expression of the human ecotropic virus integration site-1 (EVI1)
gene in patients with leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) using the
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method. The EVI1
transcripts were detected in 5 (10.0%) of 50 patients with de novo acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML), including two AML patients with trilineage myelodysplasia, and in
8 (34.8%) of 23 patients with post-myelodysplastic syndrome AML (post-MDS AML).
EVI1 expression was also detected in 6 (35.3%) of 17 MDS patients and three of
six patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in myelomegakaryoblast crisis.
No EVI1 transcripts were detected in patients with acute lymphoid leukemia (n =
15) or CML in lymphoid blast crisis (n = 4). Chromosomal abnormalities at the
3q26 region, where the EVI1 gene is located, were found in one patient with MDS
and two patients with CML myelomegakaryoblast crisis who had EVI1 expression. Our
results showed that EVI1 expression was frequent in patients with post-MDS AML
and AML with trilineage myelodysplasia, regardless of the presence or absence of 
3q26 abnormalities. EVI1 expression was accompanied by expression of GATA-1 and
GATA-2, and often by stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene expression. In patients with
post-MDS AML, EVI1 expression was not always associated with a 3q26 abnormality, 
whereas EVI1 expression in CML myelomegakaryoblast crisis was often linked to a
3q26 abnormality. Our results suggest that the leukemogenic role of EVI1
expression may differ between post-MDS AML and leukemia, with EVI1 expression
associated with a 3q26 abnormality.

PMID: 7780155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Oncogene. 1995 May 18;10(10):1961-7.

EVI-1 zinc finger protein works as a transcriptional activator via binding to a
consensus sequence of GACAAGATAAGATAAN1-28 CTCATCTTC.

Morishita K(1), Suzukawa K, Taki T, Ihle JN, Yokota J.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Previously, the DNA-binding consensus sequences for domains 1 (GACAAGATAAGATAA)
and 2 (GAAGATGAG) of the EVI-1 protein were identified using GST fusion proteins 
of each domain in binding and amplification reactions. We have utilized
full-length EVI-1 protein to confirm these consensus sequences and determine the 
spacial and orientation requirements for binding. Our data demonstrate that
full-length EVI-1 can independently bind the consensus sequences in gel mobility 
shift assays. In binding and amplification reactions only the domain 1 consensus 
sequence (D1-CONS) was obtained with full-length EVI-1 protein. However, by using
constructs in which D1-CONS was anchored, products were obtained in which the
domain 2 consensus sequence (D2-CONS) was observed with the spacing and
orientation of GACAAGATAATATAAN1-28 CTCATCTTC. Using this consensus sequence we
show that EVI-1 can activate transcription from reporter constructs. No
transcriptional activation was seen with the reporter construct containing
D1-CONS alone while activation was seen with the construct-containing D2-CONS
alone. These results indicate that the EVI-1 protein works as a transcriptional
activator and the binding of the domain 2 with D2-CONS is essential for its
activation.

PMID: 7761097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 May;15(5):2383-92.

Dual functions of the AML1/Evi-1 chimeric protein in the mechanism of
leukemogenesis in t(3;21) leukemias.

Tanaka T(1), Mitani K, Kurokawa M, Ogawa S, Tanaka K, Nishida J, Yazaki Y,
Shibata Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

The chromosomal translocation t(3;21)(q26;q22), which is found in blastic crisis 
in chronic myelogenous leukemias and myelodysplastic syndrome-derived leukemias, 
produces AML1/Evi-1 chimeric transcription factor and is thought to play
important roles in acute leukemic transformation of hemopoietic stem cells. We
report here the functional analyses of AML1/Evi-1. It was revealed that
AML1/Evi-1 itself does not alter the transactivation level through mouse
polyomavirus enhancer-binding protein 2 (PEBP2; PEA2) sites (binding site of
AML1) but dominantly suppresses the transactivation by intact AML1, which is
assumed to be a stimulator of myeloid cell differentiation. DNA-binding
competition is a putative mechanism of such dominant negative effects of
AML1/Evi-1 because it binds to PEBP2 sites with higher affinity than AML1 does.
Furthermore, AML1/Evi-1 stimulated c-fos promoter transactivation and increased
AP-1 activity, as Evi-1 (which is not normally expressed in hemopoietic cells)
did. Experiments using deletion mutants of AML1/Evi-1 showed that these two
functions are mutually independent because the dominant negative effects on
intact AML1 and the stimulation of AP-1 activity are dependent on the runt domain
(DNA-binding domain of AML1) and the zinc finger domain near the C terminus,
respectively. Furthermore, we showed that AML1/Evi-1 blocks granulocytic
differentiation, otherwise induced by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, of
32Dcl3 myeloid cells. It was also suggested that both AML1-derived and
Evi-1-derived portions of the fusion protein play crucial roles in this
differentiation block. We conclude that the leukemic cell transformation in
t(3;21) leukemias is probably caused by these dual functions of AML1/Evi-1
chimeric protein.

PMCID: PMC230467
PMID: 7739522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Genomics. 1995 May 1;27(1):220-2.

Chromosomal localization of the human ECT2 proto-oncogene to 3q26.1-->q26.2 by
somatic cell analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Takai S(1), Long JE, Yamada K, Miki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, International Medical Center of Japan.

PMID: 7665179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mamm Genome. 1995 Mar;6(3):202-5.

Four human chromosome 3q and four human chromosome 21 loci map onto sheep
chromosome 1q.

Broad TE(1), Burkin DJ, Cambridge LM, Lewis PE, Maher DW, Ansari HA, Pearce PD,
Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Mapping Unit, AgResearch Grasslands Research Centre, Palmerston North,
New Zealand.

Eight new loci have been assigned to sheep Chromosome (Chr) 1q by use of a
chromosomally characterized minipanel of sheep x hamster cell hybrids. Four loci,
which have been mapped to the distal region of human Chr 3q, are ceruloplasmin
(CP), sucrase isomaltase (SI), glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2), and ectopic viral
integration site 1 (EVI1). The other four loci, on human Chr 21, include
interferon alpha receptor (IFNAR); interferon inducible protein p78, murine
(MX1); collagen type VI, alpha 1 (COL6A1); and S100 protein, beta polypeptide
(S100B). All of these loci, except GLUT2 and MX1, have been mapped onto bovine
Chr 1 or are syntenic with loci on this chromosome. The in situ localization of
transferrin (TF) to sheep Chr 1q42-q45 confirms our previous assignment of this
locus and independently anchors the eight new syntenic loci to sheep Chr 1q.

PMID: 7749229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Leukemia. 1994 Dec;8(12):2169-73.

EVI1 expression associated with a 3q26 anomaly in a leukemia cell line derived
from the blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia.

Ohyashiki K(1), Ohyashiki JH, Fujieda H, Shimamoto T, Kawakubo K, Nakazawa S,
Suzukawa K, Morishita K, Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

Two leukemia cell lines, TS9;22 and YS9;22, were established from different
individuals with Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-positive chronic myeloid leukemia
in blast crisis. The reverse transcript-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
technique revealed that both cell lines expressed GATA-1, GATA-2, and the stem
cell leukemia (SCL) gene, consistent with a megakaryocyte lineage. Chromosome
analysis revealed that TS9;22 cells show the Ph translocation without abnormality
of chromosome 3. In contrast, YS9;22 cells show the Ph translocation and
dic(3)(q26;p12). Northern analysis revealed that YS9;22 cells express the EVI1
(ecotropic virus integration-1) gene, possibly because of the chromosomal
translocation in the 3q26 region; TS9;22 cells do not express EVI1. However, no
rearrangements were detected over 600 kb upstream or over 900 kb downstream of
EVI1 in the YS9;22 cell line, suggesting a different mechanism of EVI1 activation
from that in leukemia cells with either a t(3;3)(q21;q26) or inv(3)(q21q26).
These results indicate that EVI1 expression in YS9;22 cells is linked to the 3q26
abnormality and that EVI1 activation plays an oncogenic role in the blastic
transformation of chronic myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 7808006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Blood. 1994 Oct 15;84(8):2681-8.

Identification of a breakpoint cluster region 3' of the ribophorin I gene at 3q21
associated with the transcriptional activation of the EVI1 gene in acute
myelogenous leukemias with inv(3)(q21q26).

Suzukawa K(1), Parganas E, Gajjar A, Abe T, Takahashi S, Tani K, Asano S, Asou H,
Kamada N, Yokota J, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Structural alterations occur in the long arm of chromosome 3 in approximately 2% 
of patients with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) or myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS). The major alterations are inv(3)(q21q26) and t(3:3)(q21;q26) and are often
classified as the 3q21q26 syndrome. We previously reported that the EVI1 gene is 
transcriptionally activated in AMLs with t(3;3)(q21;q26) and inv(3)(q21q26) and
that the chromosomal breakpoints at 3q26 in the translocations were 5' of the
EVI1 gene, whereas the breakpoints in the inversion cases were 3' of the gene. In
these studies, four additional cases of AML with inv(3)(q21q26) are shown to
express the EVI1 gene and to have breakpoints 3' of the gene. To characterize the
3q21 breakpoint region, cosmid and phage clones were isolated that cover
approximately 100 kb. At 3q21, the breakpoints for both AMLs with t(3;3)(q21;q26)
and inv(3)(q21q26) were found to cluster over a region of approximately 50 kb
downstream of the Ribophorin I gene. The results indicate a common mechanism for 
the translocations and inversions and support the hypothesis that the
transcriptional activation of the EVI1 gene is mediated by enhancer elements
associated with the Ribophorin I gene.

PMID: 7919381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 30;269(39):24020-6.

Evi-1 raises AP-1 activity and stimulates c-fos promoter transactivation with
dependence on the second zinc finger domain.

Tanaka T(1), Nishida J, Mitani K, Ogawa S, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.

Evi-1 is a gene, encoding a zinc finger protein, associated with a common viral
integration site in murine leukemias. It is suggested that Evi-1 plays important 
roles in embryogenesis and transformation of myeloid cells. To elucidate
mechanisms by which Evi-1 induces such biological effects, we analyzed the
relationship between Evi-1 and AP-1 which could regulate cellular proliferation
and differentiation. When Evi-1 was expressed, transactivation through a
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate-responsive element was observed in NIH3T3
and P19 cells. Evi-1-transfected P19 cells showed some differentiated phenotypes 
and increased expression of endogenous c-Jun and c-Fos. These results indicate
that Evi-1 raises AP-1 activity. Evi-1 caused stimulation of the c-fos promoter
transactivation, which seems to be a main mechanism of AP-1 activation, through
at least two portions of the promoter. Evi-1 has the first zinc finger domain at 
the N terminus and the second zinc finger domain near the C-terminus. We
constructed deletion mutants of Evi-1 and investigated the functions of these
domains. It was shown that the second zinc finger domain is essential for the
activation of AP-1 and transactivation of the c-fos promoter.

PMID: 7929053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Blood. 1994 Aug 15;84(4):1243-8.

Expression of EVI1 in myelodysplastic syndromes and other hematologic
malignancies without 3q26 translocations.

Russell M(1), List A, Greenberg P, Woodward S, Glinsmann B, Parganas E, Ihle J,
Taetle R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson.

The EVI1 gene encodes a zinc-finger, DNA-binding protein originally described as 
the transforming gene associated with a common ecotropic viral insertion site in 
myeloid leukemias. Previous studies demonstrated EVI1 expression in human
leukemias in cases with 3q26 translocations, but not in normal blood or bone
marrow. These studies also suggested an association between EVI1 expression and
chromosome 7 deletion (del). Because of this association, we examined expression 
of EVI1 using RNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and acute leukemia with and without 3q26
translocations. EVI1 RNA was expressed in 29% of 34 (95% confidence interval, 20%
to 50%) patients with the MDS subtypes refractory anemia (RA), refractory anemia 
with excess blasts (RAEB), or refractory anemia with excess blasts in
transformation (RAEB-T). The vast majority of these cases occurred in patients
with RAEB and RAEB-T. EVI1 expression was not detected in patients with chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), normal bone marrow or cord blood, or a variety of
other hematologic malignancies. EVI1 RNA was detected in three of 18 patients
with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and in two of four patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Karyotypes showed that only one AML patient had
karyotype 3q26 abnormalities, indicating that EVI1 expression is associated with 
cases that do not have structural abnormalities involving chromosome 3q26. These 
studies document for the first time the abnormal expression of EVI1 RNA by
patients with MDS, and suggest an important role for EVI1 in the pathogenesis or 
progression of some myeloid malignancies.

PMID: 8049440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5558-68.

PEBP2/CBF, the murine homolog of the human myeloid AML1 and PEBP2 beta/CBF beta
proto-oncoproteins, regulates the murine myeloperoxidase and neutrophil elastase 
genes in immature myeloid cells.

Nuchprayoon I(1), Meyers S, Scott LM, Suzow J, Hiebert S, Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland 21287.

The myeloperoxidase (MPO) and neutrophil elastase genes are expressed
specifically in immature myeloid cells. The integrity of a polyomavirus enhancer 
core sequence, 5'-AACCACA-3', is critical to the activity of the murine MPO
proximal enhancer. This element binds two species, myeloid nuclear factors 1
alpha and 1 beta (MyNF1 alpha and -beta), present in 32D cl3 myeloid cell nuclear
extracts. The levels of the MyNF1s increase during early 32D cl3 cell
granulocytic differentiation. Both MyNF1 alpha and -beta supershift with an
antiserum raised by using a peptide derived from the N terminus of polyomavirus
enhancer-binding protein 2/core-binding factor (PEBP2/CBF) alpha subunit. The
specific peptide inhibits these supershifts. In vitro-translated PEBP2/CBF
DNA-binding domain binds the murine MPO PEBP2/CBF site. An alternate PEBP2/CBF
consensus site, 5'-GACCGCA-3', but not a simian virus 40 enhancer core sequence, 
5'-TTCCACA-3', binds the MyNF1s in vitro and activates a minimal murine
MPO-thymidine kinase promoter in vivo. The murine neutrophil elastase gene 100-bp
5'-flanking sequences contain several functional elements, including potential
binding sites for PU.1, C/EBP, c-Myb, and PEBP2/CBF. The functional element
5'-GGCCACA-3' located at positions -66 to 72 differs from the PEBP2/CBF consensus
(5'-PuACCPuCA-3') only by an A-to-G transition at position 2. This DNA element
binds MyNF1 alpha and -beta weakly. The N terminis of two PEBP2/CBF alpha subunit
family members, PEBP2 alpha A and PEBP2 alpha B (murine AML1), are nearly
identical, and 32D c13 cl3 cells contain both corresponding mRNAs. Since t(8;21),
t(3;21), and inv(16), associated with myeloid leukemias, disrupt subunits of
PEBP2/CBF, we speculate that the resulting oncoproteins, AML1-ETO, AML1-EAP,
AML1-Evi1, and CBF beta-MYH11, inhibit early myeloid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC359075
PMID: 8035830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Oncogene. 1994 Jun;9(6):1575-81.

The carboxyl domain of zinc fingers of the Evi-1 myeloid transforming gene binds 
a consensus sequence of GAAGATGAG.

Funabiki T(1), Kreider BL, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105.

Inappropriate expression of the Evi-1 zinc finger gene is associated with myeloid
leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes in mice and humans and has been
hypothesized to contribute to pathology by blocking myeloid differentiation.
Evi-1 contains two domains of zinc fingers, an amino-terminal domain of seven
fingers and a carboxyl domain of three fingers. The first domain binds a
consensus sequence of GA(C/T)AAGATAAGATAA in binding and amplication reactions or
GATA repeat containing regions of genomic DNA. The experiments described here,
establish a consensus sequence for the carboxyl domain of zinc fingers consisting
of GAAGATGAG. Unlike the first domain, the consensus sequence established for the
carboxyl domain is identical to that which would be predicted by the current
rules relating to C2H2 zinc fingers and DNA recognition. Substitution of
sequences in finger 8 with those in finger 9, demonstrate that the individual
fingers bind the predicted region of the consensus sequence. In an attempt to
engineer binding of constructs containing the carboxyl domain, a variety of
mutations were made in the middle finger that would be predicted to change the
consensus sequence in specific ways. Remarkably, most of the mutations were
deleterious and destroyed specific DNA binding. Although Evi-1 contains potential
transcriptional activation domains, it was not able to activate gene
transcription from CAT constructs containing the consensus sequence.

PMID: 8183551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Apr 26;91(9):4004-8.

Consistent intergenic splicing and production of multiple transcripts between
AML1 at 21q22 and unrelated genes at 3q26 in (3;21)(q26;q22) translocations.

Nucifora G(1), Begy CR, Kobayashi H, Roulston D, Claxton D, Pedersen-Bjergaard J,
Parganas E, Ihle JN, Rowley JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL 60637.

Two genes have been implicated in leukemias of patients with abnormalities of
chromosome 3, band q26: EVI1, which can be activated over long distances by
chromosomal rearrangements involving 3q26, and EAP, a ribosomal gene that fuses
with AML1 in a therapy-related myelodysplasia patient with a t(3;21)(q26.2;q22). 
AML1 was identified by its involvement in the t(8;21)(q22;q22) of acute myeloid
leukemia. Here we report the consistent identification of fusion transcripts
between AML1 and EAP or between AML1 and previously unidentified sequences that
we named MDS1 (MDS-associated sequences) in the leukemic cells of four patients
with therapy-related myelodysplasia/acute myeloid leukemia and in one patient
with chronic myelogenous leukemia in blast crisis, all of whom had a t(3;21). In 
addition, we have identified a third chimeric transcript, AML1/EVI1, in one of
the therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia patients. Pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis established the order of the genes as EAP, the most telomeric,
and EVI1, the most centromeric, gene. The results indicate that translocations
could involve multiple genes and affect gene expression over long distances.

PMCID: PMC43711
PMID: 8171026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Blood. 1994 Mar 1;83(5):1348-54.

DNA rearrangements proximal to the EVI1 locus associated with the 3q21q26
syndrome.

Levy ER(1), Parganas E, Morishita K, Fichelson S, James L, Oscier D, Gisselbrecht
S, Ihle JN, Buckle VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Specific rearrangements involving 3q21 and 3q26 are well documented in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Aberrant expression of the Ecotropic virus integration-1 
(EVI1) gene, located at 3q26, has been reported in individuals with AML and
translocations or inversions of chromosome 3 long arm. We have studied six
individuals with AML and inv(3)(q21q26) for disruptions to the EVI1 locus by in
situ hybridization and long-range mapping. EVI1 transcripts have been detected in
the blast cells of the two individuals available for expression studies. We
derived a YAC containing the EVI1 gene and showed that it crossed the 3q26
inversion breakpoints in three of four cases examined. Pulsed field analysis
detected aberrant fragments 3' of the EVI1 gene in all six patients. The
orientation of the gene was established and the locations of the breakpoints were
refined by in situ hybridization using phage clones from this region.

PMID: 8118036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Oncogene. 1994 Mar;9(3):939-42.

Induction of two alternatively spliced evi-1 proto-oncogene transcripts by cAMP
in kidney cells.

Bartholomew C(1), Clark AM.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Cancer Research Campaign Beatson
Laboratories, Bearsden, Glasgow.

The evi-1 proto-oncogene is normally predominantly expressed in the kidney. We
report here that evi-1 transcripts are also abundant in foetal kidney and
expression is retained in primary kidney cell cultures. However available kidney 
cell lines express low or no evi-1 mRNA. In the human renal cell carcinoma cell
line, A704, evi-1 is inducible approximately 16-fold by elevating intra-cellular 
cAMP levels with either forskolin or dibutyryl cAMP. TPA down-regulates evi-1
mRNA production and blocks forskolin mediated induction. Similar effects are seen
in NIH3T3 cells and primary kidney cell cultures. Induction of evi-1 gene
expression by forskolin does not alter the ratio of full length and an
alternatively spliced transcript which encodes a protein lacking two repeats of
the zinc finger motif. Potential regulation of evi-1 expression in kidney by
hormones which modulate intra-cellular cAMP levels suggest that it can respond to
environmental cues which might be important to the normal physiological role of
this protein in kidney differentiation, development and function.

PMID: 8108138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. EMBO J. 1994 Feb 1;13(3):504-10.

Generation of the AML1-EVI-1 fusion gene in the t(3;21)(q26;q22) causes blastic
crisis in chronic myelocytic leukemia.

Mitani K(1), Ogawa S, Tanaka T, Miyoshi H, Kurokawa M, Mano H, Yazaki Y, Ohki M, 
Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

The t(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation, which is one of the consistent chromosomal
abnormalities found in blastic crisis of chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML), is
thought to play an important role in the leukemic progression of CML to an acute 
blastic crisis phase. The AML1 gene, which is located at the translocation
breakpoint of the t(8;21)(q22;q22) translocation found in acute myelocytic
leukemia, was also rearranged by the t(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation. Screening of
a cDNA library of the t(3;21)-carrying leukemic cell line cells (SKH1) resulted
in the isolation of two potentially complete AML1-EVI-1 chimeric cDNAs of 6 kb.
Two species of AML1-EVI-1 fusion transcripts of 8.2 and 7.0 kb were detected in
SKH1 cells. These cells expressed the 180 kDa AML1-EVI-1 fusion protein
containing an N-terminal half of AML1 including a runt homology domain which is
fused to the entire zinc finger EVI-1 protein. The AML1-EVI-1 fusion transcript
was consistent in all three cases of the t(3;21)-carrying leukemia examined by
RNA-based PCR. These findings strongly suggest that the t(3;21) translocation
results in the formation of a new class of chimeric transcription factor which
could contribute to the leukemic progression of CML through interference with
cell growth and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC394839
PMID: 8313895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Leukemia. 1993 Oct;7(10):1654-7.

Expression of the EVI1 gene in chronic myelogenous leukemia in blast crisis.

Russell M(1), Thompson F, Spier C, Taetle R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Medical Center, Tucson, AZ.

The EVI1 gene encodes a nuclear, zinc finger, DNA binding protein expressed after
provirus insertion into the Fim-3 or EVI1 loci in murine leukemia myeloid cells. 
EVI1 is also expressed by cells from AML patients with chromosome rearrangements 
involving band 3q26, the putative location of the EVI1 gene, but expression of
this gene is not detected in normal bone marrow. We report expression of EVI1 by 
cells from a patient with chronic myelogenous leukemia in blast crisis (CML/BC)
whose cells showed inv(3)(q22q26). In vitro culture of these cells resulted in
macrophage differentiation and loss of EVI1 expression. Results in this patient
suggest EVI1 expression played a role in CML blast transformation. Patients with 
CML/BC and other nonrandom chromosome abnormalities involving chromosome 3q26
should be evaluated for EVI1 expression.

PMID: 8412328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jul 15;90(14):6454-8.

Loss of erythropoietin responsiveness in erythroid progenitors due to expression 
of the Evi-1 myeloid-transforming gene.

Kreider BL(1), Orkin SH, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105.

Inappropriate expression of the Evi-1 zinc-finger gene in hematopoietic cells has
been associated with acute myelogenous leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes in 
murine models and in humans. Consistent with this, previous studies have shown
that aberrant expression of the Evi-1 gene in a myeloid progenitor cell line
blocks granulocytic differentiation. Here we demonstrate that the aberrant
expression of the Evi-1 gene impairs the normal response of erythroid cells or
bone-marrow progenitors to erythropoietin. Erythroid differentiation has been
shown to require the GATA-1 transcription factor that binds to a sequence
contained within the consensus binding sequence identified for Evi-1. In the
studies presented here we also show that Evi-1 can repress GATA-1-dependent
transactivation in transient chloramphenicol acetyltransferase assays. Together
the data support the hypothesis that inappropriate expression of the Evi-1 gene
blocks erythropoiesis by repressing the transcription of a subset of GATA-1
target genes.

PMCID: PMC46950
PMID: 8341654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):4291-300.

Four of the seven zinc fingers of the Evi-1 myeloid-transforming gene are
required for sequence-specific binding to GA(C/T)AAGA(T/C)AAGATAA.

Delwel R(1), Funabiki T, Kreider BL, Morishita K, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105.

Expression of the Evi-1 gene is activated in murine myeloid leukemias by
retroviral insertions and in human acute myelogenous leukemia by translocations
and inversions involving chromosome band 3q26 where the gene resides. Aberrant
expression of the Evi-1 gene has been shown to interfere with myeloid
differentiation, which is proposed to be the basis for its role in leukemias. The
Evi-1 gene encodes a 145-kDa DNA-binding protein containing two domains of seven 
and three Cys2-His2 zinc fingers. Previous studies identified a portion of the
consensus DNA-binding sequence for the first domain of zinc fingers. The
experiments presented here extend these studies and demonstrate that the first
domain recognizes a consensus of 15 nucleotides consisting of
GA(C/T)AAGA(T/C)AAGATAA. The first three fingers of the first domain do not
detectably bind DNA but contribute to the binding by conferring a relative
specificity for GACAA verses GATAA in the first position. The first three fingers
also contribute to optimal binding of the 15-nucleotide consensus sequence.

PMCID: PMC359982
PMID: 8321231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Leukemia. 1992 May;6(5):446-51.

Expression and regulation of the evi-1 gene in the human factor-dependent
leukemia cell line, UCSD/AML1.

Oval J(1), Smedsrud M, Taetle R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, VA Medical Center, Sepulveda, California.

The human factor-dependent leukemia cell line UCSD/AML1 contains the t(3;3)
(q21;q26) characteristic of the syndrome of acute leukemia with high platelets.
The human homologue of the murine leukemia oncogene evi-1 was recently localized 
to chromosome 3q24-3q28 and transcription of evi-1 is a frequent event in
mouse-retrovirus-induced leukemias (17). To determine whether translocations near
human 3q24 might induce similar genetic changes, we examined and compared evi-1
and c-myc expression and regulation in UCSD/AML1 cells. Steady-state evi-1
transcripts were detected in UCSD/AML1 and murine leukemia M1 cells, but were not
present in HL60 or Namalwa human leukemia cells. Transcription assays showed the 
evi-1 gene was actively transcribed in UCSD/AML1, but not HL60 nuclei. Evi-1
transcript sizes and half-life were similar in UCSD/AML1 and human HEC-1B
carcinoma cells which express evi-1 transcripts, but do not have abnormalities
involving chromosome 3. An alternative splice site detected by polymerase chain
reaction was present in transcripts from both cell lines. Regulation of evi-1 RNA
in UCSD/AML1 cells was similar to that of actin transcripts in response to
cycloheximide or phorbol-ester-induced macrophage differentiation. After
withdrawal of granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), evi-1,
actin, and histone H3 transcripts declined in concert with exit from the cell
cycle. Minor differences in rates of recovery were noted for these three genes
after GM-CSF restimulation. In contrast, c-myc was expressed at high levels in
UCSD/AML1 cells and showed evidence for specific regulation in response to
cycloheximide, phorbol ester, and GM-CSF withdrawal and restimulation. These
studies suggest the 3q translocation in UCSD/AML1 cells is associated with evi-1 
transcription and expression of a potential transforming gene. In contrast to
c-myc, evi-1 expression is minimally altered by biologically active chemicals or 
growth factor stimulation.

PMID: 1593910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 May 1;89(9):3937-41.

Activation of EVI1 gene expression in human acute myelogenous leukemias by
translocations spanning 300-400 kilobases on chromosome band 3q26.

Morishita K(1), Parganas E, William CL, Whittaker MH, Drabkin H, Oval J, Taetle
R, Valentine MB, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105.

Retroviral activation of Evi-1 gene expression is one of the most common
transforming events in murine myeloid leukemias. To evaluate the role of the EVI1
gene in human acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), leukemic blasts or cell lines
from 116 patients were examined. In eight patients the EVI1 gene was expressed
and all but one had cytogenetically detectable translocations of chromosome 3q26 
where the EVI1 gene has been localized. To identify breakpoints, a restriction
map that spans 1700 kilobases (kb) of the EVI1 locus was developed by
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. In one case, t(3;3)(q21;q26), a rearrangement
was localized to 170-330 kb 5' of the gene. In a second case, t(3;3)(q21;q26),
there was a rearrangement 13 kb 5' of the gene. This rearrangement was cloned and
shown to be due to the fusion of sequences from 3q21-22 with the EVI1 locus. In
the third case, ins(3)-(q21q25q27), there was a rearrangement that mapped 150 kb 
downstream from the 5' end of the gene.

PMCID: PMC525606
PMID: 1570317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Jan;12(1):183-9.

Expression of the Evi-1 zinc finger gene in 32Dc13 myeloid cells blocks
granulocytic differentiation in response to granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor.

Morishita K(1), Parganas E, Matsugi T, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105.

Expression of the Evi-1 gene is frequently activated in murine myeloid leukemias 
by retroviral insertions immediately 5' or 90 kb 5' of the gene. The Evi-1 gene
product is a nuclear, DNA-binding zinc finger protein of 145 kDa. On the basis of
the properties of the myeloid cell lines in which the Evi-1 gene is activated, it
has been hypothesized that its expression blocks normal differentiation. To
explore this proposed role, we have constructed a retrovirus vector containing
the gene and examined its effects on an interleukin-3-dependent myeloid cell line
that differentiates in response to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF).
Expression of the Evi-1 gene in these cells did not alter the normal growth
factor requirements of the cells. However, expression of the Evi-1 gene blocked
the ability of the cells to express myeloperoxidase and to terminally
differentiate to granulocytes in response to G-CSF. This effect was not due to
altered expression of the G-CSF receptor or to changes in the initial responses
of the cells to G-CSF. These results support the hypothesis that the
inappropriate expression of the Evi-1 gene in myeloid cells interferes with the
ability of the cells to terminally differentiate.

PMCID: PMC364082
PMID: 1370341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 May;11(5):2665-74.

Evi-1, a murine zinc finger proto-oncogene, encodes a sequence-specific
DNA-binding protein.

Perkins AS(1), Fishel R, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702.

Evi-1 was originally identified as a common site of viral integration in murine
myeloid tumors. Evi-1 encodes a 120-kDa polypeptide containing 10 zinc finger
motifs located in two domains 380 amino acids apart and an acidic domain located 
carboxy terminal to the second set of zinc fingers. These features suggest that
Evi-1 is a site-specific DNA-binding protein involved in the regulation of RNA
transcription. We have purified Evi-1 protein from E. coli and have employed a
gel shift-polymerase chain reaction method using random oligonucleotides to
identify a high-affinity binding site for Evi-1. The consensus sequence for this 
binding site is TGACAAGATAA. Evi-1 protein specifically protects this motif from 
DNase I digestion. By searching the nucleotide sequence data bases, we have found
this binding site both in sequences 5' to genes in putative or known regulatory
regions and within intron sequences.

PMCID: PMC360036
PMID: 2017172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Apr;11(4):1820-8.

Retroviral insertions 90 kilobases proximal to the Evi-1 myeloid transforming
gene activate transcription from the normal promoter.

Bartholomew C(1), Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105.

The inappropriate production of the Evi-1 zinc finger protein occurs in
retrovirus-induced murine myeloid leukemias and human acute myelogenous
leukemias. In murine leukemias, expression of the Evi-1 gene is associated with
retroviral insertions either in the Evi-1 locus, which is immediately 5' of the
coding region of the gene, or in the genetically linked Cb-1/fim-3 locus. In
these studies, we demonstrate by chromosomal walking and pulse field
electrophoresis that the Cb-1/fim-3 locus is located 90 kb 5' of the Evi-1 locus.
Primary structure analysis of Evi-1 cDNA clones from a Cb-1/fim-3 rearranged cell
line (DA-3) demonstrates that transcription initiates 5' of the Evi-1 locus and
that the first noncoding exon of the gene is 681 bp larger than previously
defined. S1 nuclease protection studies reveal multiple transcription initiation 
sites within this region. Comparable transcriptional initiation sites were
identified in RNA from kidney and ovary, in which the gene is normally expressed,
suggesting that retroviral insertions in the Cb-1/fim-3 locus activate
transcription from the normal promoter. In one myeloid cell line (DA-3), a single
long terminal repeat (LTR) is present in the Cb-1/fim-3 locus. No stable
transcripts were detectable from this LTR. In cells with retroviral insertions in
the Cb-1/fim-3 locus, one allele of the Evi-1 locus becomes hypermethylated in
the 5' region of the gene. Together, these results are most consistent with an
LTR-mediated, long-range cis activation of Evi-1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC359852
PMID: 1848663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Oncogene. 1990 Sep;5(9):1419-23.

The Evi-1 zinc finger myeloid transforming gene is normally expressed in the
kidney and in developing oocytes.

Morishita K(1), Parganas E, Parham DM, Matsugi T, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105.

Activation of the Evi-1 zinc finger gene is commonly associated with the
transformation of murine leukemias and is involved in some cases of human AML
involving rearrangements at chromosome 3q25. To determine the normal function of 
the gene, we have looked for expression in a variety of cell lines and tissues.
The predominant sites of expression of the gene are in the kidney and ovary. In
the kidney, expression is localized to the renal tubules in the corticomedullary 
junction. In the ovary, high levels of the Evi-1 protein are found in the
cytoplasm of developing oocytes. The latter result suggests a potential role for 
the Evi-1 gene product in early oocyte development.

PMID: 1699199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1990;352:329-37.

Insertional mutagenesis and transformation of hematopoietic stem cells.

Ihle JN(1), Morishita K, Matsugi T, Bartholomew C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105.

The mechanisms that are involved in the control of the normal differentiation of 
hematopoietic progenitor cells are largely unknown. Moreover, little is known
concerning the types of genes that can alter the ability of hematopoietic
progenitors to differentiate and cause transformation. One approach to the latter
has been to use retroviral induced IL-3-dependent myeloid leukemia cell lines to 
identify transforming genes by their activation through insertional mutagenesis. 
This approach has implicated alterations in c-myb in transformation and has
identified a novel transcriptional factor of the zinc finger family that is
frequently activated in murine myeloid leukemias and in some cases of human AML. 
Using this approach it should be possible to identify additional myeloid
transforming genes. The identification and characterization of the genes will
provide important information and approaches to the study of the regulation of
differentiation in normal hematopoiesis.

PMID: 2169632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


