
1. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Mar 15. pii: S1934-5909(16)00062-X. doi:
10.1016/j.stem.2016.01.024. [Epub ahead of print]

Divergent lncRNAs Regulate Gene Expression and Lineage Differentiation in
Pluripotent Cells.

Luo S(1), Lu JY(1), Liu L(1), Yin Y(1), Chen C(2), Han X(1), Wu B(1), Xu R(1),
Liu W(1), Yan P(1), Shao W(1), Lu Z(3), Li H(1), Na J(1), Tang F(4), Wang J(5),
Zhang YE(2), Shen X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics
and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101,
China. (3)School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(4)Biodynamic Optical Imaging Center, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. (5)The Black Family Stem Cell
Institute, Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. (6)Tsinghua-Peking Center for
Life Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
Electronic address: xshen@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Divergent lncRNAs that are transcribed in the opposite direction to nearby
protein-coding genes comprise a significant proportion (~20%) of total lncRNAs in
mammalian genomes. Through genome-wide analysis, we found that the distribution
of this lncRNA class strongly correlates with essential developmental regulatory 
genes. In pluripotent cells, divergent lncRNAs regulate the transcription of
nearby genes. As an example, the divergent lncRNA Evx1as promotes transcription
of its neighbor gene, EVX1, and regulates mesendodermal differentiation. At a
single-cell level, early broad expression of Evx1as is followed by a rapid,
high-level transcription of EVX1, supporting the idea that Evx1as plays an
upstream role to facilitate EVX1 transcription. Mechanistically, Evx1as RNA binds
to regulatory sites on chromatin, promotes an active chromatin state, and
interacts with Mediator. Based on our analyses, we propose that the biological
function of thousands of uncharacterized lncRNAs of this class may be inferred
from the role of their neighboring adjacent genes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26996597  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Neural Dev. 2016 Feb 19;11(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s13064-016-0059-9.

Evx1 and Evx2 specify excitatory neurotransmitter fates and suppress inhibitory
fates through a Pax2-independent mechanism.

Juárez-Morales JL(1), Schulte CJ(2), Pezoa SA(1), Vallejo GK(1), Hilinski
WC(1,)(3), England SJ(1), de Jager S(2), Lewis KE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Syracuse University, 107 College Place, Syracuse, NY,
13244, USA. (2)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University
of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3DY, UK. (3)Department of
Neuroscience and Physiology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 505 Irving Avenue, 
Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA. (4)Department of Biology, Syracuse University, 107
College Place, Syracuse, NY, 13244, USA. kelewi02@syr.edu.

BACKGROUND: For neurons to function correctly in neuronal circuitry they must
utilize appropriate neurotransmitters. However, even though neurotransmitter
specificity is one of the most important and defining properties of a neuron we
still do not fully understand how neurotransmitter fates are specified during
development. Most neuronal properties are determined by the transcription factors
that neurons express as they start to differentiate. While we know a few
transcription factors that specify the neurotransmitter fates of particular
neurons, there are still many spinal neurons for which the transcription factors 
specifying this critical phenotype are unknown. Strikingly, all of the
transcription factors that have been identified so far as specifying inhibitory
fates in the spinal cord act through Pax2. Even Tlx1 and Tlx3, which specify the 
excitatory fates of dI3 and dI5 spinal neurons work at least in part by
down-regulating Pax2.
METHODS: In this paper we use single and double mutant zebrafish embryos to
identify the spinal cord functions of Evx1 and Evx2.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that Evx1 and Evx2 are expressed by spinal cord V0v cells
and we show that these cells develop into excitatory (glutamatergic) Commissural 
Ascending (CoSA) interneurons. In the absence of both Evx1 and Evx2, V0v cells
still form and develop a CoSA morphology. However, they lose their excitatory
fate and instead express markers of a glycinergic fate. Interestingly, they do
not express Pax2, suggesting that they are acquiring their inhibitory fate
through a novel Pax2-independent mechanism.
CONCLUSIONS: Evx1 and Evx2 are required, partially redundantly, for spinal cord
V0v cells to become excitatory (glutamatergic) interneurons. These results
significantly increase our understanding of the mechanisms of neuronal
specification and the genetic networks involved in these processes.

PMCID: PMC4759709
PMID: 26896392  [PubMed - in process]


3. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2016 Feb 1. [Epub ahead of print]

Trichoderma longibrachiatum Evx1 is a fungal biocatalyst suitable for the
remediation of soils contaminated with diesel fuel and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons.

Andreolli M(1), Lampis S(2), Brignoli P(3), Vallini G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15, 37134,
Verona, Italy. (2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada Le
Grazie 15, 37134, Verona, Italy. silvia.lampis@univr.it. (3)Eurovix SpA - Viale
Enrico Mattei 17, 24060, Entratico, BG, Italy. (4)Department of Biotechnology,
University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15, 37134, Verona, Italy.
giovanni.vallini@univr.it.

Trichoderma sp. strain Evx1 was isolated from a semi-deciduous forest soil in
Southern Italy. It decolorizes polynuclear organic dyes and tolerates high
concentrations of phenanthrene, anthracene, fluoranthene, and pyrene. The ability
of this ascomycete fungus to degrade polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons was
verified in vitro and confirmed by its strong phenoloxidase activity in the
presence of gallic acid. Phylogenetic characterization of Trichoderma sp. Evx1
positioned this strain within the species Trichoderma longibrachiatum. The
potential use of this species for the bioremediation of contaminated
environmental matrices was tested by inoculating diesel-spiked soil with a dense 
mycelial suspension. The biodegradation percentage of the C12-40 hydrocarbon
fraction in the inoculated soil rose to 54.2<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.6 %, much higher than that in
non-inoculated soil or soil managed solely by a combination of watering and
aeration. The survival and persistence of T. longibrachiatum Evx1 throughout the 
bioremediation trial was monitored by PCR-DGGE analysis. The fungal strain was
still present in the soil 30 days after bioaugmentation. These findings indicate 
that T. longibrachiatum Evx1 may be a suitable inoculum in bioremediation
protocols for the reclamation of soils contaminated by complex mixtures of
hydrocarbons.

PMID: 26832871  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Pathol Oncol Res. 2016 Apr;22(2):341-7. doi: 10.1007/s12253-015-0005-x. Epub 2015
Nov 9.

Contribution of EVX1 in Aggressiveness of Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Mallak AJ(1), Abbaszadegan MR(1), Khorasanizadeh PN(1), Forghanifard MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research
Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (2)Department
of Biology, Damghan Branch, Islamic Azad University, Cheshmeh-Ali Boulevard,
Sa'dei Square, P.O. Box: 3671639998, Damghan, Iran. forghanifard@gmail.com.

Homeobox genes play an overruling role in the regional cell fate determination
during development. EVX1 is known as a new target gene of BMP signaling pathway, 
a group of morphogens which are making the largest subset within the
transformation growth factor beta (TGF-ß) superfamily. In this study, we aimed to
enlighten the expression level of EVX1 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) and to disclose its apparent roles in maintenance and progression of the
disease. The expression level of EVX1 was analyzed in fresh tumoral tissues in
comparison with distant tumor-free tissues of 50 ESCC patients using relative
comparative real-time PCR. The importance of EVX1 in development and cancer was
also reviewed. EVX1 was underexpressed in 70 % of tumor samples. There was a
significant correlation between down-regulation of EVX1 and lymph node metastasis
of tumor cells (p = 0.027). Furthermore, EVX1 underexpression was significantly
correlated with depth of tumor cell invasion (P = 0.037). To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report highlighting EVX1 expression in ESCC to date.
The clinicopathological relevance of EVX1 mRNA expression in ESCC targeted this
gene as a new independent molecular marker for advanced tumor, which determine
the characteristics and behavior of aggressive ESCC.

PMID: 26552663  [PubMed - in process]


5. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Sep 26. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22350. [Epub ahead of print]

Neuronal labeling patterns in the spinal cord of adult transgenic Zebrafish.

Stil A(1), Drapeau P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Research Centre (CRCHUM) and Department of Neurosciences, Université 
de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada, H2X 0A9.

We describe neuronal patterns in the spinal cord of adult zebrafish. We studied
the distribution of cells and processes in the three spinal regions reported in
the literature: the 8th vertebra used as a transection injury site, the 15th
vertebra mainly used for motor cell recordings and also for crush injury, and the
24th vertebra used to record motor nerve activity. We used well-known transgenic 
lines in which expression of green fluorescent protein (GFP) is driven by
promoters to hb9 and isl1 in motoneurons, alx/chx10 and evx1 interneurons, ngn1
in sensory neurons and olig2 in oligodendrocytes, as well as antibodies for
neurons (HuC/D, NF and SV2) and glia (GFAP). In isl1:GFP fish, GFP-positive
processes are retained in the upper part of ventral horns and two subsets of cell
bodies are observed. The pattern of the transgene in hb9:GFP adults is more
diffuse and fibers are present broadly through the adult spinal cord. In
alx/chx10 and evx1 lines we respectively observed two and three different
GFP-positive populations. Finally, the ngn1:GFP transgene identifies dorsal root 
ganglion and some cells in dorsal horns. Interestingly some GFP positive fibers
in ngn1:GFP fish are located around Mauthner axons and their density seems to be 
related to a rostrocaudal gradient. Many other cell types have been described in 
embryos and need to be studied in adults. Our findings provide a reference for
further studies on spinal cytoarchitecture. Combined with physiological,
histological and pathological/traumatic approaches, these studies will help
clarify the operation of spinal locomotor circuits of adult zebrafish. © 2015
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Develop Neurobiol, 2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26408263  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Ital J Pediatr. 2015 Apr 10;41:31. doi: 10.1186/s13052-015-0137-3.

HOXA genes cluster: clinical implications of the smallest deletion.

Pezzani L(1), Milani D(2), Manzoni F(3), Baccarin M(4), Silipigni R(5), Guerneri 
S(6), Esposito S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda 9, Milan, 20122, Italy.
lidia.pezzani@unimi.it. (2)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of
Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda 9, Milan, 20122,
Italy. donatella.milani@policlinico.mi.it. (3)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care
Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi
di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via
Commenda 9, Milan, 20122, Italy. fmp.manzoni@gmail.com. (4)Medical Genetics
Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan,
Italy. marco.baccarin@policlinico.mi.it. (5)Medical Genetics Laboratory,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
rosamaria.silipigni@unimi.it. (6)Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS
Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
s.guerneri@policlinico.mi.it. (7)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department
of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda 9, Milan,
20122, Italy. susanna.esposito@unimi.it.

BACKGROUND: HOXA genes cluster plays a fundamental role in embryologic
development. Deletion of the entire cluster is known to cause a clinically
recognizable syndrome with mild developmental delay, characteristic facies, small
feet with unusually short and big halluces, abnormal thumbs, and urogenital
malformations. The clinical manifestations may vary with different ranges of
deletions of HOXA cluster and flanking regions.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a girl with the smallest deletion reported to date
involving the entire HOXA cluster at 7p15.2-p14.3. The patient was the third
child born to a healthy and non-consanguineous Italian couple. She was born at
the 34th week of gestation by caesarean section due to cholestasis of pregnancy. 
Her birth weight, length, and occipitofrontal circumference were 2,140 g (25-50th
centile), 46 cm (50th centile), and 33 cm (75-90th centile), respectively. The
Apgar scores were 8 at both the 1st and 5th minutes. The patient presented with
typical mild facial anomalies, hand and feet abnormalities, urinary anomalies,
and mild speech delay. Unexpectedly, the patient demonstrated complex unusual
features of multiple episodes of oxyhemoglobin desaturation, laryngeal stridor
and a branchial cyst. Chromosome analysis of the patient revealed an apparently
normal karyotype at the 550 band level. Based on array comparative genomic
hybridization, a 2.5 Mb interstitial deletion was detected at 7p15.2p14.3 (chr7: 
26,333,553-28,859,312), involving the entire HOXA cluster and a small number of
other genes as SNX10, SKAP2, EVX1, HIBADH, TAX1BP1, JAZF1, and CREB5.
CONCLUSIONS: This report improves our understanding of the genotype-phenotype
correlations of HOXA genes cluster deletions via the identification and
characterization of the smallest deletion (as well as critical region) reported
to date. In particular we discuss the possible implications of preterm and
haploinsufficiency in the pathogenesis of the unusual findings, furthermore
opening new discussion and interpretation cues.

PMCID: PMC4395968
PMID: 25881986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cell Adh Migr. 2015;9(1-2):34-47. doi: 10.1080/19336918.2015.1008333.

Transcriptional regulation of tenascin genes.

Chiovaro F(1), Chiquet-Ehrismann R, Chiquet M.

Author information: 
(1)a Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research ; Basel , Switzerland.

Extracellular matrix proteins of the tenascin family resemble each other in their
domain structure, and also share functions in modulating cell adhesion and
cellular responses to growth factors. Despite these common features, the 4
vertebrate tenascins exhibit vastly different expression patterns. Tenascin-R is 
specific to the central nervous system. Tenascin-C is an "oncofetal" protein
controlled by many stimuli (growth factors, cytokines, mechanical stress), but
with restricted occurrence in space and time. In contrast, tenascin-X is a
constituitive component of connective tissues, and its level is barely affected
by external factors. Finally, the expression of tenascin-W is similar to that of 
tenascin-C but even more limited. In accordance with their highly regulated
expression, the promoters of the tenascin-C and -W genes contain TATA boxes,
whereas those of the other 2 tenascins do not. This article summarizes what is
currently known about the complex transcriptional regulation of the 4 tenascin
genes in development and disease.

PMCID: PMC4422812
PMID: 25793574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Jan 8;96(1):21-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.011. Epub
2014 Dec 11.

Meta-analysis of correlated traits via summary statistics from GWASs with an
application in hypertension.

Zhu X(1), Feng T(2), Tayo BO(3), Liang J(4), Young JH(5), Franceschini N(6),
Smith JA(7), Yanek LR(5), Sun YV(8), Edwards TL(9), Chen W(10), Nalls M(11), Fox 
E(12), Sale M(13), Bottinger E(14), Rotimi C(15); COGENT BP Consortium, Liu
Y(16), McKnight B(17), Liu K(18), Arnett DK(19), Chakravati A(20), Cooper RS(3), 
Redline S(21).

Collaborators: Franceschini N, Fox E, Zhang Z, Edwards TL, Nalls MA, Sung YJ,
Tayo BO, Sun YV, Gottesman O, Adeyemo A, Johnson AD, Young J, Rice K, Duan Q,
Chen F, Li Y, Tang H, Fornage M, Keene KL, Andrews JS, Smith JA, Faul JD, Guangfa
Z, Guo W, Liu Y, Murray SS, Musani SK, Srinivasan S, Velez Edwards DR, Wang H,
Becker LC, Bovet P, Bochud M, Broeckel U, Burnier M, Carty C, Chen WM, Chen G,
Chen W, Ding J, Dreisbach AW, Evans MK, Guo X, Garcia ME, Jensen R, Keller MF,
Lettre G, Lotay V, Martin LW, Morrison AC, Mosley TH, Ogunniyi A, Palmas W,
Papanicolaou G, Penman A, Polak JF, Ridker PM, Salako B, Singleton AB, Shriner D,
Taylor KD, Vasan R, Wiggins K, Williams SM, Yanek LR, Zhao W, Zonderman AB,
Becker DM, Berenson G, Boerwinkle E, Bottinger E, Cushman M, Eaton C, Heiss G,
Hirschhron JN, Howard VJ, Lanktree MB, Liu K, Liu Y, Loos R, Margolis K, Psaty
BM, Schork NJ, Weir DR, Rotimi CN, Sale MM, Harris T, Kardia SL, Hunt SC, Arnett 
D, Redline S, Cooper RS, Risch N, Rao DC, Rotter JI, Chakravarti A, Reiner AP,
Levy D, Keating BJ, Zhu X.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified many genetic variants
underlying complex traits. Many detected genetic loci harbor variants that
associate with multiple-even distinct-traits. Most current analysis approaches
focus on single traits, even though the final results from multiple traits are
evaluated together. Such approaches miss the opportunity to systemically
integrate the phenome-wide data available for genetic association analysis. In
this study, we propose a general approach that can integrate association evidence
from summary statistics of multiple traits, either correlated, independent,
continuous, or binary traits, which might come from the same or different
studies. We allow for trait heterogeneity effects. Population structure and
cryptic relatedness can also be controlled. Our simulations suggest that the
proposed method has improved statistical power over single-trait analysis in most
of the cases we studied. We applied our method to the Continental Origins and
Genetic Epidemiology Network (COGENT) African ancestry samples for three blood
pressure traits and identified four loci (CHIC2, HOXA-EVX1, IGFBP1/IGFBP3, and
CDH17; p < 5.0 × 10(-8)) associated with hypertension-related traits that were
missed by a single-trait analysis in the original report. Six additional loci
with suggestive association evidence (p < 5.0 × 10(-7)) were also observed,
including CACNA1D and WNT3. Our study strongly suggests that analyzing multiple
phenotypes can improve statistical power and that such analysis can be executed
with the summary statistics from GWASs. Our method also provides a way to study a
cross phenotype (CP) association by using summary statistics from GWASs of
multiple phenotypes.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4289691
PMID: 25500260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. BMC Genomics. 2014 Nov 20;15:1002. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1002.

A high-throughput screening strategy for detecting CRISPR-Cas9 induced mutations 
using next-generation sequencing.

Bell CC(1), Magor GW, Gillinder KR, Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Mater Research, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Science, The University of 
Queensland, Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia. charles.bell@mater.uq.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: CRISPR-Cas9 is a revolutionary genome editing technique that allows
for efficient and directed alterations of the eukaryotic genome. This relatively 
new technology has already been used in a large number of 'loss of function'
experiments in cultured cells. Despite its simplicity and efficiency, screening
for mutated clones remains time-consuming, laborious and/or expensive.
RESULTS: Here we report a high-throughput screening strategy that allows parallel
screening of up to 96 clones, using next-generation sequencing. As a proof of
principle, we used CRISPR-Cas9 to disrupt the coding sequence of the homeobox
gene, Evx1 in mouse embryonic stem cells. We screened 67 CRISPR-Cas9 transfected 
clones simultaneously by next-generation sequencing on the Ion Torrent PGM. We
were able to identify both homozygous and heterozygous Evx1 mutants, as well as
mixed clones, which must be identified to maintain the integrity of subsequent
experiments.
CONCLUSIONS: Our CRISPR-Cas9 screening strategy could be widely applied to screen
for CRISPR-Cas9 mutants in a variety of contexts including the generation of
mutant cell lines for in vitro research, the generation of transgenic organisms
and for assessing the veracity of CRISPR-Cas9 homology directed repair. This
technique is cost and time-effective, provides information on clonal
heterogeneity and is adaptable for use on various sequencing platforms.

PMCID: PMC4246457
PMID: 25409780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 20;8(11):e81240. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081240.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of an evx1-dependent joint-formation pathway during FIN
regeneration.

Ton QV(1), Iovine MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

Joints are essential for skeletal flexibly and form, yet the process underlying
joint morphogenesis is poorly understood. Zebrafish caudal fins are comprised of 
numerous segmented bony fin rays, where growth occurs by the sequential addition 
of new segments and new joints. Here, we evaluate joint gene expression during
fin regeneration. First, we identify three genes that influence joint formation, 
evx1, dlx5a, and mmp9. We place these genes in a common molecular pathway by
evaluating both their expression patterns along the distal-proximal axis (i.e.
where the youngest tissue is always the most distal), and by evaluating changes
in gene expression following gene knockdown. Prior studies from our lab indicate 
that the gap junction protein Cx43 suppresses joint formation. Remarkably,
changes in Cx43 activity alter the expression of joint markers. For example, the 
reduced levels of Cx43 in the sof (b123) mutant causes short fin ray
segments/premature joints. We also find that the expression of evx1-dlx5a-mmp9 is
shifted distally in sof (b123) , consistent with premature expression of these
genes. In contrast, increased Cx43 in the alf (dty86) mutant leads to stochastic 
joint failure and stochastic loss of evx1 expression. Indeed, reducing the level 
of Cx43 in alf (dty86) rescues both the evx1 expression and joint formation.
These results suggest that Cx43 influences the pattern of joint formation by
influencing the timing of evx1 expression.

PMCID: PMC3835681
PMID: 24278401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Sep 5;93(3):545-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.07.010. Epub
2013 Aug 22.

Genome-wide association analysis of blood-pressure traits in African-ancestry
individuals reveals common associated genes in African and non-African
populations.

Franceschini N, Fox E, Zhang Z, Edwards TL, Nalls MA, Sung YJ, Tayo BO, Sun YV,
Gottesman O, Adeyemo A, Johnson AD, Young JH, Rice K, Duan Q, Chen F, Li Y, Tang 
H, Fornage M, Keene KL, Andrews JS, Smith JA, Faul JD, Guangfa Z, Guo W, Liu Y,
Murray SS, Musani SK, Srinivasan S, Velez Edwards DR, Wang H, Becker LC, Bovet P,
Bochud M, Broeckel U, Burnier M, Carty C, Chasman DI, Ehret G, Chen WM, Chen G,
Chen W, Ding J, Dreisbach AW, Evans MK, Guo X, Garcia ME, Jensen R, Keller MF,
Lettre G, Lotay V, Martin LW, Moore JH, Morrison AC, Mosley TH, Ogunniyi A,
Palmas W, Papanicolaou G, Penman A, Polak JF, Ridker PM, Salako B, Singleton AB, 
Shriner D, Taylor KD, Vasan R, Wiggins K, Williams SM, Yanek LR, Zhao W,
Zonderman AB, Becker DM, Berenson G, Boerwinkle E, Bottinger E, Cushman M, Eaton 
C, Nyberg F, Heiss G, Hirschhron JN, Howard VJ, Karczewsk KJ, Lanktree MB, Liu K,
Liu Y, Loos R, Margolis K, Snyder M; Asian Genetic Epidemiology Network
Consortium, Psaty BM, Schork NJ, Weir DR, Rotimi CN, Sale MM, Harris T, Kardia
SL, Hunt SC, Arnett D, Redline S, Cooper RS, Risch NJ, Rao DC, Rotter JI,
Chakravarti A, Reiner AP, Levy D, Keating BJ, Zhu X.

Collaborators: Go MJ, Kim YJ, Lee JY, Jeon JP, Kim SS, Han BG, Cho YS, Sim X, Tay
WT, Ong RT, Seielstad M, Liu JJ, Aung T, Wong TY, Teo YY, Tai ES, Chen CH, Chang 
LC, Chen YT, Wu JY, Kelly TN, Gu D, Hixson JE, Sung YJ, He J, Tabara Y, Kokubo Y,
Miki T, Iwai N, Kato N, Takeuchi F, Katsuya T, Nabika T, Sugiyama T, Zhang Y,
Huang W, Zhang X, Zhou X, Jin L, Zhu D.

High blood pressure (BP) is more prevalent and contributes to more severe
manifestations of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in African Americans than in any
other United States ethnic group. Several small African-ancestry (AA) BP
genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been published, but their findings
have failed to replicate to date. We report on a large AA BP GWAS meta-analysis
that includes 29,378 individuals from 19 discovery cohorts and subsequent
replication in additional samples of AA (n = 10,386), European ancestry (EA) (n =
69,395), and East Asian ancestry (n = 19,601). Five loci (EVX1-HOXA, ULK4, RSPO3,
PLEKHG1, and SOX6) reached genome-wide significance (p < 1.0 × 10(-8)) for either
systolic or diastolic BP in a transethnic meta-analysis after correction for
multiple testing. Three of these BP loci (EVX1-HOXA, RSPO3, and PLEKHG1) lack
previous associations with BP. We also identified one independent signal in a
known BP locus (SOX6) and provide evidence for fine mapping in four additional
validated BP loci. We also demonstrate that validated EA BP GWAS loci, considered
jointly, show significant effects in AA samples. Consequently, these findings
suggest that BP loci might have universal effects across studied populations,
demonstrating that multiethnic samples are an essential component in identifying,
fine mapping, and understanding their trait variability.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3769920
PMID: 23972371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Neoplasia. 2013 Apr;15(4):399-408.

Methylation profiling defines an extensive field defect in histologically normal 
prostate tissues associated with prostate cancer.

Yang B(1), Bhusari S, Kueck J, Weeratunga P, Wagner J, Leverson G, Huang W,
Jarrard DF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI,
USA.

Prostate cancer (PCa) is typically found as a multifocal disease suggesting the
potential for molecular defects within the morphologically normal tissue. The
frequency and spatial extent of DNA methylation changes encompassing a potential 
field defect are unknown. A comparison of non-tumor-associated (NTA) prostate to 
histologically indistinguishable tumor-associated (TA) prostate tissues detected 
a distinct profile of DNA methylation alterations (0.2%) using genome-wide DNA
arrays based on the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements 18 sequence that tile both
gene-rich and poor regions. Hypomethylation (87%) occurred more frequently than
hypermethylation (13%). Several of the most significantly altered loci (CAV1,
EVX1, MCF2L, and FGF1) were then used as probes to map the extent of these DNA
methylation changes in normal tissues from prostates containing cancer. In TA
tissues, the extent of methylation was similar both adjacent (2 mm) and at a
distance (>1 cm) from tumor foci. These loci were also able to distinguish NTA
from TA tissues in a validation set of patient samples. These mapping studies
indicate that a spatially widespread epigenetic defect occurs in the peripheral
prostate tissues of men who have PCa that may be useful in the detection of this 
disease.

PMCID: PMC3612912
PMID: 23555185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59444. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059444. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

DNA methylation profiles at precancerous stages associated with recurrence of
lung adenocarcinoma.

Sato T(1), Arai E, Kohno T, Tsuta K, Watanabe S, Soejima K, Betsuyaku T, Kanai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Tokyo, Japan.

The aim of this study was to clarify the significance of DNA methylation
alterations at precancerous stages of lung adenocarcinoma. Using single-CpG
resolution Infinium array, genome-wide DNA methylation analysis was performed in 
36 samples of normal lung tissue obtained from patients without any primary lung 
tumor, 145 samples of non-cancerous lung tissue (N) obtained from patients with
lung adenocarcinomas, and 145 samples of tumorous tissue (T). Stepwise
progression of DNA methylation alterations from normal lung tissue to
non-cancerous lung tissue obtained from patients with lung adenocarcinomas, and
then tumorous tissue samples, was observed at 3,270 CpG sites, suggesting that
non-cancerous lung tissue obtained from patients with lung adenocarcinomas was at
precancerous stages with DNA methylation alterations. At CpG sites of 2,083
genes, DNA methylation status in samples of non-cancerous lung tissue obtained
from patients with lung adenocarcinomas was significantly correlated with
recurrence after establishment of lung adenocarcinomas. Among such
recurrence-related genes, 28 genes are normally unmethylated (average ß-values
based on Infinium assay in normal lung tissue samples was less than 0.2) and
their DNA hypermethylation at precancerous stages was strengthened during
progression to lung adenocarcinomas (<U+0394>ß(T-N)>0.1). Among these 28 genes, we
focused on 6 for which implications in transcription regulation, apoptosis or
cell adhesion had been reported. DNA hypermethylation of the ADCY5, EVX1, GFRA1, 
PDE9A, and TBX20 genes resulted in reduced mRNA expression in tumorous tissue
samples. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment of lung cancer cell lines restored the 
mRNA expression levels of these 5 genes. Reduced mRNA expression in tumorous
tissue samples was significantly correlated with tumor aggressiveness. These data
suggest that DNA methylation alterations at precancerous stages determine tumor
aggressiveness and outcome through silencing of specific genes.

PMCID: PMC3609833
PMID: 23544068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Urol. 2013 Jun;189(6):2020-1. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.02.3193. Epub 2013 Mar
4.

Epigenetic changes in histologically normal prostate tissues.

Brooks JD.

Comment on
    J Urol. 2013 Jun;189(6):2335-41.

PMID: 23465550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Epigenomics. 2013 Feb;5(1):65-71. doi: 10.2217/epi.12.67.

Analysis of promoter non-CG methylation in prostate cancer.

Truong M(1), Yang B, Wagner J, Desotelle J, Jarrard DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine & Public
Health, Madison, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: In vertebrates, DNA methylation occurs primarily at CG dinucleotides 
but recently, non-CG methylation has been found at appreciable levels in
embryonic stem cells.
MATERIALS & METHODS: To assess non-CG methylation in cancer, we compared the
extent of non-CG methylation at several biologically important CG islands in
prostate cancer and normal cell lines. An assessment of the promoter CG islands
EVX1 and FILIP1L demonstrates a fourfold higher rate of non-CG methylation at
EVX1 compared with FILIP1L across all cell lines. These loci are densely
methylated at CG sites in cancer.
RESULTS: No significant difference in non-CG methylation was demonstrated between
cancer and normal. Treatment of cancer cell lines with 5-azacytidine
significantly reduced methylation within EVX1 at CG and CC sites, preferentially.
CONCLUSION: Non-CG methylation does not correlate with CG methylation at
hypermethylated promoter regions in cancer. Furthermore, global inhibition of DNA
methyltransferases does not affect all methylated cytosines uniformly.

PMCID: PMC3731941
PMID: 23414321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cancer Microenviron. 2013 Apr;6(1):19-29. doi: 10.1007/s12307-012-0128-5. Epub
2012 Dec 29.

Pilot study on "pericytic mimicry" and potential embryonic/stem cell properties
of angiotropic melanoma cells interacting with the abluminal vascular surface.

Lugassy C(1), Wadehra M, Li X, Corselli M, Akhavan D, Binder SW, Péault B,
Cochran AJ, Mischel PS, Kleinman HK, Barnhill RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA, USA, clugassy@mednet.ucla.edu.

The interaction of tumor cells with the tumor vasculature is mainly studied for
its role in tumor angiogenesis and intravascular metastasis of circulating tumor 
cells. In addition, a specific interaction of tumor cells with the abluminal
surfaces of vessels, or angiotropism, may promote the migration of angiotropic
tumor cells along the abluminal vascular surfaces in a pericytic location. This
process has been termed extravascular migratory metastasis. The abluminal
vascular surface may also provide a vascular niche inducing or sustaining
stemness to angiotropic tumor cells. This pilot study investigated if angiotropic
melanoma cells might represent a subset population with pericytic and embryonic
or stem cell properties. Through microarray analysis, we showed that the
interaction between melanoma cells and the abluminal surface of endothelial cells
triggers significant differential expression of several genes. The most
significantly differentially expressed genes have demonstrated properties linked 
to cancer cell migration (CCL2, ICAM1 and IL6), cancer progression (CCL2, ICAM1, 
SELE, TRAF1, IL6, SERPINB2 and CXCL6), epithelial to mesenchymal transition (CCL2
and IL6), embryonic/stem cell properties (CCL2, PDGFB, EVX1 and CFDP1) and
pericytic recruitment (PDGFB). In addition, bioinformatics-based analysis of the 
differentially expressed genes has shown that the most significantly enriched
functional groups included development, cell movement, cancer, and embryonic
development. Finally, the investigation of pericyte/mesenchymal stem cells
markers via immunostaining of human melanoma samples revealed expression of
PDGFRB, NG2 and CD146 by angiotropic melanoma cells. Taken together, these
preliminary data are supportive of the "pericytic mimicry" by angiotropic
melanoma cells, and suggest that the interaction between melanoma cells and the
abluminal vascular surface induce differential expression of genes linked to
cancer migration and embryonic/stem cell properties.

PMCID: PMC3601217
PMID: 23275074  [PubMed]


17. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Mar;34(3):513-21. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs363. Epub 2012 Nov 
19.

Genome-wide CpG island methylation analyses in non-small cell lung cancer
patients.

Heller G(1), Babinsky VN, Ziegler B, Weinzierl M, Noll C, Altenberger C, Müllauer
L, Dekan G, Grin Y, Lang G, End-Pfützenreuter A, Steiner I, Zehetmayer S, Döme B,
Arns BM, Fong KM, Wright CM, Yang IA, Klepetko W, Posch M, Zielinski CC,
Zöchbauer-Müller S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Clinical Division of Oncology, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna 1090, Austria. gerwin.heller@meduniwien.ac.at

DNA methylation is part of the epigenetic gene regulation complex, which is
relevant for the pathogenesis of cancer. We performed a genome-wide search for
methylated CpG islands in tumors and corresponding non-malignant lung tissue
samples of 101 stages I-III non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients by
combining methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and microarray analysis. Overall, we
identified 2414 genomic positions differentially methylated between tumor and
non-malignant lung tissue samples. Ninety-seven percent of them were found to be 
tumor-specifically methylated. Annotation of these genomic positions resulted in 
the identification of 477 tumor-specifically methylated genes of which many are
involved in regulation of gene transcription and cell adhesion. Tumor-specific
methylation was confirmed by a gene-specific approach. In the majority of tumors,
methylation of certain genes was associated with loss of their protein expression
determined by immunohistochemistry. Treatment of NSCLC cells with epigenetically 
active drugs resulted in upregulated expression of many tumor-specifically
methylated genes analyzed by gene expression microarrays suggesting that about
one-third of these genes are transcriptionally regulated by methylation.
Moreover, comparison of methylation results with certain clinicopathological
characteristics of the patients suggests that methylation of HOXA2 and HOXA10 may
be of prognostic relevance in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) patients. In
conclusion, we identified a large number of tumor-specifically methylated genes
in NSCLC patients. Expression of many of them is regulated by methylation.
Moreover, HOXA2 and HOXA10 methylation may serve as prognostic parameters in SCC 
patients. Overall, our findings emphasize the impact of methylation on the
pathogenesis of NSCLCs.

PMID: 23172663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Urol. 2013 Jun;189(6):2335-41. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.11.074. Epub 2012 Nov
15.

Using the epigenetic field defect to detect prostate cancer in biopsy negative
patients.

Truong M(1), Yang B, Livermore A, Wagner J, Weeratunga P, Huang W, Dhir R, Nelson
J, Lin DW, Jarrard DF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2013 Jun;189(6):2020-1.

PURPOSE: We determined whether a novel combination of field defect DNA
methylation markers could predict the presence of prostate cancer using
histologically normal transrectal ultrasound guided biopsy cores.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation was assessed using quantitative
Pyrosequencing® in a training set consisting of 65 nontumor and tumor associated 
prostate tissues from University of Wisconsin. A multiplex model was generated
using multivariate logistic regression and externally validated in blinded
fashion in a set of 47 nontumor and tumor associated biopsy specimens from
University of Washington.
RESULTS: We observed robust methylation differences in all genes at all CpGs
assayed (p <0.0001). Regression models incorporating individual genes (EVX1, CAV1
and FGF1) and a gene combination (EVX1 and FGF1) discriminated nontumor from
tumor associated tissues in the original training set (AUC 0.796-0.898, p
<0.001). On external validation uniplex models incorporating EVX1, CAV1 or FGF1
discriminated tumor from nontumor associated biopsy negative specimens (AUC
0.702, 0.696 and 0.658, respectively, p <0.05). A multiplex model (EVX1 and FGF1)
identified patients with prostate cancer (AUC 0.774, p = 0.001) and had a
negative predictive value of 0.909. Comparison between 2 separate cores in
patients in this validation set revealed similar methylation defects, indicating 
detection of a widespread field defect.
CONCLUSIONS: A widespread epigenetic field defect can be used to detect prostate 
cancer in patients with histologically negative biopsies. To our knowledge this
assay is unique, in that it detects alterations in nontumor cells. With further
validation this marker combination (EVX1 and FGF1) has the potential to decrease 
the need for repeat prostate biopsies, a procedure associated with cost and
complications.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4226217
PMID: 23159584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Oncol Lett. 2012 Apr 1;3(4):901-906. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Methylation status of NEUROG2 and NID2 improves the diagnosis of stage I NSCLC.

Geng J(1), Sun J, Lin Q, Gu J, Zhao Y, Zhang H, Feng X, He Y, Wang W, Zhou X, Yu 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

In our previous study, we attempted to develop a tool for the early diagnosis of 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) using DNA methylation biomarkers. With the aim
of improving the diagnostic potential by optimizing the composition of the target
set, in this study, 13 candidate genes (ACTA1, AIDH1A2, CBX8, CDH8, EVX1,
MGC16275, NEUROG1, NEUROG2, NID2, OTX2OS1, PGAM2, PHOX2B and TOX) were analyzed
by methylation-specific PCR to determine the methylation status of each gene in 5
NSCLC cell lines and in lung tissue samples from 15 healthy volunteers,
103 stage I NSCLC patients and 26 non-cancerous control patients. Results showed 
that NEUROG2 and NID2 were hypermethylated in stage I NSCLC tissues (31.07 and
46.60%, respectively) and unmethylated in normal lung tissues (0/15) and
non-cancerous tissues (0/26). Following recombination, an optimized 5-gene panel 
(NEUROG2, NID2, RASSF1A, APC and HOXC9) achieved a sensitivity of 91.26% with a
specificity of 84.62% in the detection of stage I NSCLC. The optimized 5-gene
panel greatly improved the diagnostic power for stage I NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3362429
PMID: 22741015  [PubMed]


20. Br J Cancer. 2012 Jun 26;107(1):100-7. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.216. Epub 2012 May
17.

Even-skipped homeobox 1 is frequently hypermethylated in prostate cancer and
predicts PSA recurrence.

Truong M(1), Yang B, Wagner J, Kobayashi Y, Rajamanickam V, Brooks J, Jarrard DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, 7037, Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, 1111 Highland Avenue,
Madison, WI 53792, USA.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is an important epigenetic mechanism in prostate
cancer (PCa) progression. Given the role of even-skipped homeobox 1 (EVX1) in the
regulation of multiple genes during embryogenesis, we postulated that EVX1
methylation is altered in PCa progression.
METHODS: Bisulphite sequencing and quantitative MethyLight were used to assess
methylation in human prostate epithelial cells, four PCa cell lines, liver, lung,
spleen, kidney, 35 paired tumour and tumour-associated benign tissues, and 11
normal prostate tissues. Prostate cancer cell lines were treated with
5-azacytidine (AzaC) or trichostatin A (TSA), and expression of EVX1 transcript
and variants was assessed by qPCR. Hypermethylation was compared with
clinicopathological features in a validation set of 58 patients using microarray.
RESULTS: Even-skipped homeobox 1 hypermethylation was observed in all four PCa
cell lines and 57% of tumours. High-grade tumours exhibited increased methylation
compared with intermediate-grade tumours. Even-skipped homeobox 1 expression was 
induced in PCa cell lines after treatment with AzaC or TSA. In the validation
set, 83% of tumours were hypermethylated and hypermethylation was associated with
worse recurrence-free survival.
CONCLUSION: In this first evaluation of EVX1 methylation in human cancer, EVX1 is
one of the most commonly hypermethylated genes observed in PCa and predicted
treatment failure in moderate risk patients.

PMCID: PMC3389415
PMID: 22596233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Neurobiol. 2012 Feb;72(2):208-14. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20972.

Regulation of spinal interneuron differentiation by the paracrine action of
glycine.

Côté S(1), Drapeau P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology and Groupe de recherche sur le
système nerveux central, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada.

Glycine and <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) are depolarizing during early development 
but the purpose is unclear. We tested the effect of altering glycine signaling in
zebrafish embryos by overexpressing the potassium-chloride co-transporter type 2 
(KCC2) to reverse the chloride gradient or by blocking glycine receptors with
strychnine or by selectively knocking down the embryonic glycine receptor (GlyR
KD). Using a variety of markers we observed in all three cases a reduction of all
types of spinal interneuron populations examined, indicating that glycine
modulates their overall differentiation rather than choice of cell fate. Other
cell populations (motor, sensory, and glial cells) were unaffected. As glycine
appeared to act preceding neural and synaptic development, we examined the
bandoneon (beo) mutant in which glycine receptors are functional but not
clustered at synapses. Neural populations in beo embryos appeared normal,
suggesting a paracrine action of circulating glycine in promoting interneuron
differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4005792
PMID: 22234938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Biol. 2012 Feb 1;362(1):94-103. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.11.017. Epub 2011
Dec 6.

EVEN-SKIPPED HOMEOBOX 1 controls human ES cell differentiation by directly
repressing GOOSECOID expression.

Kalisz M(1), Winzi M, Bisgaard HC, Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte,
Denmark. pas@hagedorn.dk

TGFß signaling patterns the primitive streak, yet little is known about
transcriptional effectors that mediate the cell fate choices during streak-like
development in mammalian embryos and in embryonic stem (ES) cells. Here we
demonstrate that cross-antagonistic actions of EVEN-SKIPPED HOMEOBOX 1 (EVX1) and
GOOSECOID (GSC) regulate cell fate decisions in streak-like progenitors derived
from human ES cells exposed to BMP4 and/or activin. We found that EVX1 repressed 
GSC expression and promoted formation of posterior streak-like progeny in
response to BMP4, and conversely that GSC repressed EVX1 expression and was
required for development of anterior streak-like progeny in response to activin. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that EVX1 bound to the GSC
5'-flanking region in BMP4 treated human ES cells, and band shift assays
identified two EVX1 binding sites in the GSC 5'-region. Significantly, we found
that intact EVX1 binding sites were required for BMP4-mediated repression of GSC 
reporter constructs. We conclude that BMP4-induced EVX1 repress GSC directly and 
the two genes form the core of a gene regulatory network (GRN) controlling cell
fates in streak-like human ES cell progeny.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22178155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2011 Aug 31;178(1):146-55. doi:
10.1016/j.resp.2011.04.013. Epub 2011 Apr 16.

Prenatal development of central rhythm generation.

Champagnat J(1), Morin-Surun MP, Bouvier J, Thoby-Brisson M, Fortin G.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiologie et Développement (UPR 3294, CNRS), Neuro-Sud Paris (IFR 144),
Centre de Recherche de Gif-sur Yvette (CNRS, FRC 3115), Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
jean.champagnat@iaf.cnrs-gif.fr

Foetal breathing in mice results from prenatal activity of the two coupled
hindbrain oscillators considered to be responsible for respiratory rhythm
generation after birth: the pre-Bötzinger complex (preBötC) is active shortly
before the onset of foetal breathing; the parafacial respiratory group (e-pF in
embryo) starts activity one day earlier. Transcription factors have been
identified that are essential to specify neural progenitors and lineages forming 
each of these oscillators during early development of the neural tube: Hoxa1,
Egr2 (Krox20), Phox2b, Lbx1 and Atoh1 for the e-pF; Dbx1 and Evx1 for the preBötC
which eventually grow contralateral axons requiring expression of Robo3.
Inactivation of the genes encoding these factors leads to mis-specification of
these neurons and distinct breathing abnormalities: apneic patterns and loss of
central chemosensitivity for the e-pF (central congenital hypoventilation
syndrome, CCHS, in humans), complete loss of breathing for the preBötC,
right-left desynchronized breathing in Robo3 mutants. Mutations affecting
development in more rostral (pontine) respiratory territories change the shape of
the inspiratory drive without affecting the rhythm. Other (primordial) embryonic 
oscillators start in the mouse three days before the e-pF, to generate low
frequency (LF) rhythms that are probably required for activity-dependent
development of neurones at embryonic stages; in the foetus, however, they are
actively silenced to avoid detrimental interaction with the on-going respiratory 
rhythm. Altogether, these observations provide a strong support to the previously
proposed hypothesis that the functional organization of the respiratory generator
is specified at early stages of development and is dual in nature, comprising two
serially non-homologous oscillators.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21527363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Dyn. 2011 May;240(5):1240-8. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22534. Epub 2011 Jan 18.

Evx1 is required for joint formation in zebrafish fin dermoskeleton.

Schulte CJ(1), Allen C, England SJ, Juárez-Morales JL, Lewis KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, Anatomy Building,
Cambridge, UK.

The transcription factor Evx1 is expressed in the joints between individual
lepidotrichia (bony ray) segments and at the distal tips of the lepidotrichia in 
developing zebrafish fins. It is also expressed in the apical growth zone in
regenerating fins. However, so far there is no functional evidence that addresses
whether Evx1 is required for any aspect of fin development or regeneration. In
this study, we use a novel mutation in evx1 to address this. We find that Evx1 is
not required for either fin outgrowth or regeneration. All of the fins form
normally in evx1 mutants, and there are no significant changes in fin length. In 
contrast, Evx1 is required for lepidotrichia joint formation during both fin
development and regeneration. This is a very specific phenotype as both
lepidotrichia hemisegment separations and lepidotrichia bifurcations still form
normally in evx1 mutant fins, as do joints in the more proximal endoskeletal
radials.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21509898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Hua Xi Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Apr;28(2):190-4.

[Research on the differently expressed homeobox genes related to adenoid cystic
carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Xia H(1), Li LJ, Han B, Pan J, Gao N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the differently expressed Homeobox genes between
adenoid cystic carcinoma of salivary gland and normal gland tissue, and find out 
the effect of homeobox genes on oncogenesis and differentiation of adenoid cystic
carcinoma of salivary gland.
METHODS: Six strictly paired specimens including adenoid cystic carcinoma and its
surrounding normal gland tissue and two pairs of specimens including cell strain 
of adenoid cystic carcinoma and its surrounding normal gland tissue were
established. Customized Oligo microarray which contains probes of 232 human
homeobox genes was used to analyze and conclude two groups of different genes
data. RT-PCR technique was used to examine the mRNA expressing level of highly
suspected relevant genes of adenoid cystic carcinoma in different specimens.
Obvious differently expressed Homeobox genes were found through statistical
analyses.
RESULTS: In tissue specimens homeobox genes were found 67 up-regulated and 54
down-regulated, and in cell specimens homeobox genes were found 12 up-regulated
and 15 down-regulated. One up-regulated gene and 7 down-regulated genes were
found both in tissue and cell specimens, among which EVX1 and PITX1 were the most
frequent. RT-PCI showed that there was statistical expressing difference between 
TGIF, EVX1 and normal gland tissue in ACC-M.
CONCLUSION: As the key gene to cellular proliferation and differentiation,
homeobox genes are closely relevant to the oncogenesis of adenoid cystic
carcinoma of salivary gland.

PMID: 20480666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Neurosci. 2009;31(6):511-22. doi: 10.1159/000243715. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Detailed expression pattern of Foxp1 and its possible roles in neurons of the
spinal cord during embryogenesis.

Morikawa Y(1), Komori T, Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama,
Japan. yoshim@wakayama-med.ac.jp

A member of winged-helix/forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1, is expressed in
the developing spinal cord during mouse embryogenesis. To shed light on the
potential role of Foxp1 in neurons of the developing spinal cord, we investigated
the detailed expression pattern of Foxp1 between embryonic day (E) 9.5 and E17.5.
At E10.25, some postmitotic neurons with strong expression of Foxp1 (Foxp1(high))
were first detected in the ventral half of the brachial spinal cord. By E11.5,
Foxp1(high) neurons increased in the ventral spinal cord at the limb levels. All 
of Foxp1(high) neurons at the limb levels were Islet2(+)/Lhx3(-) motor neurons
(MNs) of the lateral motor column and some neurons that expressed Foxp1 weakly
(Foxp1(low)) at the thoracic level were MNs of the preganglionic motor column.
Between E12.5 and E17.5, Foxp1(low) neurons were also observed in the
intermediate zone throughout the ventral spinal cord, all of which were Pax2(+), 
En1(+), Evx1(-), Chx10(-), Gata3(-), and Lhx3(-) V1 interneurons. Interestingly, 
no colocalization of Foxp1 with Lhx3 was observed in the developing spinal cord. 
In addition, overexpression of Foxp1 markedly attenuated the endogenous
expression of Lhx3 in a neuroendocrine cell line. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays in a neuronal cell line and E13.5 spinal cords revealed an interaction
between Foxp1 and the consensus motif in the Lhx3 promoter. These results suggest
that Foxp1 may play some important roles in the determination of neuronal fates
of the ventral spinal cord, possibly through the suppression of Lhx3 expression.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19797899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Neuroscience. 2009 Sep 15;162(4):1150-62. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.05.022. Epub 2009 May 20.

Characterization of Foxp2-expressing cells in the developing spinal cord.

Morikawa Y(1), Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1,
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. yoshim@wakayama-med.ac.jp

Two members of winged-helix/forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, are 
expressed in the developing and adult CNS, including the striatum, cerebral
cortex, and thalamus. In a previous study, we have demonstrated that Foxp1 is
expressed in a subpopulation of V1 interneurons in addition to motor neurons of
the spinal cord during mouse embryogenesis. However, the detailed expression
pattern of Foxp2 and its relationship with Foxp1 in the developing spinal cord
remains to be elucidated. To shed light on the potential roles of Foxp1 and Foxp2
in the developing spinal cord, we characterized Foxp2-expressing cells during
mouse embryogenesis. At embryonic day (E) 11.0, Foxp2-expressing cells were first
observed in the ventral spinal cord, which were Pax6(-), p27(+), and
neuron-specific class III beta-tubulin(+) postmitotic neurons. Between E13.5 and 
E15.5, high expression of Foxp2 was observed in both medial and lateral parts of 
the ventral spinal cord. Double-immunofluorescence staining for Foxp2 with some
homeodomain transcription factors revealed that Foxp2-expressing neurons were
Pax2(+), En1(+), Evx1(-), Chx10(-), Gata3(-), and Lhx3(-) V1 interneurons in the 
intermediate zone throughout the ventral spinal cord, indicating that
Foxp2-expressing neurons were also V1 interneurons with the same phenotypes as
Foxp1-expressing interneurons. In addition, neither Foxp1 nor Foxp2 was expressed
in ventral calbindin(+) Renshaw cells. However, Foxp2 did not colocalize with
Foxp1 in interneurons of the ventral spinal cord. These findings suggest that
Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed in the distinct subsets of V1 interneurons that
belong to non-Renshaw cells in the ventral spinal cord during embryogenesis.
Thus, Foxp1 and Foxp2 may be involved in the determination of the cell type
identities during late embryogenesis: the classes of neurotransmitters and the
functional subtypes of non-Renshaw cells, such as Ia and Ib inhibitory
interneurons.

PMID: 19463901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 15;325(2):422-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.10.004. Epub 2008 
Oct 18.

A novel conserved evx1 enhancer links spinal interneuron morphology and
cis-regulation from fish to mammals.

Suster ML(1), Kania A, Liao M, Asakawa K, Charron F, Kawakami K, Drapeau P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Neuroscience, Research Institute of the McGill
University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec H3T 1J4 Canada. msuster@lab.nig.ac.jp

Spinal interneurons are key components of locomotor circuits, driving such
diverse behaviors as swimming in fish and walking in mammals. Recent work has
linked the expression of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors to key
features of interneurons in diverse species, raising the possibility that these
interneurons are functionally related. Consequently, the determinants of
interneuron subtypes are predicted to share conserved cis-regulation in
vertebrates with very different spinal cords. Here, we establish a link between
cis-regulation and morphology of spinal interneurons that express the Evx1
homeodomain transcription factor from fish to mammals. Using comparative
genomics, and complementary transgenic approaches, we have identified a novel
enhancer of evx1, that includes two non-coding elements conserved in vertebrates.
We show that pufferfish evx1 transgenes containing this enhancer direct reporter 
expression to a subset of spinal commissural interneurons in zebrafish embryos.
Pufferfish, zebrafish and mouse evx1 downstream genomic enhancers label
selectively Evx1(+) V0 commissural interneurons in chick and rat embryos. By
dissecting the zebrafish evx1 enhancer, we identify a role for a 25 bp conserved 
cis-element in V0-specific gene expression. Our findings support the notion that 
spinal interneurons shared between distantly related vertebrates, have been
maintained in part via the preservation of highly conserved cis-regulatory
modules.

PMID: 18992237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. FASEB J. 2009 Jan;23(1):114-22. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-111203. Epub 2008 Sep 22.

Directed induction of anterior and posterior primitive streak by Wnt from
embryonic stem cells cultured in a chemically defined serum-free medium.

Nakanishi M(1), Kurisaki A, Hayashi Y, Warashina M, Ishiura S, Kusuda-Furue M,
Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan.

Formation of the primitive streak (PS) is the initial specification step that
generates all the mesodermal and endodermal tissue lineages during early
differentiation. Thus, a therapeutically compatible and efficient method for
differentiation of the PS is crucial for regenerative medicine. In this study, we
developed chemically defined serum-free culture conditions for the
differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells into the PS-like cells. Cultures
supplemented with Wnt showed induction of expression of a PS marker, the
brachyury gene, followed by induction of the anterior PS markers goosecoid and
foxa2, a posterior PS marker, evx1, and the endoderm marker sox17. Similar
differentiation of PS by Wnt was also observed in human ES cells. Moreover, we
revealed that the activation of the Wnt canonical pathway is essential for PS
differentiation in mouse ES cells. These results demonstrated that Wnt is an
essential and sufficient factor for the induction of the PS-like cells in vitro. 
These conditions of induction could constitute the initial step in generating
therapeutically useful cells of the definitive endoderm lineage, such as
hepatocytes and pancreatic endocrine cells, under chemically defined conditions.

PMID: 18809738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 1;68(17):7156-64. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1085.

CREB3L2-PPARgamma fusion mutation identifies a thyroid signaling pathway
regulated by intramembrane proteolysis.

Lui WO(1), Zeng L, Rehrmann V, Deshpande S, Tretiakova M, Kaplan EL, Leibiger I, 
Leibiger B, Enberg U, Höög A, Larsson C, Kroll TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago,
Illinois 60637, USA.

The discovery of gene fusion mutations, particularly in leukemia, has
consistently identified new cancer pathways and led to molecular diagnostic
assays and molecular-targeted chemotherapies for cancer patients. Here, we report
our discovery of a novel CREB3L2-PPARgamma fusion mutation in thyroid carcinoma
with t(3;7)(p25;q34), showing that a family of somatic PPARgamma fusion mutations
exist in thyroid cancer. The CREB3L2-PPARgamma fusion encodes a CREB3L2-PPARgamma
fusion protein that is composed of the transactivation domain of CREB3L2 and all 
functional domains of PPARgamma1. CREB3L2-PPARgamma was detected in <3% of
thyroid follicular carcinomas. Engineered overexpression of CREB3L2-PPARgamma
induced proliferation by 40% to 45% in primary human thyroid cells, consistent
with a dominant oncogenic mechanism. Wild-type CREB3L2 was expressed in the
thyroid as a bZIP transcription factor with a transmembrane domain that has
flanking S1P and S2P proteolytic cleavage sites. Native CREB3L2 was cleaved to
nuclear CREB3L2 by regulated intramembrane proteolysis in normal thyroid cells
that expressed the S1P and S2P proteases. Nuclear CREB3L2 stimulated
transcription 8-fold from the EVX1 cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element in the
absence of cAMP, whereas CREB3L2-PPARgamma inhibited transcription 6-fold from
EVX1 in the same experiments. CREB3L2-PPARgamma also inhibited 4-fold the
expression of thyroglobulin, a native cAMP-responsive gene, in primary thyroid
cells treated with thyroid-stimulating hormone. Our findings identify a novel
CREB3L2-PPARgamma gene fusion mutation in thyroid carcinoma and reveal a thyroid 
signaling pathway that is regulated by intramembrane proteolysis and disrupted in
cancer.

PMID: 18757431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Dev Dyn. 2008 May;237(5):1359-72. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21536.

Ventral specification and perturbed boundary formation in the mouse midbrain in
the absence of Hedgehog signaling.

Fogel JL(1), Chiang C, Huang X, Agarwala S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas
78712-0248, USA.

Although Hedgehog (HH) signaling plays a critical role in patterning the ventral 
midbrain, its role in early midbrain specification is not known. We examined the 
midbrains of sonic hedgehog (Shh) and smoothened (Smo) mutant mice where HH
signaling is respectively attenuated and eliminated. We show that some ventral
(Evx1+) cell fates are specified in the Shh-/- mouse in a Ptc1- and
Gli1-independent manner. HH-independent ventral midbrain induction was further
confirmed by the presence of a Pax7-negative ventral midbrain territory in both
Shh-/- and Smo-/- mice at and before embryonic day (E) 8.5. Midbrain signaling
centers are severely disrupted in the Shh-/- mutant. Interestingly, dorsal
markers are up-regulated (Wnt1, Gdf7, Pax7), down-regulated (Lfng), or otherwise 
altered (Zic1) in the Shh-/- midbrain. Together with the increased cell death
seen specifically in Shh-/- dorsal midbrains (E8.5-E9), our results suggest
specific regulation of dorsal patterning by SHH, rather than a simple
deregulation due to its absence.

PMCID: PMC2586936
PMID: 18429041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Neurosci. 2006;28(1-2):102-17.

Notch1 signaling influences v2 interneuron and motor neuron development in the
spinal cord.

Yang X(1), Tomita T, Wines-Samuelson M, Beglopoulos V, Tansey MG, Kopan R, Shen
J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Program in
Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway plays a variety of roles in cell fate decisions
during development. Previous studies have shown that reduced Notch signaling
results in premature differentiation of neural progenitor cells, while increased 
Notch activities promote apoptotic death of neural progenitor cells in the
developing brain. Whether Notch signaling is involved in the specification of
neuronal subtypes is unclear. Here we examine the role of Notch1 in the
development of neuronal subtypes in the spinal cord using conditional knockout
(cKO) mice lacking Notch1 specifically in neural progenitor cells. Notch1
inactivation results in accelerated neuronal differentiation in the ventral
spinal cord and gradual disappearance of the ventral central canal. These changes
are accompanied by reduced expression of Hes1 and Hes5 and increased expression
of Mash1 and Neurogenin 1 and 2. Using markers (Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Olig2, Pax6 and
Dbx1) for one or multiple progenitor cell types, we found reductions of all
subtypes of progenitor cells in the ventral spinal cord of Notch1 cKO mice.
Similarly, using markers (Islet1/2, Lim3, Sim1, Chox10, En1 and Evx1/2) specific 
for motor neurons and distinct classes of interneurons, we found increases in the
number of V0-2 interneurons in the ventral spinal cord of Notch1 cKO mice.
Specifically, the number of Lim3+/Chox10+ V2 interneurons is markedly increased
while the number of Lim3+/Islet+motor neurons is decreased in the Notch1 cKO
spinal cord, suggesting that V2 interneurons are generated at the expense of
motor neurons in the absence of Notch1. These results provide support for a role 
of Notch1 in neuronal subtype specification in the ventral spinal cord.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16508308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Oct 1;162(1):82-4.

HOXA gene cluster rearrangement in a t(7;9)(p15;q34) in a child with MDS.

Poppe B(1), Yigit N, De Moerloose B, De Paepe A, Benoit Y, Speleman F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ghent 1K5, De Pintelaan 185, 
Getnt B-9000, Belgium.

We describe the molecular characterization of a t(7;9)(p15;q34) found in a
15-month-old female patient, diagnosed with refractory anemia with excess blasts 
in transformation (RAEBt), in progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) M7.
Molecular characterization of the 7p15 breakpoint showed that this was localized 
within a fully sequenced PAC clone RP1-170O19 containing the HOXA4 to HOXA13
genes and the EVX1 gene. The 9q34 breakpoint was mapped distal to ABL1 and
proximal to NOTCH1 excluding their involvement as fusion gene partners. Our
findings suggest a causal role for HOXA genes in childhood myelodysplasia and
warrant investigation of this locus in a larger series of patients.

PMID: 16157206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. BMC Dev Biol. 2005 Aug 18;5:17.

Inactivation of the Huntington's disease gene (Hdh) impairs anterior streak
formation and early patterning of the mouse embryo.

Woda JM(1), Calzonetti T, Hilditch-Maguire P, Duyao MP, Conlon RA, MacDonald ME.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, CNY-149,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. jwoda@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Huntingtin, the HD gene encoded protein mutated by polyglutamine
expansion in Huntington's disease, is required in extraembryonic tissues for
proper gastrulation, implicating its activities in nutrition or patterning of the
developing embryo. To test these possibilities, we have used whole mount in situ 
hybridization to examine embryonic patterning and morphogenesis in homozygous
Hdh(ex4/5) huntingtin deficient embryos.
RESULTS: In the absence of huntingtin, expression of nutritive genes appears
normal but E7.0-7.5 embryos exhibit a unique combination of patterning defects.
Notable are a shortened primitive streak, absence of a proper node and diminished
production of anterior streak derivatives. Reduced Wnt3a, Tbx6 and Dll1
expression signify decreased paraxial mesoderm and reduced Otx2 expression and
lack of headfolds denote a failure of head development. In addition, genes
initially broadly expressed are not properly restricted to the posterior, as
evidenced by the ectopic expression of Nodal, Fgf8 and Gsc in the epiblast and T 
(Brachyury) and Evx1 in proximal mesoderm derivatives. Despite impaired posterior
restriction and anterior streak deficits, overall anterior/posterior polarity is 
established. A single primitive streak forms and marker expression shows that the
anterior epiblast and anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) are specified.
CONCLUSION: Huntingtin is essential in the early patterning of the embryo for
formation of the anterior region of the primitive streak, and for down-regulation
of a subset of dynamic growth and transcription factor genes. These findings
provide fundamental starting points for identifying the novel cellular and
molecular activities of huntingtin in the extraembryonic tissues that govern
normal anterior streak development. This knowledge may prove to be important for 
understanding the mechanism by which the dominant polyglutamine expansion in
huntingtin determines the loss of neurons in Huntington's disease.

PMCID: PMC1208873
PMID: 16109169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Evol Dev. 2004 Nov-Dec;6(6):423-30.

Conserved expression domains for genes upstream and within the HoxA and HoxD
clusters suggests a long-range enhancer existed before cluster duplication.

Lehoczky JA(1), Williams ME, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Division of Genetics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The posterior HoxA and HoxD genes are essential in appendicular development.
Studies have demonstrated that a "distal limb enhancer," remotely located
upstream of the HoxD complex, is required to drive embryonic autopod expression
of the posterior Hox genes as well as the two additional non-Hox genes in the
region: Evx2 and Lnp. Our work demonstrates a similar mode of regulation for
Hoxa13 and four upstream genes: Evx1, Hibadh, Tax1bp, and Jaz1. These genes all
show embryonic (E11.5-E13.5) distal limb and genital bud expression, suggesting
the existence of a nearby enhancer influencing the expression of a domain of
genes. Comparative sequence analysis between homologous human and mouse genomic
sequence upstream of Hoxa13 revealed a remote 2.25-kb conserved noncoding
sequence (mmA13CNS) within the fourth intron of the Hibadh gene. mmA13CNS shares 
a common 131-bp core identity within a conserved noncoding sequence upstream of
Hoxd13, which is located within the previously identified distal limb enhancer
critical region. To test the function of this conserved sequence, we created
mmA13CNS-Hsp86-lacZ transgenic mice. mmA13CNS directed a wide range of tissue
expression, including the central nervous system, developing olfactory tissue,
limb, and genital bud. Limb and genital bud expression directed by mmA13CNS is
not identical to the patterns exhibited by Hoxa13/Evx1/Hibadh/Tax1bp1/Jaz1,
suggesting that mmA13CNS is not sufficient to fully recapitulate their expression
in those tissues. The Evx1- and Evx2-like central nervous system expression
observed in these mice suggests that the long-range regulatory element(s) for the
Hox cluster existed before the cluster duplication.

PMID: 15509224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Dyn. 2004 Aug;230(4):727-33.

Cellular expression of eve1 suggests its requirement for the differentiation of
the ameloblasts and for the initiation and morphogenesis of the first tooth in
the zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Laurenti P(1), Thaëron C, Allizard F, Huysseune A, Sire JY.

Author information: 
(1)Populations, Génétique et Evolution, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

even-skipped-related (evx) genes encode homeodomain-containing transcription
factors that are involved in a series of developmental processes such as
posterior body patterning and neurodifferentiation. Although evx1 and evx2 were
not reported to be expressed during mammalian tooth development, we present here 
evidence that eve1, the closest paralog of evx1 in the actinopterygian lineage,
is expressed during pharyngeal tooth formation in the zebrafish, Danio rerio. We 
have performed whole-mount in situ hybridization on zebrafish embryos and larvae 
ranging from 24 to 192 hours postfertilization (hpf). A detailed analysis of
serial sections through the pharyngeal region of whole-mount hybridized and
control specimens indicates that only dental epithelial cells express eve1. eve1 
transcription was activated at 48 hpf, in the placode of the first tooth (i.e.,
the initiation site of tooth 4V(1)), and maintained in the dental epithelium
throughout morphogenesis. Then, by 72 hpf, eve1 expression was restricted to the 
differentiating ameloblasts of the enamel organ during early differentiation
stage, and this expression decreased as soon as matrix was deposited. In
subsequent primary teeth (3 V(1) and 5 V(1)) as well as in their successors
(replacement teeth 4V(2), 3V(2), and 5V(2)), eve1 expression was restricted to
the differentiating ameloblasts and, again, disappeared when matrix was
deposited. Therefore, in the zebrafish, eve1 expression in the pharyngeal region 
is correlated with two key steps of tooth development: initiation and
morphogenesis of the first tooth, and ameloblast differentiation of all
developing teeth.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15254906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Evol Dev. 2003 Mar-Apr;5(2):145-56.

Comparison of even-skipped related gene expression pattern in vertebrates shows
an association between expression domain loss and modification of selective
constraints on sequences.

Avaron F(1), Thaëron-Antono C, Beck CW, Borday-Birraux V, Géraudie J, Casane D,
Laurenti P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Université de Paris 7, case courrier
7077, 2 place Jussieu, 75251 Paris cedex 5, France.

The even-skipped related genes (evx) encode homeodomain-containing transcription 
factors that play key roles in body patterning and neurogenesis in a wide array
of Eumetazoa species. It is thought that the genome of the last common ancestor
of Chordata contained a unique evx gene linked to a unique ancestral Hox complex.
During subsequent evolution, two rounds of whole genome duplication followed by
individual gene losses gave rise to three paralogs: evx1, evx2, and eve1. Then,
eve1 was maintained in Actinopterygii lineage but not in Tetrapoda. To explain
this discrepancy, we examined the expression patterns of the evx1 homologue,
Xhox3, in Xenopus laevis and that of evx1 and eve1 in Danio rerio. We show here
that Xhox3 is expressed in a manner that closely reflects the inferred expression
pattern of the evx1 gene in the last common ancestor of Vertebrata (i.e., in
gastrula, the central nervous system, the posterior gut, and the tip of the
growing tail). Zebrafish evx1 and Xenopus Xhox3 are expressed in homologous cell 
lineages of the central nervous system and of the posterior gut, but evx1 was
undetectable in the gastrula and the tail bud. Strikingly, eve1 is the only evx
gene of zebrafish to be expressed in these two latter regions. Thus, the
ancestral expression pattern of evx1 in vertebrates appears to have been
distributed between evx1 and eve1 in zebrafish. We propose that evx1 and eve1
underwent a complementary loss of expression domain in zebrafish that allowed the
maintenance of the two paralogs in accordance with the
duplication-degeneration-complementation model. It is important to note that, in 
zebrafish, Evx1 and Eve1 have lost most of the protein domain upstream of the
homeodomain. In addition, Eve1 has accumulated substitutions in positions that
are highly conserved in all other Evx proteins. Thus, the reduction of the
expression domain of both evx1 and eve1 in zebrafish appears to be associated
with the modification of constraints on the protein sequences, allowing the
shortening of both genes and an accelerated substitution rate in eve1.

PMID: 12622731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Genome Biol. 2003;4(2):R12. Epub 2003 Jan 23.

Genesis and evolution of the Evx and Mox genes and the extended Hox and ParaHox
gene clusters.

Minguillón C(1), Garcia-Fernàndez J.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona,
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Hox and ParaHox gene clusters are thought to have resulted from the
duplication of a ProtoHox gene cluster early in metazoan evolution. However, the 
origin and evolution of the other genes belonging to the extended Hox group of
homeobox-containing genes, that is, Mox and Evx, remains obscure. We constructed 
phylogenetic trees with mouse, amphioxus and Drosophila extended Hox and other
related Antennapedia-type homeobox gene sequences and analyzed the linkage data
available for such genes.
RESULTS: We claim that neither Mox nor Evx is a Hox or ParaHox gene. We propose a
scenario that reconciles phylogeny with linkage data, in which an Evx/Mox
ancestor gene linked to a ProtoHox cluster was involved in a segmental tandem
duplication event that generated an array of all Hox-like genes, referred to as
the 'coupled' cluster. A chromosomal breakage within this cluster explains the
current composition of the extended Hox cluster (with Evx, Hox and Mox genes) and
the ParaHox cluster.
CONCLUSIONS: Most studies dealing with the origin and evolution of Hox and
ParaHox clusters have not included the Hox-related genes Mox and Evx. Our
phylogenetic analyses and the available linkage data in mammalian genomes support
an evolutionary scenario in which an ancestor of Evx and Mox was linked to the
ProtoHox cluster, and that a tandem duplication of a large genomic region early
in metazoan evolution generated the Hox and ParaHox clusters, plus the
cluster-neighbors Evx and Mox. The large 'coupled' Hox-like cluster
EvxHox/MoxParaHox was subsequently broken, thus grouping the Mox and Evx genes to
the Hox clusters, and isolating the ParaHox cluster.

PMCID: PMC151302
PMID: 12620122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Biol. 2001 Sep 15;237(2):270-81.

Amphioxus Evx genes: implications for the evolution of the Midbrain-Hindbrain
Boundary and the chordate tailbud.

Ferrier DE(1), Minguillón C, Cebrián C, Garcia-Fernàndez J.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Av.
Diagonal 645, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Evx genes are widely used in animal development. In vertebrates they are crucial 
in gastrulation, neurogenesis, appendage development and tailbud formation,
whilst in protostomes they are involved in gastrulation and neurogenesis, as well
as segmentation at least in Drosophila. We have cloned the Evx genes of amphioxus
(Branchiostoma floridae), and analysed their expression to understand how the
functions of Evx have evolved between invertebrates and vertebrates, and in
particular at the origin of chordates and during their subsequent evolution.
Amphioxus has two Evx genes (AmphiEvxA and AmphiEvxB) which are genomically
linked. AmphiEvxA is prototypical to the vertebrate Evx1 and Evx2 genes with
respect to its sequence and expression, whilst AmphiEvxB is very divergent.
Mapping the expression of AmphiEvxA onto a phylogeny shows that a role in
gastrulation, dorsal-ventral patterning and neurogenesis is probably retained
throughout bilaterian animals. AmphiEvxA expression during tailbud development
implies a role for Evx throughout the chordates in this process, whilst lack of
expression at the homologous region to the vertebrate Midbrain-Hindbrain Boundary
(MHB) is consistent with the elaboration of the full organiser properties of this
region being a vertebrate innovation.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11543613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Development. 2001 May;128(9):1587-97.

Mice doubly deficient for the Polycomb Group genes Mel18 and Bmi1 reveal synergy 
and requirement for maintenance but not initiation of Hox gene expression.

Akasaka T(1), van Lohuizen M, van der Lugt N, Mizutani-Koseki Y, Kanno M,
Taniguchi M, Vidal M, Alkema M, Berns A, Koseki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Polycomb group genes were identified as a conserved group of genes whose products
are required in multimeric complexes to maintain spatially restricted expression 
of Hox cluster genes. Unlike in Drosophila, in mammals Polycomb group (PcG) genes
are represented as highly related gene pairs, indicative of duplication during
metazoan evolution. Mel18 and Bmi1 are mammalian homologs of Drosophila Posterior
sex combs. Mice deficient for Mel18 or Bmi1 exhibit similar posterior
transformations of the axial skeleton and display severe immune deficiency,
suggesting that their gene products act on overlapping pathways/target genes.
However unique phenotypes upon loss of either Mel18 or Bmi1 are also observed. We
show using embryos doubly deficient for Mel18 and Bmi1 that Mel18 and Bmi1 act in
synergy and in a dose-dependent and cell type-specific manner to repress Hox
cluster genes and mediate cell survival of embryos during development. In
addition, we demonstrate that Mel18 and Bmi1, although essential for maintenance 
of the appropriate expression domains of Hox cluster genes, are not required for 
the initial establishment of Hox gene expression. Furthermore, we show an
unexpected requirement for Mel18 and Bmi1 gene products to maintain stable
expression of Hox cluster genes in regions caudal to the prospective anterior
expression boundaries during subsequent development.

PMID: 11290297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Neuron. 2001 Feb;29(2):385-99.

Evx1 is a postmitotic determinant of v0 interneuron identity in the spinal cord.

Moran-Rivard L(1), Kagawa T, Saueressig H, Gross MK, Burrill J, Goulding M.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Graduate Program University of California, San Diego 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Interneurons in the ventral spinal cord are essential for coordinated locomotion 
in vertebrates. During embryogenesis, the V0 and V1 classes of ventral
interneurons are defined by expression of the homeodomain transcription factors
Evx1/2 and En1, respectively. In this study, we show that Evx1 V0 interneurons
are locally projecting intersegmental commissural neurons. In Evx1 mutant
embryos, the majority of V0 interneurons fail to extend commissural axons.
Instead, they adopt an En1-like ipsilateral axonal projection and ectopically
express En1, indicating that V0 interneurons are transfated to a V1 identity.
Conversely, misexpression of Evx1 represses En1, suggesting that Evx1 may
suppress the V1 interneuron differentiation program. Our findings demonstrate
that Evx1 is a postmitotic determinant of V0 interneuron identity and reveal a
critical postmitotic phase for neuronal determination in the developing spinal
cord.

PMID: 11239430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Neuron. 2001 Feb;29(2):321-4.

Spinal motor circuits: merging development and function.

Sharma K(1), Peng CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Pharmacology and Physiology, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. ksharma@delphi.bsd.uchicago.edu

Comment on
    Neuron. 2001 Feb;29(2):367-84.

PMID: 11239425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dev Dyn. 2001 Feb;220(2):91-8.

evx1 transcription in bony fin rays segment boundaries leads to a reiterated
pattern during zebrafish fin development and regeneration.

Borday V(1), Thaëron C, Avaron F, Brulfert A, Casane D, Laurenti P, Géraudie J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Université Paris 7-Denis Diderot,
case 7077, 2 Place Jussieu, 75251 Paris cedex 5, France.

The dermoskeleton of zebrafish fins is composed of actinotrichia and segmented
bony rays, or lepidotrichia, which grow by successive addition of distal
segments. The present study shows that evx1, a new zebrafish even-skipped related
gene (Thaëron et al., 2000) displays during bony ray morphogenesis, a unique
repetitive expression pattern along the proximodistal axis of the fin.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization performed on larvae and adult regenerating fins
show that evx1 signal appears as parallel dash lines crossing the width of each
developing and regenerating rays, in a ladder-like fashion. Cytological studies
show that a subpopulation of bone forming cells (scleroblasts) expresses evx1 at 
the level of the joint between two adjacent segments except in the apical part of
the differentiating ray where evx1 expression precedes the formation of the
joint. This distal transcription is turned on again only when the latest
differentiating segment reached its final size and might label the putative next 
segment boundary. This suggests the existence of a molecular mechanism
controlling the periodic expression of evx1 which could be involved in the
establishment of segment boundaries during fin ray morphogenesis, and could play 
a key role during dermal skeleton patterning.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11169842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mech Dev. 2000 Dec;99(1-2):167-72.

Zebrafish evx1 is dynamically expressed during embryogenesis in subsets of
interneurones, posterior gut and urogenital system.

Thaëron C(1), Avaron F, Casane D, Borday V, Thisse B, Thisse C, Boulekbache H,
Laurenti P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, EA 296, Université de Paris 7, case 
courrier 7077, 2 place Jussieu, 75251 cedex 5, Paris, France.

The even-skipped-related homeobox genes (evx) are widely distributed through
animal kingdom and are thought to play key role in posterior body patterning and 
neurogenesis. We have cloned and analyzed the expression of evx1 in zebrafish
(see also Borday et al. (Dev. Dyn. 220 (2001) in press) which displays a dynamic 
and restricted expression pattern during neurogenesis. In spinal cord,
rhombencephalon, and epiphysis, evx1 is expressed in several subsets of emerging 
interneurones prior to their axonal outgrowth, identified as primary
interneurones and a subset of Pax2.1(+) commissural interneurones. In the
hindbrain, evx1 is expressed in reticulospinal interneurones of rhombomeres 5 and
6 as well as in rhombomere 7 interneurones. The latest emerging evx1(+)
interneurones in the hindbrain correspond to commissural interneurones. evx1 is
also dynamically transcribed during the formation of the posterior gut and the
uro-genital system in mesenchymal cells that border the pronephric ducts, the
wall of the pronephric duct, and later in the posterior gut and the wall of the
uro-genital opening. In larvae, the ano-rectal epithelium and the muscular layer 
that surrounds the analia-genitalia region remain stained up to 27 days. In
contrast other vertebrates, evx1displays no early nor caudal expression in
zebrafish.

PMID: 11091087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1998 Jul;24(4):245-8.

PAC and cosmid contig spanning the HOXA cluster on human chromosome 7p15.

Kim MH(1), Park JH, Park HW, Chung IH, Park KA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Anatomy, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
mhkim1@yumc.yonsei.ac.kr

To construct the PAC and cosmid contig map spanning the HOXA cluster on human
chromosome 7, we used 9 DNA markers (D7S2243, D7S3010, HOXA1, EVX1, 750, pBH8,
p60, p8.0, and HOXA11), among which the final 4 were generated in this study by
shotgun cloning strategy. From the libraries, 5 PAC and 35 cosmid clones were
screened and as a result, an overlapping continuous array of cosmid and PAC
clones covering the genomic region (about 200 kb) spanning the entire cluster
were constructed. The isolated cosmids contained several consecutive HOX genes of
regional group, probably sharing the regulatory processes such as alternative
splicing or polyadenylation, and thus could be used as useful materials for
elucidating the molecular mechanism of HOX gene expression in the future.

PMID: 10410678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cell. 1999 Jun 25;97(7):903-15.

A sonic hedgehog-independent, retinoid-activated pathway of neurogenesis in the
ventral spinal cord.

Pierani A(1), Brenner-Morton S, Chiang C, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is thought to control the generation of motor neurons and
interneurons in the ventral CNS. We show here that a Shh-independent pathway of
interneuron generation also operates in the ventral spinal cord. Evidence for
this parallel pathway emerged from an analysis of the induction of ventral
progenitors that express the Dbx homeodomain proteins and of Evx1/2 (V0) and En1 
(V1) neurons. Shh signaling is sufficient to induce Dbx cells and V0 and V1
neurons but is not required for their generation in vitro or in vivo. Retinoids
appear to mediate this parallel pathway. These findings reveal an unanticipated
Shh-independent signaling pathway that controls progenitor cell identity and
interneuron diversity in the ventral spinal cord.

PMID: 10399918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mech Dev. 1998 Nov;78(1-2):171-8.

Pax3 and Pax7 are expressed in commissural neurons and restrict ventral neuronal 
identity in the spinal cord.

Mansouri A(1), Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Am Fassberg 11, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.

Pax3 and Pax7 are transcription factors sharing high sequence identity and
overlapping patterns of expression in particular in the dorsal spinal cord.
Analysis of Pax3 and Pax7 double mutant mice demonstrates that both genes share
redundant functions to restrict ventral neuronal identity in the spinal cord. In 
their absence, the En1 expression domain is expanded dorsally but that of Evx1 is
not affected. In addition, Pax3 and Pax7 are expressed in commissural neurons and
double mutant embryos exhibit highly reduced ventral commissure. Our findings
reveal two distinct regulatory pathways for spinal cord neurogenesis, only one of
which is dependent on Pax3/7 and 6.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved

PMID: 9858722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Int J Dev Biol. 1998 Jul;42(5):637-44.

Genetic patterning of the posterior neuropore region of curly tail mouse embryos:
deficiency of Wnt5a expression.

Gofflot F(1), Hall M, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
gofflot@gene.ucl.ac.be

The mouse mutant curly tail (ct) develops tail flexion defects and spina bifida
as the result of delayed or failed closure of the posterior neuropore (PNP). With
the aim of identifying genes involved in the chain of events resulting in
defective neurulation, which can be detected at day 10.5 of development, we
examined the expression patterns of a number of genes implicated in patterning of
axial structures, mesoderm and neuroepithelium. The genes analyzed were Shh,
HNF3alpha, HNF3beta, Brachyury, Hoxb1, Evx1, Fgf8, Wnt5a and Wnt5b. No
differences could be detected between non-mutant embryos and ct/ct embryos with
normal PNP size for any of these genes. Comparisons between ct/ct embryos with
enlarged PNP and phenotypically normal ct/ct or nonmutant embryos showed
differences only for Wnt5a. Expression of this gene was greatly reduced in the
ventral caudal mesoderm and hindgut endoderm. Analysis of younger embryos
revealed that prior to the stage at which embryos at risk of developing neural
tube defects can be detected, the same proportion of ct/ct embryos shows reduced 
Wnt5a expression. The proportion of embryos showing reduced expression and almost
undetectable expression of Wnt5a reflects the proportions of tail defects and
spina bifida seen at later stages. We suggest that deficiency of Wnt5a signaling 
in the ventral caudal region tissues is an important component of the mechanism
of development of the defects in affected curly tail mutant mice, and that it is 
causally related to decreased cell proliferation within the ventral caudal
region. A possible relationship between decreased Wnt5a expression and reduced
levels of heparan sulphate proteoglycan is discussed.

PMID: 9712518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Dyn. 1997 Dec;210(4):431-45.

Genetic patterning of the developing mouse tail at the time of posterior
neuropore closure.

Gofflot F(1), Hall M, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

Posterior neuropore (PNP) closure coincides with the end of gastrulation, marking
the end of primary neurulation and primary body axis formation. Secondary
neurulation and axis formation involve differentiation of the tail bud
mesenchyme. Genetic control of the primary-secondary transition is not
understood. We report a detailed analysis of gene expression in the caudal region
of day 10 mouse embryos during primary neuropore closure. Embryos were collected 
at the 27-32 somite stage, fixed, processed for whole mount in situ
hybridisation, and subsequently sectioned for a more detailed analysis. Genes
selected for study include those involved in the key events of gastrulation and
neurulation at earlier stages and more cranial levels. Patterns of expression
within the tail bud, neural plate, recently closed neural tube, notochord,
hindgut, mesoderm, and surface ectoderm are illustrated and described.
Specifically, we report continuity of expression of the genes Wnt5a, Wnt5b, Evx1,
Fgf8, RARgamma, Brachyury, and Hoxb1 from primitive streak and node into
subpopulations of the tail bud and caudal axial structures. Within the caudal
notochord, developing floorplate, and hindgut, HNF3alpha, HNF3beta, Shh, and
Brachyury expression domains correlate directly with known genetic roles and
predicted tissue interdependence during induction and differentiation of these
structures. The patterns of expression of Wnt5a, Hoxb1, Brachyury, RARgamma, and 
Evx1, together with observations on proliferation, reveal that the caudal
mesoderm is organised at a molecular level into distinct domains delineated by
longitudinal and transverse borders before histological differentiation.
Expression of Wnt5a in the ventral ectodermal ridge supports previous evidence
that this structure is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. These
results provide a foundation for understanding the mechanisms facilitating
transition from primary to secondary body axis formation, as well as the factors 
involved in defective spinal neurulation.

PMID: 9415428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Development. 1997 Nov;124(22):4493-503.

PAX2 is expressed in multiple spinal cord interneurons, including a population of
EN1+ interneurons that require PAX6 for their development.

Burrill JD(1), Moran L, Goulding MD, Saueressig H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

Members of the PAX family of transcription factors are candidates for controlling
cell identity in the spinal cord. We have morphologically analyzed cells that
express one of these transcription factors, PAX2, demonstrating multiple
interneuron cell types express PAX2. Two ventral populations of PAX2-expressing
interneurons in the spinal cord are marked by coexpression of the transcription
factors, EN1 and EVX1. Interestingly, the expression domains of PAX2, EN1 and
EVX1 in postmitotic neurons correlate closely with those of Pax6 and Pax7 in the 
ventricular zone, implicating these patterning genes in the regulation of PAX2,
EN1 and EVX1. We show that one of these patterning genes, Pax6, is required for
the correct specification of ventral PAX2+ interneurons that coexpress EN1. These
results demonstrate that the early activity of patterning genes in the
ventricular zone determines interneuron identity in the spinal cord.

PMID: 9409667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. FEBS Lett. 1997 Feb 3;402(2-3):131-5.

Mapping of a potent transcriptional repression region of the human homeodomain
protein EVX1.

Briata P(1), Ilengo C, Van DeWerken R, Corte G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology I.S.T., Advanced Biotechnology Center, Genova,
Italy. briata@sirio.cba.unige.it

The human homeodomain protein EVX1 is a transcriptional repressor in transfected 
mammalian cells and this function depends on a region carboxyl-terminal to the
homeodomain. In this study, we transiently expressed several deletions of the
EVX1 C-terminal region in mammalian cells and investigated their effect on the
transcription of a reporter gene directed by different promoters. We show that
the repressor activity maps to a region of 51 amino acids with a high abundance
of alanine and proline residues. This region is able to transfer the repressor
function to either the entire HOXC6 or CREB transcription factors, or to the GAL4
DNA binding domain.

PMID: 9037181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Development. 1997 Jan;124(1):133-9.

Limb deformity proteins: role in mesodermal induction of the apical ectodermal
ridge.

Kuhlman J(1), Niswander L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10021, USA.

During early limb development, distal tip ectoderm is induced by the underlying
mesenchyme to form the apical ectodermal ridge. Subsequent limb growth and
patterning depend on reciprocal signaling between the mesenchyme and ridge. Mice 
that are homozygous for mutations at the limb deformity (ld) locus do not form a 
proper ridge and the anteroposterior axis of the limb is shortened. Skeletal
analyses reveal shortened limbs that involve loss and fusion of distal bones and 
digits, defects in both anteroposterior and proximodistal patterning. Using
molecular markers and mouse-chick chimeras we examined the ridge-mesenchymal
interactions to determine the origin of the ld patterning defects. In the ld
ridge, fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8) RNA is decreased and Fgf4 RNA is not
detected. In the ld mesenchyme, Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Evx1 and Wnt5a expression
is decreased. In chimeras between ld ectoderm and wild-type mesenchyme, a ridge
of normal morphology and function is restored, Fgf8 and Shh are expressed
normally, Fgf4 is induced and a normal skeletal pattern arises. These results
suggest that the ld mesenchyme is unable to induce the formation of a completely 
functional ridge. This primary defect causes a disruption of ridge function and
subsequently leads to the patterning defects observed in ld limbs. We propose a
model in which ridge induction requires at least two phases: an early competence 
phase, which includes induction of Fgf8 expression, and a later differentiation
phase in which Fgf4 is induced and a morphological ridge is formed. Ld proteins
appear to act during the differentiation phase.

PMID: 9006074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Dec 13;229(2):494-7.

The exon-intron structure of human LHX1 gene.

Bozzi F(1), Bertuzzi S, Strina D, Giannetto C, Vezzoni P, Villa A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Technologie Biomediche Avanzate, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Milan, Italy.

We have determined the genomic structure of the human LHX1 gene, a member of the 
LIM/homeobox (Lhx) gene family. The transcript is assembled from five exons,
which are separated by introns ranging in size from 93 nt to 2.3 kb. The two LIM 
domains are entirely contained in the first and second exons, respectively, while
the homeodomain is split into exons three and four. This structure closely
parallels the organization of other mouse and human Lhx genes whose genomic
structure is known. An exception is the mouse and human is/1 genes, whose
homeodomain does not contain introns. An intron at the same position also occurs 
in the Xlim 1 gene as well as in other homeobox genes, such as evx1 and evx2,
suggesting that this intron insertion represents an ancestral event, from which
homeobox genes of different families originated. In this context, evolution of
the Lhx gene family probably involved the shuffling of this intron-containing
homeobox in the proximity of a LIM-only gene, while Islet genes were formed
either by the shuffling of an intronless homeobox to the same LIM domain or,
alternatively, by intron loss during their evolution.

PMID: 8954926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 1995 Nov 17;270(46):27695-701.

Transcriptional repression by the human homeobox protein EVX1 in transfected
mammalian cells.

Briata P(1), Van De Werken R, Airoldi I, Ilengo C, Di Blas E, Boncinelli E, Corte
G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology I.S.T., Advanced Biotechnology Center, Genova,
Italy.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1996 Aug 2;271(31):19008.

The human homeobox protein EVX1 (EVX1) is thought to play an important role
during embryogenesis. In this study, the effect of EVX1 on gene transcription has
been investigated in transfected mammalian cells. EVX1 expression represses
transcription of a reporter gene directed by either cell-specific or viral
promoter/enhancer sequences in a variety of mammalian cell lines and in a
concentration-dependent manner. Transcriptional repression is independent of the 
presence of DNA-binding sites for EVX1 in all the promoters we tested.
Furthermore, repression by EVX1 is evident also using a TATA-less minimal
promoter in the reporter construct. A carboxyl-terminal proline/alanine-rich
region of EVX1 seems to be responsible for the transcriptional repression
activity, as suggested by transfection of EVX1 mutants. We speculate that the
repressor function of EVX1 contributes to its proposed role in embryogenesis.

PMID: 7499236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mech Dev. 1995 May;51(1):99-114.

Expression of the novel murine homeobox gene Sax-1 in the developing nervous
system.

Schubert FR(1), Fainsod A, Gruenbaum Y, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Molekulare Zellbiologie, Max-Planck-Institut für
biophysikalische Chemie, Göttingen, Germany.

We have isolated the novel murine Sax-1 gene, a member of the NK-1 class of
homeobox genes, and report its expression pattern in the developing central
nervous system (CNS) in comparison to two other homeobox genes, Evx-1 and Pax-6. 
Sax-1 was found to be transiently expressed in the developing posterior CNS.
First seen in the ectoderm lateral to the primitive streak, the signal later
encompassed the neural plate. Posteriorly, the expression domain overlapped with 
the Evx-1 expression in the streak, while anteriorly it was delimited by the
Pax-6 signal in the neural tube. This early phase starting at day 9.5 pc, Sax-1
was expressed in distinct areas of spinal cord, hindbrain and forebrain.
Particularly strong signals were detected in rhombomere 1 and in the pretectum.
In these areas, subsets of neurons may be marked and specified. In addition to
the normal pattern of Sax-1 during development, the expression in different mouse
mutants was analysed. In Brachyury curtailed homozygotes, the expression of Sax-1
was found to be reduced during neurulation and even lost at day 9.0 pc. Ventral
shift and finally loss of the signal in the ventral spinal cord was observed in
Danforth's short tail homozygotes.

PMID: 7669696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Development. 1995 Feb;121(2):273-85.

The eed mutation disrupts anterior mesoderm production in mice.

Faust C(1), Schumacher A, Holdener B, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106-4955, USA.

Mouse embryos homozygous for the mutation embryonic ectoderm development (eed)
exhibit a growth defect and fail to gastrulate normally. While extraembryonic
mesoderm is produced extensively, very little embryonic mesoderm is detected in
eed mutant embryos, and there is no subsequent organization of mesoderm into
node, notochord, or somites. The phenotype is consistent with a defect in the
distal primitive streak. Here we report additional phenotypic analyses that
include mRNA in situ hybridization of genes whose expression reflects the
function of different regions of the primitive streak and their derivatives.
These studies have confirmed that mesoderm derived from the proximal primitive
streak is specified appropriately. Despite the absence of a morphologically
distinct node, sparse axial mesoderm cells in eed mutant embryos are specified,
as reflected by expression of Brachyury (T), Sonic hedgehog, and Tcf3b/HNF-3
beta, and definitive endoderm is produced. Specification of these cell types is
also independent of correct expression of nodal, Fgf4, and gsc. Finally, T and
Evx1 display ectopic expression in cells not normally fated to ingress through
the primitive streak. The data presented are discussed in terms of mechanisms for
establishment of the eed phenotype, and are consistent with the eed gene product 
playing an early role in primitive streak formation and/or organization.

PMID: 7768172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Genes Dev. 1994 Aug 15;8(16):1949-61.

Targeted disruption of the even-skipped gene, evx1, causes early postimplantation
lethality of the mouse conceptus.

Spyropoulos DD(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112.

Implantation within the mammalian uterus elicits dramatic changes in the growth, 
differentiation, and morphogenesis of the conceptus. This process is interrupted 
in mice carrying a targeted disruption of the murine evx1 gene, a homolog of the 
Drosophila even-skipped (eve) gene. Upon implantation, presumptive evx1-
homozygotes elicit a decidual response, invade the uterine epithelium, and attach
to the basement membrane between uterine stroma and epithelium, but fail to
differentiate extraembryonic tissues or to form egg cylinders prior to
resorption. Retrograde analysis of embryo genotypes demonstrates that homozygotes
could be isolated as free-floating blastocysts but not as gastrulating egg
cylinders. Homozygous mutant blastocysts appeared normal and, when grown in
vitro, attach, proliferate, and form trophoblastic giant cells surrounding a
growing inner cell mass before rapidly degenerating. In situ hybridization
analysis demonstrates evx1 gene expression within the visceral endoderm after
implantation and prior to gastrulation, at a time in which the mutant phenotype
is first detected.

PMID: 7958869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Dev Biol. 1992 May;151(1):273-87.

Analysis of mouse Evx genes: Evx-1 displays graded expression in the primitive
streak.

Dush MK(1), Martin GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology Program, School of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco 94143.

Two mouse genes, Evx-1 and Evx-2, each encoding a homeodomain closely related to 
that of the Drosophila even-skipped gene were isolated using a PCR-based
strategy. The structure and sequence of these genes are described. Mapping
studies localized Evx-1 to chromosome 6, near the Hox-1 gene cluster, and Evx-2
to chromosome 2, near the Hox-4 cluster. The evolutionary implications of these
linkages are discussed. RNA in situ hybridization analysis of Evx expression in
embryos demonstrated a striking pattern of Evx-1 expression during gastrulation, 
whereas Evx-2 RNA could not be detected at any stage by this technique. Evx-1 RNA
is first detected shortly before the onset of gastrulation in a region of
ectoderm containing cells that will soon be found in the primitive streak. This
localized expression of Evx-1 provides the first molecular evidence for regional 
differences in the mouse embryonic ectoderm before gastrulation. Throughout
gastrulation, Evx-1 expression is limited to cells near and within the streak and
that expression is graded, with a posterior-to-anterior decrease in the level of 
RNA. Based on fate-mapping studies indicating that different types of mesoderm
emerge from different regions of the primitive streak and our observation that
high levels of expression are localized to the region that will give rise to
extraembryonic and ventral mesoderm, we speculate that Evx-1 plays a role in the 
dorsoventral specification of mesodermal cell fate.

PMID: 1349539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 11;19(23):6541-5.

Isolation and mapping of EVX1, a human homeobox gene homologous to even-skipped, 
localized at the 5' end of HOX1 locus on chromosome 7.

Faiella A(1), D'Esposito M, Rambaldi M, Acampora D, Balsofiore S, Stornaiuolo A, 
Mallamaci A, Migliaccio E, Gulisano M, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR, Naples, Italy.

We isolated and mapped the human homeobox gene EVX1. This gene encodes a protein 
of 407 amino acid residues containing a homeodomain closely related to the
Drosophila even-skipped (eve) segmentation gene of the pair-rule class. EVX1
belongs to a small family of vertebrate eve-related homeobox genes including
human EVX1 and EVX2 genes, their murine homologs, Evx 1 and Evx 2, and the frog
Xhox-3 gene. We previously reported that EVX2 is localized at the 5' end of the
HOX4 locus on chromosome 2. We show here that EVX1 is localized at the 5' end of 
the HOX1 locus on chromosome 7, 48 kb upstream from the most 5' of the eleven
HOX1 genes, namely HOX1J. Both EVX genes are transcribed in an opposite
orientation as compared to that of adjacent HOX genes. Human HOX1 and HOX4
complex loci appear to be both closely linked to a homeobox gene of the EVX
family.

PMCID: PMC329215
PMID: 1684419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


