
1. Histopathology. 2016 Mar 24. doi: 10.1111/his.12973. [Epub ahead of print]

A Subset of Ectomesenchymal Chondromyxoid Tumors of the Tongue shows EWSR1
Rearrangements and is Genetically Linked to Soft Tissue Myoepithelial Neoplasms: 
A study of 11 cases.

Argyris PP(1), Bilodeau EA(2), Yancoskie AE(3), Trochesset D(4), Pambuccian
SE(5), Wetzel SL(1), Shah SS(6), Edelman M(7), Freedman P(8), Dolan M(9), Koutlas
IG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Dentistry, University 
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. (2)Department of Diagnostic Sciences, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (3)Touro
College of Dental Medicine at New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA.
(4)Stony Brook University School of Dental Medicine, Department of Oral Biology
and Pathology, Stony Brook, NY, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Loyola
University Medical Center, Maywood, IL, USA. (6)Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Pathology, Radiology and Medicine, New York University College of
Dentistry, New York, NY, USA. (7)Department of Pathology, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ
School of Medicine New Hyde Park, NY, USA. (8)Section of Oral Pathology, New York
Presbyterian/Queens, Flushing, NY, USA. (9)Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, University of Minnesota Medical School, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

AIMS: Ectomesenchymal chondromyxoid tumor (ECT) is a rare, benign intraoral
neoplasm showing predilection for the anterior dorsum of the tongue. The World
Health Organization (W.H.O.) includes ECT in the pathologic spectrum of soft
tissue myoepithelioma. EWSR1 rearrangement is identified in 45% of cutaneous,
soft tissue and bone myoepithelial neoplasms, while PLAG1 aberrations are found
in 37% of EWSR1-negative soft tissue myoepitheliomas. The aim of this study was
to evaluate the presence of EWSR1 and PLAG1 rearrangements in ECTs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Eleven formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded ECTs were evaluated
using FISH probes to EWSR1 (22q12) and PLAG1 (8q12). Among the 11 ECT cases
tested, 3 (27.3%) showed EWSR1 rearrangement in >15% of tumor cells, while 8
(72.7%) cases did not show EWSR1 rearrangement. Eight of 9 (89%) ECTs
demonstrated gain of EWSR1, likely representing gain of all or part of chromosome
22, in a varying proportion of neoplastic cells ranging between 1.4-27.9%. PLAG1 
rearrangement was not detected in the successfully hybridized tissue sections
(7/11). No correlation was observed between the molecular and histopathologic
findings such as morphology of the neoplastic cells, presence of atypia, and
matrical type.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified EWSR1 rearrangement in > 25% of ECTs. These results
suggest that some ECTs are at least genetically related to myoepithelioma of the 
soft parts. Finally, PLAG1 aberrations do not appear to be critical in the
pathogenesis of ECT of the tongue. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27010880  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0152022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152022.
eCollection 2016.

Proteomic Profiling of Mouse Liver following Acute Toxoplasma gondii Infection.

He JJ(1), Ma J(1,)(2), Elsheikha HM(3), Song HQ(1), Zhou DH(1), Zhu XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha, Hunan Province 410128, PR China. (3)Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.

Toxoplasma gondii remains a global public health problem. However, its
pathophysiology is still not-completely understood particularly the impact of
infection on host liver metabolism. We performed iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis
to evaluate early liver protein responses in BALB/c mice following infection with
T. gondii PYS strain (genotype ToxoDB#9) infection. Our data revealed
modification of protein expression in key metabolic pathways, as indicated by the
upregulation of immune response and downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory
chain, and the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and xenobiotics. T. gondii seems
to hijack host PPAR signaling pathway to downregulate the metabolism of fatty
acids, lipids and energy in the liver. The metabolism of over 400 substances was 
affected by the downregulation of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. The
top 10 transcription factors used by upregulated genes were Stat2, Stat1, Irf2,
Irf1, Sp2, Egr1, Stat3, Klf4, Elf1 and Gabpa, while the top 10 transcription
factors of downregulated genes were Hnf4A, Ewsr1, Fli1, Hnf4g, Nr2f1, Pparg,
Rxra, Hnf1A, Foxa1 and Foxo1. These findings indicate global reprogramming of the
metabolism of the mouse liver after acute T. gondii infection. Functional
characterization of the altered proteins may enhance understanding of the host
responses to T. gondii infection and lead to the identification of new
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4803215
PMID: 27003162  [PubMed - in process]


3. Brain Res. 2016 Mar 18. pii: S0006-8993(16)30096-8. doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2016.02.037. [Epub ahead of print]

Prion-like domains as epigenetic regulators, scaffolds for subcellular
organization, and drivers of neurodegenerative disease.

March ZM(1), King OD(2), Shorter J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States; Biochemistry
and Molecular Biophysics Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United Sates. (2)Department
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, United States. Electronic address: oliver.king@umassmed.edu.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States; Biochemistry
and Molecular Biophysics Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United Sates. Electronic
address: jshorter@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Key challenges faced by all cells include how to spatiotemporally organize
complex biochemistry and how to respond to environmental fluctuations. The
budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae harnesses alternative protein folding
mediated by yeast prion domains (PrDs) for rapid evolution of new traits in
response to environmental stress. Increasingly, it is appreciated that low
complexity domains similar in amino acid composition to yeast PrDs (prion-like
domains; PrLDs) found in metazoa have a prominent role in subcellular cytoplasmic
organization, especially in relation to RNA homeostasis. In this review, we
highlight recent advances in our understanding of the role of prions in enabling 
rapid adaptation to environmental stress in yeast. We also present the complete
list of human proteins with PrLDs and discuss the prevalence of the PrLD in
nucleic-acid binding proteins that are often connected to neurodegenerative
disease, including: ataxin 1, ataxin 2, FUS, TDP-43, TAF15, EWSR1, hnRNPA1, and
hnRNPA2. Recent paradigm-shifting advances establish that PrLDs undergo phase
transitions to liquid states, which contribute to the structure and biophysics of
diverse membraneless organelles. This structural functionality of PrLDs, however,
simultaneously increases their propensity for deleterious protein-misfolding
events that drive neurodegenerative disease. We suggest that even these
PrLD-misfolding events are not irreversible and can be mitigated by natural or
engineered protein disaggregases, which could have important therapeutic
applications. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled SI:RNA Metabolism 
in Disease.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26996412  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2016 Mar;41(6):E375-8. doi: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000001246.

Primary Epidural Lumbar Ewing Sarcoma: Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Giner J(1), Isla A, Cubedo R, Tejerina E.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain
†Department of Oncology, University Hospital Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain
‡Department of Pathology, University Hospital Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain.

STUDY DESIGN: Case report.
OBJECTIVE: We present a case of isolated primary epidural lumbar Ewing sarcoma
and review the current literature on the standard management. We also propose
laminoplasty as safe procedure in this patient population that can provide good
stabilization in young people.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Primary epidural Ewing's sarcoma is a very rare
entity. The best generally accepted treatment option in sarcomas is to achieve a 
gross total resection with safe margins followed by local radiotherapy and
chemotherapy. A total resection with safe margins is a great challenge in
neurosurgical patients.
METHODS: We present a previously healthy 17-year-old girl who complained of right
sciatica with an epidural lumbar mass at L3-L4. She underwent complete resection 
of the tumor and a laminoplasty, which, in our experience, is a good way to
preserve stability.
RESULTS: At surgery, an isolated and noninvasive lesion was identified.
Histopathological confirmation of Ewing sarcoma was obtained by
immunohistochemical study and EWSR1 gene rearrangement detection. Treatment with 
6 months of chemotherapy resulted in no further identifiable lesions by PET and
MRI imaging at 4 years postsurgery. The laminoplasty has remained stable.
CONCLUSION: Primary epidural Ewing sarcoma is extremely rare. The detection of
the EWSR1 gene rearrangement can help to diagnose these tumors. The decision on
how to treat these patients is difficult and can hardly be based on data from the
current literature because of the small number of patients. The laminoplasty
procedure can be safely performed in the setting of sarcoma of the epidural
space.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4.

PMID: 26966980  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 8. pii: canres.1572.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

CRM1 inhibition promotes cytotoxicity in Ewing sarcoma cells by repressing
EWS-FLI1-dependent IGF-1 signaling.

Sun H(1), Lin DC(2), Cao Q(2), Guo X(3), Marijon H(2), Zhao Z(4), Gery S(2), Xu
L(5), Yang H(6), Pang B(7), Lee VK(8), Lim HJ(7), Doan N(9), Said JW(10), Chu
P(11), Mayakonda A(5), Thomas T(2), Forscher C(3), Baloglu E(12), Shacham S(13), 
Rajalingam R(14), Koeffler HP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sugery, University of California, San Francisco
frenksun@gmail.com. (2)Department of Medicine, Cedars Sinai Medical Center.
(3)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. (4)Department of
Musculoskeletal Oncology, First Af<U+FB01>liated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, China. (5)National Cancer Institute,Cancer Science Institute,,
National University of Singapore. (6)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore,
National University of Singapore. (7)Department of Pathology, National University
Hospital Singapore. (8)Pathology, National University Hospital. (9)Pathology,
University of California Los Angeles. (10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles. (11)Department of Pathology, City
of Hope National Medical Center. (12)Karyopharm Therapeutics Inc. (13)Drug
Discovery at Karyopharm, Karyopharm Therapeutics Inc. (14)Department of Surgery, 
University of California, San Francisco.

Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is an aggressive bone malignancy that mainly affects children
and young adults. The mechanisms by which EWS (EWSR1) fusion genes drive the
disease are not fully understood. CRM1 (XPO1) traffics proteins from the nucleus,
including tumor suppressors and growth factors, and is overexpressed in many
cancers. A small-molecule inhibitor of CRM1, KPT-330, has shown therapeutic
promise, but has yet to be investigated in the context of EWS. In this study, we 
demonstrate that CRM1 is also highly expressed in EWS. shRNA-mediated or
pharmacological inhibition of CRM1 in EWS cells dramatically decreased cell
growth while inducing apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, and protein expression
alterations to several cancer-related factors. Interestingly, silencing of CRM1
markedly reduced EWS-FLI1 fusion protein expression at the post-transcriptional
level and upregulated the expression of the well-established EWS-FLI1 target
gene, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3), which inhibits
IGF-1. Accordingly, KPT-330 treatment attenuated IGF-1-induced activation of the 
IGF-1R/AKT pathway. Furthermore, knockdown of IGFBP3 increased cell growth and
rescued the inhibitory effects on IGF-1 signaling triggered by CRM1 inhibition.
Finally, treatment of EWS cells with a combination of KPT-330 and the IGF-1R
inhibitor, linsitinib, synergistically decreased cell proliferation both in vitro
and in vivo. Taken together, these findings provide a strong rationale for
investigating the efficacy of combinatorial inhibition of CRM1 and IGF-1R for the
treatment of EWS.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26956669  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 29. pii: 201521827. [Epub ahead of print]

High-throughput small molecule screen identifies inhibitors of aberrant chromatin
accessibility.

Pattenden SG(1), Simon JM(2), Wali A(3), Jayakody CN(1), Troutman J(4), McFadden 
AW(5), Wooten J(3), Wood CC(1), Frye SV(1), Janzen WP(1), Davis IJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27302; Division of Chemical
Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27302; (2)Department of Genetics, School
of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; 
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Curriculum in Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, 
NC 27599; (3)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599; Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; (4)Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; (5)Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; (6)Department of Genetics, School of
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599;
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Department of Pediatrics, School 
of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; 
Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 ian_davis@med.unc.edu.

Mutations in chromatin-modifying proteins and transcription factors are commonly 
associated with a wide variety of cancers. Through gain- or loss-of-function,
these mutations may result in characteristic alterations of accessible chromatin,
indicative of shifts in the landscape of regulatory elements genome-wide. The
identification of compounds that reverse a specific chromatin signature could
lead to chemical probes or potential therapies. To explore whether chromatin
accessibility could serve as a platform for small molecule screening, we adapted 
formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements (FAIRE), a chemical method
to enrich for nucleosome-depleted genomic regions, as a high-throughput,
automated assay. After demonstrating the validity and robustness of this
approach, we applied this method to screen an epigenetically targeted small
molecule library by evaluating regions of aberrant nucleosome depletion mediated 
by EWSR1-FLI1, the chimeric transcription factor critical for the bone and soft
tissue tumor Ewing sarcoma. As a class, histone deacetylase inhibitors were
greatly overrepresented among active compounds. These compounds resulted in
diminished accessibility at targeted sites by disrupting transcription of
EWSR1-FLI1. Capitalizing on precise differences in chromatin accessibility for
drug discovery efforts offers significant advantages because it does not depend
on the a priori selection of a single molecular target and may detect novel
biologically relevant pathways.

PMCID: PMC4801272 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26929321  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Feb 27;17(3). pii: E310. doi: 10.3390/ijms17030310.

Roles of RNA-Binding Proteins in DNA Damage Response.

Kai M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. mkai2@jhmi.edu.

Living cells experience DNA damage as a result of replication errors and
oxidative metabolism, exposure to environmental agents (e.g., ultraviolet light, 
ionizing radiation (IR)), and radiation therapies and chemotherapies for cancer
treatments. Accumulation of DNA damage can lead to multiple diseases such as
neurodegenerative disorders, cancers, immune deficiencies, infertility, and also 
aging. Cells have evolved elaborate mechanisms to deal with DNA damage. Networks 
of DNA damage response (DDR) pathways are coordinated to detect and repair DNA
damage, regulate cell cycle and transcription, and determine the cell fate.
Upstream factors of DNA damage checkpoints and repair, "sensor" proteins, detect 
DNA damage and send the signals to downstream factors in order to maintain
genomic integrity. Unexpectedly, we have discovered that an RNA-processing factor
is involved in DNA repair processes. We have identified a gene that contributes
to glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)'s treatment resistance and recurrence. This
gene, RBM14, is known to function in transcription and RNA splicing. RBM14 is
also required for maintaining the stem-like state of GBM spheres, and it controls
the DNA-PK-dependent non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway by interacting
with KU80. RBM14 is a RNA-binding protein (RBP) with low complexity domains,
called intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs), and it also physically interacts
with PARP1. Furthermore, RBM14 is recruited to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in
a poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR)-dependent manner (unpublished data). DNA-dependent PARP1
(poly-(ADP) ribose polymerase 1) makes key contributions in the DNA damage
response (DDR) network. RBM14 therefore plays an important role in a
PARP-dependent DSB repair process. Most recently, it was shown that the other
RBPs with intrinsically disordered domains are recruited to DNA damage sites in a
PAR-dependent manner, and that these RBPs form liquid compartments (also known as
"liquid-demixing"). Among the PAR-associated IDPs are FUS/TLS (fused in
sarcoma/translocated in sarcoma), EWS (Ewing sarcoma), TARF15 (TATA box-binding
protein-associated factor 68 kDa) (also called FET proteins), a number of
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs), and RBM14. Importantly,
various point mutations within the FET genes have been implicated in pathological
protein aggregation in neurodegenerative diseases, specifically with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS), and frontotemporal lobe degeneration (FTLD). The FET
proteins also frequently exhibit gene translocation in human cancers, and
emerging evidence shows their physical interactions with DDR proteins and thus
implies their involvement in the maintenance of genome stability.

PMID: 26927092  [PubMed - in process]


8. Mol Cytogenet. 2016 Feb 27;9:23. doi: 10.1186/s13039-016-0232-1. eCollection
2016.

Simultaneous deletion of 3'ETV6 and 5'EWSR1 genes in blastic plasmacytoid
dendritic cell neoplasm: case report and literature review.

Tang Z(1), Tang G(1), Wang SA(1), Lu X(1), Young KH(1), Bueso-Ramos CE(1),
Alvarado Y(2), Medeiros LJ(1), Khoury JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030 USA. (2)Department of
Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030 USA.

BACKGROUND: Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) is a rare
hematologic malignancy. Based on literature reports of limited cases, over 50 %
of BPDCN have chromosomal abnormalities, but no single chromosomal change has
been identified as diagnostic of this entity.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this report, we present a case of BPDCN with complicated
chromosomal abnormalities involving chromosomes 12 and 22 and resulting in a
simultaneous partial deletion of ETV6 and EWSR1. Notably, these aberrations were 
identified in bone marrow myeloid precursors in the absence of bone marrow
involvement by BPDCN.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of 46 BPDCN cases with abnormal karyotypes (45 from
literature reports plus this case) showed that 12p- is one of the most common
structural aberrations in BPDCN. The ETV6 and CDKN1B on 12p deserve further
investigations as potential markers of BPDCN.

PMCID: PMC4769509
PMID: 26925167  [PubMed]


9. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2016 Mar;98(3):e37-9. doi: 10.1308/rcsann.2016.0073.

Gastrointestinal clear cell sarcoma-like tumour of the ascending colon.

Gahanbani Ardakani A(1), Boyle DJ(1), Elton C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust , UK.

Introduction A clear cell sarcoma-like gastrointestinal tumour (CCSLGT) is a rare
malignant soft tissue sarcoma. In the literature, they are sometimes referred to 
as malignant gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumours, clear cell sarcomas or
osteoclast rich tumours of the gastrointestinal tract. Case history We present a 
case of a CCSLGT arising from the ascending colon of a previously well
22-year-old man presenting with abdominal pain and anaemia. Computed tomography
of the abdomen and pelvis showed a 7cm irregular mass in the right flank that
seemed to emerge from the proximal transverse colon. A laparoscopic right
hemicolectomy was undertaken to remove the mass. Microscopic pathological
examination of the specimen revealed sections of spindle to oval cells with
monomorphic nuclei and scant cytoplasm. The cells were arranged in a striking
perivascular growth pattern with microcytic breakdown and pseudopapillary
formation. Immunohistochemistry analysis showed that the tumour cells removed
expressed S100 protein, and were negative for smooth muscle actin, desmin, CD34, 
CD117, DOG1, HMB-45 and MNF116. Additionally, cytogenetic testing identified
EWSR1 gene rearrangement, which was observed by interphase fluorescence in situ
hybridisation. Conclusions A complex tumour, a CCSLGT can be thought of in simple
terms as a gastrointestinal tract tumour that is S100 protein positive,
osteoclast rich, HMB-45 negative and compromises a t(12;22)(q13;q12) gene
translocation. These simplified CCSLGT characteristics seem to be described and
classified under different aliases in the literature, which makes it difficult to
accurately predict the appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic modality required
to provide the best clinical care. Given that this case report describes the
fourth CCSLGT of primary colonic origins, it may aid future targeted therapies as
well as offering epidemiological evidence on prevalence and prognosis.

PMID: 26890846  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Pathol. 2016 Apr;238(5):689-99. doi: 10.1002/path.4700.

Regulatory mechanisms, expression levels and proliferation effects of the
FUS-DDIT3 fusion oncogene in liposarcoma.

Åman P(1), Dolatabadi S(1), Svec D(1,)(2), Jonasson E(1), Safavi S(1), Andersson 
D(1), Grundevik P(1), Thomsen C(1), Ståhlberg A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sahlgrenska Cancer Centre, Department of Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine, 
University of Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Institute of Biotechnology, Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

Fusion oncogenes are among the most common types of oncogene in human cancers.
The gene rearrangements result in new combinations of regulatory elements and
functional protein domains. Here we studied a subgroup of sarcomas and leukaemias
characterized by the FET (FUS, EWSR1, TAF15) family of fusion oncogenes,
including FUS-DDIT3 in myxoid liposarcoma (MLS). We investigated the regulatory
mechanisms, expression levels and effects of FUS-DDIT3 in detail. FUS-DDIT3
showed a lower expression than normal FUS at both the mRNA and protein levels,
and single-cell analysis revealed a lack of correlation between FUS-DDIT3 and FUS
expression. FUS-DDIT3 transcription was regulated by the FUS promotor, while its 
mRNA stability depended on the DDIT3 sequence. FUS-DDIT3 protein stability was
regulated by protein interactions through the FUS part, rather than the leucine
zipper containing DDIT3 part. In addition, in vitro as well as in vivo FUS-DDIT3 
protein expression data displayed highly variable expression levels between
individual MLS cells. Combined mRNA and protein analyses at the single-cell level
showed that FUS-DDIT3 protein expression was inversely correlated to the
expression of cell proliferation-associated genes. We concluded that FUS-DDIT3 is
uniquely regulated at the transcriptional as well as the post-translational level
and that its expression level is important for MLS tumour development. The FET
fusion oncogenes are potentially powerful drug targets and detailed knowledge
about their regulation and functions may help in the development of novel
treatments. Copyright © 2016 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26865464  [PubMed - in process]


11. World Neurosurg. 2016 Feb 6. pii: S1878-8750(16)00212-6. doi:
10.1016/j.wneu.2016.02.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Hyalinizing Clear Cell Carcinoma with Biopsy-Proven Spinal Metastasis: Case
Report and Review of Literature.

Newman WC(1), Williams L(2), Duvvuri U(3), Clump DA 2nd(4), Amankulor N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Dahl-Chase Pathology Associates, Bangor, Maine,
USA. (3)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. (5)Department of
Neurological Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA. Electronic address: amankulornm@upmc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma (HCCC) is a rare epithelial
malignant neoplasm typically arising from the minor salivary glands. Although it 
has been described as a benign neoplasm, there are increasing reports of
malignant features and metastases to the lungs; we present the first case of
biopsy-proven spinal metastases from HCCC and an overview of the literature.
CASE DESCRIPTION: This is a single-patient case report in which we used
immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ hybridization for Ewing sarcoma
breakpoint region 1 translocation to confirm the diagnosis of HCCC in a spinal
metastasis. The diagnosis of metastatic HCCC was confirmed on the basis of
histopathology, immunohistochemistry, and fluorescence in situ hybridization
studies.
CONCLUSIONS: We present the first pathologically confirmed case of a spinal
metastasis in HCCC. As increasing of metastatic HCCC arise, a reconsideration of 
HCCC as a potentially high-grade disease seems increasingly necessary as it may
impact the current treatment paradigm.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26862022  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 9. pii: clincanres.2516.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Impact of Two Measures of Micrometastatic Disease on Clinical Outcomes in
Patients with Newly Diagnosed Ewing Sarcoma: A Report from the Children's
Oncology Group.

Vo KT(1), Edwards JV(2), Epling CL(3), Sinclair E(3), Hawkins DS(4), Grier HE(5),
Janeway KA(6), Barnette P(7), McIlvaine E(8), Krailo M(9), Barkauskas DA(10),
Matthay KK(11), Womer RB(12), Gorlick R(13), Lessnick SL(14), Mackall CL(15),
Dubois SG(16).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics, UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital, University of California, San
Francisco School of Medicine. (2)Pediatrics, Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
(3)Experimental Medicine Core Immunology Laboratory, University of California,
San Francisco School of Medicine. (4)Hematology/Oncology, Seattle Children's
Hospital. (5)Dana-Farber, Boston. (6)Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston
Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Harvard Medical School.
(7)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Center for Children's Cancer Research, Huntsman
Cancer Institute, University of Utah. (8)Statistics, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine. (9)Statistics and Data Center, Children's
Oncology Group. (10)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of
the University of Southern California. (11)Pediatrics, UCSF. (12)Division of
Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. (13)Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, The Children's Hospital at Montefiore. (14)Center for Childhood Cancer 
and Blood Disorders, Nationwide Children's Hospital. (15)Pediatric Oncology
Branch, National Cancer Institute. (16)Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute steven_dubois@dfci.harvard.edu.

PURPOSE: Flow cytometry and RT-PCR can detect occult Ewing sarcoma (ES) cells in 
the blood and bone marrow (BM). These techniques were used to evaluate the
prognostic significance of micrometastatic disease in ES.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Newly diagnosed patients with ES were enrolled on two
prospective multi-center studies. In the flow cytometry cohort, patients were
defined as "positive" for BM micrometastatic disease if their CD99+/CD45- values 
were above the upper limit in 22 control patients. In the PCR cohort, RT-PCR on
blood or BM samples classified the patients as "positive" or "negative" for
EWSR1/FLI1 translocations. The association between micrometastatic disease burden
with clinical features and outcome was assessed. Co-expression of IGF-1R on
detected tumor cells was performed in a subset of flow cytometry samples.
RESULTS: The median total BM CD99+CD45- percent was 0.0012% (range 0-1.10%) in
the flow cytometry cohort, with 14/109 (12.8%) of ES patients defined as
"positive." In the PCR cohort, 19.6% (44/225) patients were "positive" for any
EWSR1/FLI1 translocation in blood or BM. There were no differences in baseline
clinical features or event-free or overall survival between patients classified
as "positive" vs. "negative" by either method. CD99+CD45- cells had significantly
higher IGF-1R expression compared to CD45+ hematopoietic cells (mean geometric
mean fluorescence intensity 982.7 vs. 190.9; p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The detection of micrometastatic disease at initial diagnosis by
flow cytometry or RT-PCR is not associated with outcome in newly diagnosed
patients with ES. Flow cytometry provides a tool to characterize occult
micrometastatic tumor cells for proteins of interest.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26861456  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Mod Pathol. 2016 Apr;29(4):370-80. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.31. Epub 2016 Feb 
5.

Evaluation of NKX2-2 expression in round cell sarcomas and other tumors with
EWSR1 rearrangement: imperfect specificity for Ewing sarcoma.

Hung YP(1), Fletcher CD(1), Hornick JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

Ewing sarcoma shows considerable histologic overlap with other round cell tumors.
NKX2-2, a homeodomain transcription factor involved in neuroendocrine/glial
differentiation and a downstream target of EWSR1-FLI1, has been reported as an
immunohistochemical marker for Ewing sarcoma. We assessed the specificity of
NKX2-2 for Ewing sarcoma compared with other round cell malignant neoplasms and
other soft tissue tumors with EWSR1 translocations. We evaluated whole-tissue
sections from 270 cases: 40 Ewing sarcomas (4 with atypical/large cell features),
20 CIC-DUX4 sarcomas, 5 BCOR-CCNB3 sarcomas, 9 unclassified round cell sarcomas, 
10 poorly differentiated synovial sarcomas, 10 lymphoblastic lymphomas, 10
alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, 10 embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas, 10 Merkel cell
carcinomas, 10 small cell carcinomas, 20 melanomas, 5 NUT midline carcinomas, 10 
Wilms tumors, 10 neuroblastomas, 10 olfactory neuroblastomas, 12 mesenchymal
chondrosarcomas, 10 angiomatoid fibrous histiocytomas, 10 clear cell sarcomas, 5 
gastrointestinal clear cell sarcoma-like tumors, 5 desmoplastic small round cell 
tumors, 10 extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas, 10 soft tissue and cutaneous
myoepitheliomas, and 19 myoepithelial carcinomas. NKX2-2 positivity was defined
as moderate-to-strong nuclear immunoreactivity in at least 5% of cells. NKX2-2
was positive in 37/40 (93%) Ewing sarcomas, including all atypical Ewing sarcomas
and cases with known EWSR1-FLI1 or EWSR1-ERG fusion; 85% of Ewing sarcomas showed
diffuse (>50%) staining. NKX2-2 was positive in 9 (75%) mesenchymal
chondrosarcomas, 8 (80%) olfactory neuroblastomas, 1 CIC-DUX4 sarcoma, 1 poorly
differentiated synovial sarcoma, 1 neuroblastoma, 2 unclassified round cell
sarcomas, and 3 small cell carcinomas; all other EWSR1-associated tumors were
negative for NKX2-2, apart from 1 desmoplastic small round cell tumor, 1
myoepithelioma, and 1 myoepithelial carcinoma. In summary, NKX2-2 is a sensitive 
but imperfectly specific marker for Ewing sarcoma. Nonetheless, NKX2-2 may be
helpful to distinguish Ewing sarcoma from some histologic mimics including
CIC-DUX4 and BCOR-CCNB3 sarcomas. Most other EWSR1-associated soft tissue tumors 
are negative for NKX2-2.

PMID: 26847175  [PubMed - in process]


14. Acta Neuropathol. 2016 Jan 25. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic alterations in uncommon low-grade neuroepithelial tumors: BRAF, FGFR1,
and MYB mutations occur at high frequency and align with morphology.

Qaddoumi I(1), Orisme W(2), Wen J(2), Santiago T(2), Gupta K(2), Dalton JD(2),
Tang B(2), Haupfear K(2), Punchihewa C(2), Easton J(3), Mulder H(3), Boggs K(3), 
Shao Y(3), Rusch M(3), Becksfort J(3), Gupta P(3), Wang S(3), Lee RP(2), Brat
D(4), Peter Collins V(5), Dahiya S(6), George D(7), Konomos W(8), Kurian KM(9),
McFadden K(10), Serafini LN(11), Nickols H(12), Perry A(13), Shurtleff S(2),
Gajjar A(1), Boop FA(14), Klimo PD Jr(14), Mardis ER(6), Wilson RK(6), Baker
SJ(15), Zhang J(3), Wu G(3), Downing JR(2), Tatevossian RG(2), Ellison DW(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, USA. 
(3)Department of Computational Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, USA. (7)Department of Pathology, Foothills Medical Center,
Las Cruces, USA. (8)Department of Pathology, Innovative Pathology Services
Knoxville, Knoxville, USA. (9)Department of Pathology, Frenchay Hospital,
Bristol, UK. (10)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
USA. (11)Department of Pathology, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto School 
of Medicine, São Paulo, Brazil. (12)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA. (13)Department of Pathology,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, USA. (14)Department of
Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, USA. (15)Department of
Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, USA. 
(16)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, USA.
david.ellison@stjude.org.

Low-grade neuroepithelial tumors (LGNTs) are diverse CNS tumors presenting in
children and young adults, often with a history of epilepsy. While the genetic
profiles of common LGNTs, such as the pilocytic astrocytoma and 'adult-type'
diffuse gliomas, are largely established, those of uncommon LGNTs remain to be
defined. In this study, we have used massively parallel sequencing and various
targeted molecular genetic approaches to study alterations in 91 LGNTs, mostly
from children but including young adult patients. These tumors comprise
dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (DNETs; n = 22), diffuse oligodendroglial
tumors (d-OTs; n = 20), diffuse astrocytomas (DAs; n = 17), angiocentric gliomas 
(n = 15), and gangliogliomas (n = 17). Most LGNTs (84 %) analyzed by whole-genome
sequencing (WGS) were characterized by a single driver genetic alteration.
Alterations of FGFR1 occurred frequently in LGNTs composed of
oligodendrocyte-like cells, being present in 82 % of DNETs and 40 % of d-OTs. In 
contrast, a MYB-QKI fusion characterized almost all angiocentric gliomas (87 %), 
and MYB fusion genes were the most common genetic alteration in DAs (41 %). A
BRAF:p.V600E mutation was present in 35 % of gangliogliomas and 18 % of DAs.
Pathogenic alterations in FGFR1/2/3, BRAF, or MYB/MYBL1 occurred in 78 % of the
series. Adult-type d-OTs with an IDH1/2 mutation occurred in four adolescents,
the youngest aged 15 years at biopsy. Despite a detailed analysis, novel genetic 
alterations were limited to two fusion genes, EWSR1-PATZ1 and SLMAP-NTRK2, both
in gangliogliomas. Alterations in BRAF, FGFR1, or MYB account for most pathogenic
alterations in LGNTs, including pilocytic astrocytomas, and alignment of these
genetic alterations and cytologic features across LGNTs has diagnostic
implications. Additionally, therapeutic options based upon targeting the effects 
of these alterations are already in clinical trials.

PMID: 26810070  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2016 Jan 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Correlation of Classic and Molecular Cytogenetic Alterations in Soft-Tissue
Sarcomas: Analysis of 46 Tumors With Emphasis on Adipocytic Tumors and Synovial
Sarcoma.

Rao UN(1), Cieply K, Sherer C, Surti U, Gollin SM.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Presbyterian-Shadyside Hospitals ‡Pittsburgh
Cytogenetics Laboratory, Magee-Womens Hospital, University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center †Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
§Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public
Health, Pittsburgh, PA.

INTRODUCTION: Sarcomas are heterogeneous, and their treatment and prognosis are
driven by the morphologic subtype and the clinical stage. Classic cytogenetics
and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis play an important role in 
their diagnostic work up.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-six cases of soft-tissue sarcoma were reviewed that 
underwent karyotyping and simultaneous FISH analysis at initial diagnosis. They
included 10 dedifferentiated liposarcomas, 10 myxoid liposarcomas, and 14
synovial sarcomas. Six tumors were investigated for EWSR1 rearrangement. Six
high-grade miscellaneous sarcomas were also examined.
RESULTS: The dedifferentiated liposarcoma had complex karyotypes and MDM2
amplification by FISH, and of these, 5 tumors with myxoid changes also had
complex signals for DDIT3. All but 4 myxoid liposarcomas had complex karyotypes, 
in addition to the characteristic translocation. FISH analysis displayed DD1T3
rearrangement. All synovial sarcomas except 1 recurrence had a t(X;18)
translocation by karyotyping and FISH. The EWSR1 rearrangement was present in all
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas, angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, atypical 
Ewing sarcoma, and a clear-cell sarcoma, all of which had characteristic
karyotypes. Seven high-grade sarcomas had no specific karyotype or rearrangements
for DDIT3, SS18, and EWSR1 by FISH.
CONCLUSIONS: There is good correlation between karyotyping and FISH. Complex FISH
signals found in dedifferentiated liposarcomas may be related to an increased
chromosome 12 copy number and ploidy. Karyotyping is an important baseline
standard for the quality assurance of newly developed FISH probes. It also
provides a global view of chromosomal changes and the opportunity to investigate 
the role of other genetic alterations and potential therapeutic targets.

PMID: 26808135  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 18. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6937. [Epub ahead of print]

The second European interdisciplinary Ewing sarcoma research summit - A joint
effort to deconstructing the multiple layers of a complex disease.

Kovar H(1,)(2), Amatruda J(3), Brunet E(4), Burdach S(5), Cidre-Aranaz F(6), de
Alava E(7), Dirksen U(8), van der Ent W(9,)(10), Grohar P(11), Grünewald TG(12), 
Helman L(13), Houghton P(14), Iljin K(15), Korsching E(16), Ladanyi M(17), Lawlor
E(18), Lessnick S(19), Ludwig J(20), Meltzer P(21), Metzler M(22), Mora J(23),
Moriggl R(24,)(25), Nakamura T(26), Papamarkou T(27), Radic Sarikas B(28), Rédini
F(29), Richter GH(5), Rossig C(8), Schadler K(30), Schäfer BW(31), Scotlandi
K(32), Sheffield NC(28), Shelat A(33), Snaar-Jagalska E(10), Sorensen P(34),
Stegmaier K(35), Stewart E(36), Sweet-Cordero A(37), Szuhai K(38), Tirado OM(39),
Tirode F(9), Toretsky J(40), Tsafou K(40), Üren A(40), Zinovyev A(9,)(41,)(42),
Delattre O(9).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics, Molecular Biology and Internal Medicine, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. (4)Museum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, INSERM U1154, CNRS 7196, Paris, France. (5)Children's
Cancer Research Center and Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technical University and Comprehensive Cancer Center Munich (CCCM), Munich,
Germany. (6)Unidad de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Área de Genética Humana,
Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain. (7)Institute of Biomedicine of Sevilla (IBiS), Virgen del Rocio
University Hospital /CSIC/University de Sevilla, Department of Pathology,
Seville, Spain. (8)University Children´s Hospital Muenster, Pediatric Hematology 
and Oncology, Muenster, Germany. (9)INSERM U830, Laboratoire de Génétique et
Biologie des Cancers, Institut Curie, Paris, France. (10)Institute of Biology,
Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. (11)Van Andel Institute, Center for
Cancer and Cell Biology and Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA. (12)Laboratory for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of Pathology of the 
LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. (13)Center for Cancer Rearch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
MA, USA. (14)Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute, University of Texas
Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (15)VTT Technical Research Centre of
Finland Ltd, Espoo, Finland. (16)Institute of Bioinformatics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. (17)Department of Pathology 
and Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA. (18)Department of Pediatrics and Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (19)Center for Childhood
Cancer and Blood Disorders, Nationwide Children's Hospital, and the Division of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/BMT, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. 
(20)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA. (21)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. (22)Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, University
Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. (23)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Sant 
Joan de Déu Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. (24)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer
Research, Vienna, Austria. (25)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics,
University of Veterinary Medicine and Medical University, Vienna, Austria.
(26)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan. (27)University of Glasgow, School of Mathematics
and Statistics, Glasgow, UK. (28)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of
the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria. (29)INSERM UMR957, Université 
de Nantes, Nantes, France. (30)Department of Pediatrics Research, MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (31)Department of Oncology and Children's
Research Center, University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. (32)CRS
Development of Biomolecular Therapies, Experimental Oncology Lab, Rizzoli
Institute, Bologna, Italy. (33)Department of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics,
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,TN, USA. (34)Department of
Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. (35)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (36)Department of
Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
USA. (37)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA. (38)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (39)Sarcoma Research Group,
Molecular Oncology Lab, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL),
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. (40)Department of Oncology,
Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington DC, USA. (41)INSERM, U900,
Paris, France. (42)Ecole des Mines ParisTech, Fontainbleau, France.

Despite multimodal treatment, long term outcome for patients with Ewing sarcoma
is still poor. The second "European interdisciplinary Ewing sarcoma research
summit" assembled a large group of scientific experts in the field to discuss
their latest unpublished findings on the way to the identification of novel
therapeutic targets and strategies. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by a quiet
genome with presence of an EWSR1-ETS gene rearrangement as the only and defining 
genetic aberration. RNA-sequencing of recently described Ewing-like sarcomas with
variant translocations identified them as biologically distinct diseases. Various
presentations adressed mechanisms of EWS-ETS fusion protein activities with a
focus on EWS-FLI1. Data were presented shedding light on the molecular
underpinnings of genetic permissiveness to this disease uncovering interaction of
EWS-FLI1 with recently discovered susceptibility loci. Epigenetic context as a
consequence of the interaction between the oncoprotein, cell type, developmental 
stage, and tissue microenvironment emerged as dominant theme in the discussion of
the molecular pathogenesis and inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity of Ewing
sarcoma, and the difficulty to generate animal models faithfully recapitulating
the human disease. The problem of preclinical development of biologically
targeted therapeutics was discussed and promising perspectives were offered from 
the study of novel in vitro models. Finally, it was concluded that in order to
facilitate rapid pre-clinical and clinical development of novel therapies in
Ewing sarcoma, the community needs a platform to maintain knowledge of
unpublished results, systems and models used in drug testing and to continue the 
open dialogue initiated at the first two Ewing sarcoma summits.

PMID: 26802024  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2016 Jan 8;45(1):25-30. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2016.01.007.

[Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma: a clinicopathologic analysis of seven
cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang HJ(1), Chen XY, Zheng ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fujian Provincal Hospital, Provincial Clinical
Medical College of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features, diagnosis and differential
diagnosis of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC).
METHODS: The clinical and pathologic features of 7 cases of EMC encountered in
Fujian Provincal Hospital and Fuzhou General Hospital of Nanjing Military Command
during the period of 2005 to 2015 were analyzed. Immunohistochemical study and
PAS staining were carried out. Relevant literature was reviewed.
RESULTS: The male-to-female ratio was 6 to 1. The age of patients ranged from 21 
to 50 years (median = 36 years). The maximum tumor dimension ranged from 2.5 to
15.0 cm (mean = 8.4 cm). The sites of involvement included left neck, right
shoulder, left thigh, right thigh, right upper arm and abdomen. Most patients
presented with painless lumps. Histologically, all cases showed similar features.
Low-power examination showed a nodular or lobulated architecture, with
intervening fibrous septa and myxoid matrix in the background. The tumor cells
were arranged in cords or tufted clusters. They were spindly to epithelioid /
rhabdoid (plasmacytoid) in shape, with eosinophilic to sometimes vacuolated
cytoplasm. Intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusion bodies and coagulative
necrosis were focally seen. Mitotic figures were rare (less than 2 per 10
high-power fields). Immunohistochemical study showed that the tumor cells were
positive for vimentin (7/7) and INI1 (7/7). They were focally positive for CKpan 
(2/7), p63 (3/7), CD99 (3/7), S-100 protein (1/7) and synaptophysin (2/7). Ki-67 
proliferation index ranged from 10% to 40%. The tumor cells were negative for
a-smooth muscle actin, desmin, myoD1, CD34 and CD117. The cytoplasm of the tumor 
cells was positive for PAS. EWSR1 gene signal was detected in 5 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: EMC is a rare malignant mesenchymal tumor. Arrival at correct
diagnosis relies on morphologic examination and immunohistochemistry. Molecular
pathology is helpful when necessary. The primary treatment modality for EMC is
complete surgical excision and the prognosis is satisfactory.

PMID: 26791550  [PubMed - in process]


18. Cell Rep. 2016 Jan 26;14(3):598-610. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.063. Epub 2016
Jan 14.

Functional Genomic Screening Reveals Splicing of the EWS-FLI1 Fusion Transcript
as a Vulnerability in Ewing Sarcoma.

Grohar PJ(1), Kim S(2), Rangel Rivera GO(3), Sen N(2), Haddock S(2), Harlow
ML(4), Maloney NK(5), Zhu J(6), O'Neill M(7), Jones TL(2), Huppi K(2), Grandin
M(2), Gehlhaus K(2), Klumpp-Thomas CA(8), Buehler E(8), Helman LJ(9), Martin
SE(8), Caplen NJ(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA; Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (2)Gene Silencing
Section, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)Gene Silencing Section, Genetics Branch, Center 
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; NIH
Academy, Office of Intramural Training and Education, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (4)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (6)Molecular Genetics Section,
Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (7)Protein Characterization Laboratory, Leidos
Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (8)Trans-NIH RNAi Screening Facility, Division of
Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences,
NIH, Rockville, MD 20850, USA. (9)Molecular Oncology Section, Pediatric Oncology 
Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. (10)Gene Silencing Section, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic
address: ncaplen@mail.nih.gov.

Ewing sarcoma cells depend on the EWS-FLI1 fusion transcription factor for cell
survival. Using an assay of EWS-FLI1 activity and genome-wide RNAi screening, we 
have identified proteins required for the processing of the EWS-FLI1 pre-mRNA. We
show that Ewing sarcoma cells harboring a genomic breakpoint that retains exon 8 
of EWSR1 require the RNA-binding protein HNRNPH1 to express in-frame EWS-FLI1. We
also demonstrate the sensitivity of EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts to the loss of
function of the U2 snRNP component, SF3B1. Disrupted splicing of the EWS-FLI1
transcript alters EWS-FLI1 protein expression and EWS-FLI1-driven expression. Our
results show that the processing of the EWS-FLI1 fusion RNA is a potentially
targetable vulnerability in Ewing sarcoma cells.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4755295
PMID: 26776507  [PubMed - in process]


19. APMIS. 2016 Apr;124(4):278-90. doi: 10.1111/apm.12506. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Clinicopathological features of five unusual cases of intraosseous myoepithelial 
carcinomas, mimicking conventional primary bone tumours, including EWSR1
rearrangement in one case.

Rekhi B(1), Joshi S(2), Panchwagh Y(3,)(4), Gulia A(5), Borges A(6,)(7), Bajpai
J(8), Jambehekar NA(1), Pant V(6), Mandholkar M(3), Byregowda S(5), Puri A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India.
(2)Department of Histopathology, Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital, Pune, India.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Oncology, Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital, Pune,
India. (4)Sancheti Institute for Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Pune, India.
(5)Department of Surgical Oncology (Bone and Soft Tissues), Tata Memorial Centre,
Mumbai, India. (6)Asian Institute of Oncology, Mumbai, India. (7)SRL Diagnostics 
Centre of Excellence: Histopathology, Mumbai, India. (8)Department of Medical
Oncology, Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India.

Primary intraosseous myoepithelial tumours, including carcinomas are rare
tumours. The concept of histopathological spectrum of these tumours is evolving. 
We describe clinicopathological and immunohistochemical features of five
myoepithelial carcinomas, including molecular cytogenetic results in one case.
There were five male patients within age-range of 8-40 years (median = 26). Four 
tumours occurred in the long bones, including two tumours, each, in the femur and
fibula, respectively, while a single tumour occurred in the proximal phalanges.
Tumour size (n = 3 cases) varied from 5.6 to 8.6 cm. On radiological imaging,
most tumours appeared as expansile, lytic and destructive lesions. Two tumours
appeared as sclerotic lesions. Two cases were referred with diagnoses of
chondrosarcomas and a single case was referred with two different diagnoses,
including an adamantinoma and an osteosarcoma. Histopathological examination in
all these cases showed multinodular tumours comprising mostly polygonal cells,
exhibiting moderate nuclear atypia and interspersed mitotic figures within a
stroma containing variable amount of myxoid, chondroid, hyalinised and
osteoid-like material. Three tumours revealed prominent squamous differentiation.
By immunohistochemistry, tumour cells were positive for EMA (5/5), pan CK
(AE1/AE3) (3/3), CK5/6 (4/4), CK MNF116 (1/1), S100 protein (5/5) and GFAP (3/5).
The first tumour revealed EWSR1 rearrangement. The first patient, 10 months after
tumour resection and a simultaneous lung metastatectomy, is free-of-disease
(FOD). The second patient, 11 months after tumour resection is FOD. The third and
fourth patients underwent wide resections and are on follow-up. The fifth patient
underwent resections, including a lung metastatectomy. Primary intraosseous
myoepithelial carcinomas are rare and mimic conventional primary bone tumours.
Some primary intraosseous myoepithelial carcinomas display EWSR1 rearrangement.
Squamous differentiation may be considered as an addition to their evolving
histopathological spectrum. Immunohistochemical stains constitute as a necessary 
tool for arriving at the correct diagnosis in such cases, which has treatment
implications. Surgical resection remains the treatment mainstay.

© 2016 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26768122  [PubMed - in process]


20. Eur J Cancer. 2016 Jan;53:171-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.09.009. Epub 2016 Jan 
5.

Ewing sarcoma: The clinical relevance of the insulin-like growth factor 1 and the
poly-ADP-ribose-polymerase pathway.

van Maldegem AM(1), Bovée JV(2), Peterse EF(3), Hogendoorn PC(4), Gelderblom
H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre,
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
a.m.van_maldegem@lumc.nl. (2)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical
Centre, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
j.v.m.g.bovee@lumc.nl. (3)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical
Centre, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
e.f.p.peterse@lumc.nl. (4)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical
Centre, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
p.c.w.hogendoorn@lumc.nl. (5)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University
Medical Centre, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: a.j.gelderblom@lumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: In the last three decades the outcome for patients with localised
Ewing sarcoma (ES) has improved significantly since the introduction of
multimodality primary treatment. However, for patients with (extra-) pulmonary
metastatic and/or non-resectable relapsed disease the outcome remains poor and
new treatment options are urgently needed. Currently the insulin-like growth
factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) pathway and the
poly-ADP(adenosinediphosphate)-ribose-polymerase (PARP) pathway are being
investigated for potential targeted therapies. IGF-1R: The IGF-1R pathway is
known to be deregulated by the EWSR1-FLI1 translocation which makes it a
potential target for therapy. Clinical trials have been reported in which only ES
patients were treated with an IGF-1R inhibitor, either as single agent or in
combination. In total 291 ES patients were included in these trials, in which two
(0.7%) complete responses, 32 (11%) partial responses of which some durable, and 
61 (21%) stable diseases were observed. PARP: In the presence of a PARP inhibitor
DNA strand breaks cannot be efficiently repaired, leading to cell death. The
first phase II trial with ES patients was recently published and showed no
clinical responses, which may have been due to the drug being non-effective as a 
single agent.
DISCUSSION: The IGF-1R pathway is an interesting target for ES and should be
explored further, as biomarkers to select patients that might benefit from
treatment are lacking. PARP inhibitors as single agent have so far failed to show
improvement in outcome. Future directions include dual insulin receptor/IGF-1R
blockade with linsitinib as well as chemotherapy-PARP combinations. Both
therapeutic strategies are currently being explored.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26765686  [PubMed - in process]


21. Histopathology. 2016 Jan 13. doi: 10.1111/his.12930. [Epub ahead of print]

Advances in the Clinicopathologic and Molecular Classification of Cutaneous
Mesenchymal Neoplasms.

Costigan DC(1), Doyle LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, St. James's Hospital and Trinity College Dublin,
Dublin 8, Ireland. (2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

In recent years, there have been several important refinements in the
classification of cutaneous mesenchymal neoplasms, including the description of
new tumour types, along with the identification of novel and recurrent molecular 
genetic findings. In addition to providing new insights into tumour biology, many
of these advances have had significant clinical consequences with regards to
diagnostics, management and prognostication. Newly described entities include
pseudomyogenic haemangioendothelioma, haemosiderotic fibrolipomatous tumour and
fibroblastic connective tissue naevus, which are reviewed in the context of
principal differential diagnoses and significant clinical implications. Genetic
characterization of several soft tissue tumour types that occur in the skin has
resulted in the identification of diagnostically useful markers: ALK gene
rearrangement with corresponding ALK protein expression by immunohistochemistry
in epithelioid fibrous histiocytoma; WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion gene with CAMTA1 protein
expression in epithelioid haemangioendothelioma; MYC amplification and
overexpression in radiation-associated angiosarcoma; and EWSR1 gene rearrangement
in cutaneous myoepithelial tumours. Finally, the classification of intradermal
smooth muscle tumours and unclassified/pleomorphic dermal sarcoma has been
refined, resulting in both improved classification and prognostication. Many of
the tumour types listed above are encountered not only by specialist
dermatopathologists, but also by practicing general surgical pathologists, and
therefore this review should provide a widely applicable update on the histologic
and molecular classification of cutaneous mesenchymal neoplasms, along with the
appropriate use of ancillary diagnostic tests, in particular
immunohistochemistry, in the evaluation of such lesions and their histologic
mimics. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26763770  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Apr;40(4):433-42. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000591.

Novel BCOR-MAML3 and ZC3H7B-BCOR Gene Fusions in Undifferentiated Small Blue
Round Cell Sarcomas.

Specht K(1), Zhang L, Sung YS, Nucci M, Dry S, Vaiyapuri S, Richter GH, Fletcher 
CD, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Technische Universität München ¶Children's Cancer
Research Center and Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München #Comprehensive Cancer Center Munich (CCCM),
Munich, Germany †Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY ‡Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA
§Department of Pathology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA <U+2225>Department of Pathology, Royal
Orthopaedic, Birmingham, UK.

Small blue round cell tumors (SBRCTs) are a heterogenous group of tumors that are
difficult to diagnose because of overlapping morphologic, immunohistochemical,
and clinical features. About two-thirds of EWSR1-negative SBRCTs are associated
with CIC-DUX4-related fusions, whereas another small subset shows BCOR-CCNB3
X-chromosomal paracentric inversion. Applying paired-end RNA sequencing to an
SBRCT index case of a 44-year-old man, we identified a novel BCOR-MAML3 chimeric 
fusion, which was validated by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
and fluorescence in situ hybridization techniques. We then screened a total of 75
SBRCTs lacking EWSR1, FUS, SYT, CIC, and BCOR-CCNB3 abnormalities for BCOR
break-apart probes by fluorescence in situ hybridization to detect potential
recurrent BCOR gene rearrangements outside the typical X-chromosomal inversion.
Indeed, 8/75 (11%) SBRCTs showed distinct BCOR gene rearrangements, with 2 cases 
each showing either a BCOR-MAML3 or the alternative ZC3H7B-BCOR fusion, whereas
no fusion partner was detected in the remaining 4 cases. Gene expression of the
BCOR-MAML3-positive index case showed a distinct transcriptional profile with
upregulation of HOX-gene signature, compared with classic Ewing's sarcoma or
CIC-DUX4-positive SBRCTs. The clinicopathologic features of the SBRCTs with
alternative BCOR rearrangements were also compared with a group of BCOR-CCNB3
inversion-positive cases, combining 11 from our files with a meta-analysis of 42 
published cases. The BCOR-CCNB3-positive tumors occurred preferentially in
children and in bone, in contrast to alternative BCOR-rearranged SBRCTs, which
presented in young adults, with a variable anatomic distribution. Furthermore,
BCOR-rearranged tumors often displayed spindle cell areas, either well defined in
intersecting fascicles or blending with the round cell component, which appears
distinct from most other fusion-positive SBRCTs and shares histologic overlap
with poorly differentiated synovial sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4792719 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26752546  [PubMed - in process]


23. Invest New Drugs. 2016 Apr;34(2):253-4. doi: 10.1007/s10637-015-0319-2. Epub 2016
Jan 8.

Targeting BRAF mutants in clear-cell sarcomas of soft tissue: beyond sarcoma or
melanoma classification.

Uguen A(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Marcorelles P(5,)(6,)(7), De Braekeleer M(8,)(6,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1078, F-29200, Brest, France. arnaud.uguen@chu-brest.fr. (2)Service
d'anatomie et cytologie pathologiques, CHRU Brest, F-29220, Brest, France.
arnaud.uguen@chu-brest.fr. (3)Université Européenne de Bretagne, Rennes, France. 
arnaud.uguen@chu-brest.fr. (4)Department of Pathology, University Hospital
Morvan, 5, Avenue Foch, 29609, Brest, France. arnaud.uguen@chu-brest.fr.
(5)Service d'anatomie et cytologie pathologiques, CHRU Brest, F-29220, Brest,
France. (6)Université Européenne de Bretagne, Rennes, France. (7)Faculté de
Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé Université de Brest, EA4685, F-29200, Brest,
France. (8)Inserm, U1078, F-29200, Brest, France. (9)Laboratoire de Cytogénétique
et Biologie de la Reproduction, CHRU Brest, F-29220, Brest, France.

PMID: 26746214  [PubMed - in process]


24. Diagn Cytopathol. 2016 Apr;44(4):338-41. doi: 10.1002/dc.23423. Epub 2015 Dec 30.

Tigroid background in cytology of hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma of the
salivary gland.

Yuan CT(1), Hsieh MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma (HCCC) is a rare and low grade salivary gland
carcinoma with a unique recurrent EWSR1 gene translocation. HCCC most commonly
arises from intraoral minor salivary glands and its cytological features have not
been well evaluated. We report a 28-year-old man with palatal HCCC and emphasize 
the "tigroid background" and metachromatic matrix observed in scrape cytology.
This "tigroid background," usually associated with glycogen-rich clear cell
tumors, is an important cytological feature of HCCC. Awareness of this feature
can do great help in pathological research and diagnosis. Diagn. Cytopathol.
2016;44:338-341. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26715185  [PubMed - in process]


25. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2016 Apr;55(4):340-9. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22336. Epub 2015
Dec 22.

Ewing sarcoma with ERG gene rearrangements: A molecular study focusing on the
prevalence of FUS-ERG and common pitfalls in detecting EWSR1-ERG fusions by FISH.

Chen S(1), Deniz K(2), Sung YS(1), Zhang L(1), Dry S(3), Antonescu CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(2)Department of Pathology, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey. (3)Department of
Pathology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.

The genetics of Ewing sarcoma (ES) are characterized by a canonical fusion
involving EWSR1 gene and a member of the ETS family of transcription factors,
such as FLI1 and ERG. In fact, ERG gene rearrangements represent the second most 
common molecular alteration, with EWSR1-ERG being identified in 5-10% of cases,
while only a handful of reports document a FUS-ERG fusion. In this study, we
focus on ES with ERG gene abnormalities, specifically to investigate the
prevalence and clinicopathologic features of FUS-ERG fusions in a large cohort of
small blue round cell tumors (SBRCTs) and compare to the eight reported
FUS-positive ES. Among the 85 SBRCTs tested, seven (8.2%) cases harbored FUS gene
rearrangements; six fused to ERG and one with FEV. During this investigation we
came across a number of ERG-rearranged ES lacking both EWSR1 and FUS
abnormalities by FISH. In one case, RNA sequencing identified an EWSR1-ERG
transcript despite the negative EWSR1 rearrangements by FISH. Additional 3-color 
FISH fusion assay demonstrated the fusion of EWSR1 and ERG signals in all four
cases negative for break-apart EWSR1 FISH. These results emphasize a potential
pitfall of relying on EWSR1 FISH assay alone for diagnosis of ES. In cases with
classic morphology and/or strong CD99 and ERG immunoreactivity, additional
molecular testing should be applied, such as ERG FISH or RT-PCR/next generation
sequencing, for a more definitive diagnosis. Although our study group is small,
there were no differences noted between the clinical, morphologic features and
immunoprofile of the different subsets of ERG-rearranged SBRCTs. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26690869  [PubMed - in process]


26. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Mar;40(3):313-23. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000570.

CIC-rearranged Sarcomas: A Study of 20 Cases and Comparisons With Ewing Sarcomas.

Yoshida A(1), Goto K, Kodaira M, Kobayashi E, Kawamoto H, Mori T, Yoshimoto S,
Endo O, Kodama N, Kushima R, Hiraoka N, Motoi T, Kawai A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology and Clinical Laboratories §Medical Oncology
<U+2225>Musculoskeletal Oncology ¶Pediatric Oncology #Head and Neck Oncology †Rare
Cancer Center, National Cancer Center Hospital §§Department of Pathology, Tokyo
Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo
Departments of ‡Diagnostic Pathology **Neurosurgery, Kainan Hospital, Aichi
Departments of ††Orthopedic Surgery ‡‡Clinical Laboratory Medicine and Diagnostic
Pathology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan.

The CIC gene rearrangement exists in a subset of small round cell sarcomas. As
the nosologic relationship of these sarcomas to Ewing sarcomas remains
undetermined, we examined 20 CIC-rearranged sarcomas to compare their
clinicopathologic features with those of Ewing sarcomas. The CIC-rearranged
sarcomas were from a group of 14 men and 6 women with a median age of 24.5 years.
The primary tumor sites included the limbs, trunk wall, internal trunk, lung,
cerebrum, and pharynx. A comparison of the demographic and clinical
characteristics of the 20 patients with CIC-rearranged sarcomas with those of the
53 near-consecutive patients with EWSR1-rarranged Ewing sarcomas showed that
there were no differences with respect to their ages and sexes. Although none of 
the CIC-rearranged sarcomas arose in the bone, 40% of the Ewing sarcomas
primarily affected the skeleton. The overall survival of patients with Ewing
sarcomas was significantly better than that for patients with CIC-rearranged
sarcomas. A histologic comparison of the CIC-rearranged sarcomas with 20
EWSR1-rearranged Ewing sarcomas showed significantly higher degrees of
lobulation, nuclear pleomorphism, the prominence of the nucleoli, spindle cell
elements, and myxoid changes in the CIC-rearranged sarcomas. Distinguishing
immunohistochemical features included heterogenous CD99 reactivity, nuclear WT1
expression, and calretinin expression in the CIC-rearranged sarcomas and NKX2.2
expression in the Ewing sarcomas. CIC-rearranged sarcomas are distinct from Ewing
sarcomas clinically, morphologically, and immunohistochemically, and they should 
be considered a separate entity rather than being grouped within the same family 
of tumors.

PMID: 26685084  [PubMed - in process]


27. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2016 Apr;14(2):e183-6. doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2015.11.001.
Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Ewing Sarcoma of Urinary Bladder Showing EWSR1 Rearrangement on FISH Analysis and
Unique Response to Chemotherapy.

Vallonthaiel AG(1), Kaur K(1), Jain D(2), Singh G(1), Tiwari D(3), Pramanik R(4),
Singh P(3), Sharma MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India. (2)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India. Electronic address: deepalijain76@gmail.com. (3)Department of
Urology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. (4)Department
of Medical Oncology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

PMID: 26684812  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015 Nov 10. pii: S0278-2391(15)01439-1. doi:
10.1016/j.joms.2015.10.029. [Epub ahead of print]

Primary Ewing Family of Tumors of the Jaw Has a Better Prognosis Compared to
Tumors of Extragnathic Sites.

Owosho AA(1), Ko E(2), Rosenberg HI(3), Yom SK(4), Antonescu CR(5), Huryn JM(6), 
Estilo CL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dental Oncology Research Fellow, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY. (2)Former Research Fellow, Dental Service,
Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY;
Clinical Assistant Professor, School of Dentistry, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI. (3)Research Study Assistant, Dental Service, Department of Surgery,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY. (4)Assistant Attending,
Dental Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY. (5)Attending, Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY. (6)Chief, Dental Service, Department of Surgery,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY. (7)Attending, Dental
Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY. Electronic address: estiloc@mskcc.org.

PURPOSE: Primary Ewing sarcoma of the jaw is rare. The aim of this study was to
describe new cases of primary Ewing sarcoma of the jaw and investigate reported
prognostic factors of Ewing sarcoma in this series and treatment outcome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Six patients with primary Ewing sarcoma of the jaw were
treated at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) from 1992 through
2013. Clinical data, pathology reports, treatment prescribed, treatment regimens,
outcome, and follow-up information were reviewed.
RESULTS: Five of 6 patients were female and 5 cases were in the mandible. No
patient presented with metastatic disease at diagnosis. All cases were positive
for CD99, and 3 patients with genetic confirmation were positive for EWS-FLI1
fusion or EWSR1 gene rearrangement. All patients received induction multiagent
chemotherapy and surgical resection and 2 patients received adjuvant
radiotherapy. Total (grade IV) or nearly total (grade III) tumor necrosis in 3 of
5 patients (60%) assessed for histologic response to chemotherapy indicated
intense sensitivity. All patients were alive and free of disease, with no history
of local recurrence, at a median follow-up period of 6.5 years.
CONCLUSION: Patients with primary Ewing sarcoma of the jaw have a good prognosis 
and metastasis is an uncommon occurrence at initial presentation.

Copyright © 2015 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26679553  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Gastrointest Tumors. 2015 Sep;2(2):83-8. doi: 10.1159/000430881. Epub 2015 May
29.

Unusual Clinical Presentation of Gastrointestinal Clear Cell Sarcoma.

Raskin GA(1), Pozharisski KM(1), Iyevleva AG(2), Rikov IV(3), Orlova RV(3),
Imyanitov EN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Russian Research Center for Radiology and Surgical Technologies, Saint
Petersburg, Russia. (2)N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, Saint Petersburg,
Russia ; Saint Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint Petersburg,
Russia. (3)Saint Petersburg State University, Medical Faculty, Saint Petersburg, 
Russia. (4)N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; Saint
Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; Saint
Petersburg State University, Medical Faculty, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; I.I.
Mechnikov North-Western State Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Use of molecular assays is gradually becoming a mandatory part of the
clinical management of soft tissue tumors, however the choice and the
interpretation of these tests may present a challenge.
SUMMARY: This report demonstrates an unusual presentation of sarcoma, which was
initially diagnosed as a tumor of unknown primary site. Given the presence of
vimentin, Fli-1, CD99 and S100 markers, lack of immunostaining for melan A,
HMB45, MITF, synaptophysin, CD56, myf4, CKAE1/3 and WT-1, as well as the presence
of EWSR1 translocation determined by a break-apart FISH assay, Ewing's sarcoma
(ES) diagnosis seemed to be well justified. However, polymerase chain reaction
testing for ES-specific rearrangements (EWSR1/FLI1, EWSR1/ERG, EWSR1/ETV1,
EWSR1/ETV4, EWS/FEV) failed to confirm the ES origin of the neoplastic tissue. We
further considered clinical, morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular
diagnostic features of other types of EWSR1-rearranged sarcomas and performed
molecular testing for gastrointestinal clear cell sarcoma. The polymerase chain
reaction assay revealed EWSR1ex7/ATF1ex5 fusion, thus confirming the latter
diagnosis. Subsequent high-precision computed tomography of the abdominal cavity 
revealed a 5-cm tumor of the small bowel, which was subjected to surgical
resection.
KEY MESSAGE: This report exemplifies that the use of anonymous cytogenetic
assays, such as break-apart FISH EWSR1 testing, may not be sufficient even in
case of a perfect match with relevant morphological and immunohistochemical tumor
features.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: Explicit identification of the translocation gene
partners is indeed important for proper sarcoma diagnosis management.

PMCID: PMC4668799
PMID: 26675070  [PubMed]


30. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Feb;40(2):212-23. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000560.

Thoracic Myoepithelial Tumors: A Pathologic and Molecular Study of 8 Cases With
Review of the Literature.

Leduc C(1), Zhang L, Öz B, Luo J, Fukuoka J, Antonescu CR, Travis WD.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center‡Department of
Pathology, New York Hospital Queens -Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
NY†Department of Pathology, Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa School of Medicine,
Istanbul, Turkey§Department of Pathology, Nagasaki University Hospital, Nagasaki,
Japan.

Thoracic myoepithelial tumors (MTs) are a rare group of tumors showing
predominant or exclusive myoepithelial differentiation. They are poorly
characterized from both a morphologic and genetic standpoint, in particular
features that separate benign from malignant behavior. We examined the histologic
and immunohistochemical features of 8 primary thoracic MTs and performed
fluorescence in situ hybridization for EWSR1, FUS, PLAG1, and HMGA2, as well as
several partner genes. Half (4/8) of the MTs occurred in large airways, and 3 had
infiltrative borders. All cases showed immunoreactivity for epithelial markers,
in conjunction with S100 protein or myogenic markers. MTs showed morphologic
characteristics analogous to MTs at other sites, with no tumors having ductal
differentiation. Necrosis and/or lymphovascular invasion was present in 5 cases, 
with mitotic activity ranging from 0 to 6 mitoses/2 mm (mean 1). Metastases
occurred in 2 cases, and no patients died of disease. Gene rearrangements were
identified in half of the cases, with EWSR1-PBX1, EWSR1-ZNF444, and FUS-KLF17
fusions identified in 1 case each and 1 case having EWSR1 rearrangement with no
partner identified. No cases were found to have HMGA2 or PLAG1 abnormalities.
Compared with fusion-negative tumors, fusion-positive tumors tended to occur in
patients who were younger (50 vs. 58 y), female (1:3 vs. 3:1 male:female ratio), 
and demonstrated predominantly spindle and clear cell morphology. Using a
combined data set of our case series with 16 cases from the literature, poor
prognosis was significantly correlated with metastases (P=0.003), necrosis
(P=0.027), and =5 mitoses/2 mm/10 high-power field (P=0.005). In summary, we
identify a subset of thoracic MTs harboring rearrangements in EWSR1 or FUS, and
our data suggest that necrosis and increased mitotic activity correlate with
aggressive clinical behavior.

PMID: 26645726  [PubMed - in process]


31. Diagn Cytopathol. 2016 Feb;44(2):152-5. doi: 10.1002/dc.23399. Epub 2015 Dec 8.

Fine-needle aspiration of soft tissue myoepithelioma.

Wang G(1), Tucker T(2,)(3), Ng TL(1,)(3), Villamil CF(1,)(2), Hayes MM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (2)Department of Pathology, British Columbia
Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (3)Department of Pathology,
Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Soft tissue myoepithelioma is a rare neoplasm composed of myoepithelial cells. We
describe the cytologic features of a soft tissue myoepithelioma arising in the
right lower chest wall in a 65-year-old woman. The fine-needle aspiration (FNA)
smears showed round to oval, spindle, epithelioid, and plasmacytoid cells in the 
myxoid background. The nuclei were uniform, round to ovoid, with finely
distributed chromatin and eosinophilic or pale cytoplasm, and resembled lobular
carcinoma of breast. Ultrasound guided core biopsy showed the tumor cells had
bland cytologic features, arranged in small cords, nests, and dissociated single 
cells, with no glandular differentiation or breast tissue seen. The tumor cells
demonstrated immunoreactivity for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) and glial fibrillary
acidic protein, but were negative for estrogen receptor. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization demonstrated the EWSR1 rearrangement, confirming the diagnosis of
myoepithelioma. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2016;44:152-155. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26644362  [PubMed - in process]


32. Oncol Lett. 2015 Oct;10(4):2543-2546. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Metastasis of myxoid liposarcoma to fat-bearing areas: A case report of unusual
metastatic sites and a hypothesis.

Lin S(1), Gan Z(1), Han K(1), Yao Y(2), Min D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital East Campus, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 201306, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oncology, The
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200233, P.R.
China.

Sarcoma is a rare disease that always metastasizes to the lungs and bones. Myxoid
liposarcoma (MLPS), in comparison with other sarcomas, has a distinct biological 
characteristic. Recent studies have suggested that MLPS expresses high levels of 
adipophilin and chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 4 (CXCR4), which are correlated 
with adipogenesis and metastasis. In addition, the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint
region 1-DNA damage-inducible transcript 3 (EWSR1-DDIT3) fusion transcript,
recently identified in MLPS, was shown to selectively repress the osteoblastic
transcription in multipotent mesenchymal cells. The present study reported a rare
case of MLPS with metastasis in fat-bearing areas, including the bones, epidural 
region, orbits and abdominal cavity, while the lungs were not involved. Bone
metastasis was diagnosed by magnetic resonance imaging and proven by histology.
However, bone scanning lacked sufficient sensitivity to detect the bone
metastasis. Based on these findings, we hypothesized that molecular adipophilin
and molecular CXCR4 may contribute to the fat-bearing area metastasis pattern.
Furthermore, the EWSR1-DDIT3 fusion transcript may repress the osteoblastic
activity in the bone metastases, ultimately resulting in a low detection rate by 
bone scans.

PMCID: PMC4580042
PMID: 26622886  [PubMed]


33. Future Oncol. 2016 Jan;12(1):1-4. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.298. Epub 2015 Nov 30.

Next steps in preventing Ewing sarcoma progression.

Knott MM(1), Dallmayer M(1), Grünewald TG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of Pathology of the LMU
Munich, Munich, Germany.

PMID: 26615856  [PubMed - in process]


34. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 5;7(1):433-45. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6336.

HSP90 inhibition blocks ERBB3 and RET phosphorylation in myxoid/round cell
liposarcoma and causes massive cell death in vitro and in vivo.

Safavi S(1), Järnum S(1), Vannas C(1), Udhane S(1), Jonasson E(1), Tomic TT(1),
Grundevik P(1), Fagman H(1), Hansson M(1), Kalender Z(2), Jauhiainen A(2),
Dolatabadi S(1), Stratford EW(3), Myklebost O(3), Eriksson M(4), Stenman G(1),
Stock RS(5), Ståhlberg A(1), Åman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Pathology, 
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Mathematical Statistics, Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers University of
Technology and the University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden. (3)Department of
Tumour Biology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Nydalen,
Oslo, Norway. (4)Department of Oncology, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. 
(5)Experimental Tumor Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Ulmenweg Erlangen, Germany.

Myxoid sarcoma (MLS) is one of the most common types of malignant soft tissue
tumors. MLS is characterized by the FUS-DDIT3 or EWSR1-DDIT3 fusion oncogenes
that encode abnormal transcription factors. The receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
encoding RET was previously identified as a putative downstream target gene to
FUS-DDIT3 and here we show that cultured MLS cells expressed phosphorylated RET
together with its ligand Persephin. Treatment with RET specific kinase inhibitor 
Vandetanib failed to reduce RET phosphorylation and inhibit cell growth,
suggesting that other RTKs may phosphorylate RET. A screening pointed out EGFR
and ERBB3 as the strongest expressed phosphorylated RTKs in MLS cells. We show
that ERBB3 formed nuclear and cytoplasmic complexes with RET and both RTKs were
previously reported to form complexes with EGFR. The formation of RTK hetero
complexes could explain the observed Vandetanib resistence in MLS. EGFR and ERBB3
are clients of HSP90 that help complex formation and RTK activation. Treatment of
cultured MLS cells with HSP90 inhibitor 17-DMAG, caused loss of RET and ERBB3
phosphorylation and lead to rapid cell death. Treatment of MLS xenograft carrying
Nude mice resulted in massive necrosis, rupture of capillaries and hemorrhages in
tumor tissues. We conclude that complex formation between RET and other RTKs may 
cause RTK inhibitor resistance. HSP90 inhibitors can overcome this resistance and
are thus promising drugs for treatment of MLS/RCLS.

PMID: 26595521  [PubMed - in process]


35. Ann Pathol. 2015 Dec;35(6):506-10. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2015.09.006. Epub 2015
Nov 14.

[Gastro-intestinal neuroectodermal tumor (GNET): A case report of a small
intestine tumor with hepatic metastases].

[Article in French]

Kervarrec T(1), Lecointre C(2), Kerdraon R(2), Bens G(3), Piquard A(4), Michenet 
P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anatomie pathologique, hôpital de la Source, 14, avenue de
l'Hôpital, 45067 Orléans, France. Electronic address:
thibault.kervarrec@etu.univ-tours.fr. (2)Service d'anatomie pathologique, hôpital
de la Source, 14, avenue de l'Hôpital, 45067 Orléans, France. (3)Service de
dermatologie, hôpital Porte-Madeleine, 1, rue Porte-Madeleine, 45000 Orléans,
France. (4)Service de chirurgie viscérale, hôpital de la Source, 14, avenue de
l'Hôpital, 45067 Orléans, France.

The gastro-intestinal neuroectodermal tumor (GNET) is a rare sarcoma of the
digestive tract, which was recently recognised. The knowledge of the
morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular diagnostic criteria is necessary
to not mistake it for the metastasis of a melanoma or for another sarcoma of the 
digestive tract as the gastro-intestinal clear cells sarcoma or the malignant
peripheral nervous system tumor (MPNST). We report the case of a 41-year-old
patient with a GNET of the small intestine with hepatic metastasis. The
histological examination showed a diffuse proliferation of epithelioid cells,
which only express PS100. The presence EWSR1-ATF1 gene fusions with any
melanocytic differentiation leads to the diagnosis of GNET.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26586017  [PubMed - in process]


36. Front Oncol. 2015 Oct 27;5:242. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00242. eCollection 2015.

Immunostimulation by OX40 Ligand Transgenic Ewing Sarcoma Cells.

Reuter D(1), Staege MS(1), Kühnöl CD(1), Föll J(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Clinic and Polyclinic for Child and Adolescent Medicine, Martin
Luther University Halle-Wittenberg , Halle , Germany. (2)University Clinic and
Polyclinic for Child and Adolescent Medicine, Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg , Halle , Germany ; Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology
and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Hospital Regensburg , Regensburg ,
Germany.

Interleukin-2 (IL-2) transgenic Ewing sarcoma cells can induce tumor specific T
and NK cell responses and reduce tumor growth in vivo and in vitro. Nevertheless,
the efficiency of this stimulation is not high enough to inhibit tumor growth
completely. In addition to recognition of the cognate antigen, optimal T-cell
stimulation requires signals from so-called co-stimulatory molecules. Several
members of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily have been identified as
co-stimulatory molecules that can augment antitumor immune responses. OX40
(CD134) and OX40 ligand (OX40L<U+2009>=<U+2009>CD252; also known as tumor necrosis factor
ligand family member 4) is one example of such receptor/ligand pair with
co-stimulatory function. In the present investigation, we generated OX40L
transgenic Ewing sarcoma cells and tested their immunostimulatory activity in
vitro. OX40L transgenic Ewing sarcoma cells showed preserved expression of Ewing 
sarcoma-associated (anti)gens including lipase member I, cyclin D1 (CCND1),
cytochrome P450 family member 26B1 (CYP26B1), and the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint
region 1-friend leukemia virus integration 1 (EWSR1-FLI1) oncogene.
OX40L-expressing tumor cells showed a trend for enhanced immune stimulation
against Ewing sarcoma cells in combination with IL-2 and stimulation of CD137.
Our data suggest that inclusion of the OX40/OX40L pathway of co-stimulation might
improve immunotherapy strategies for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4621427
PMID: 26579494  [PubMed]


37. BMC Genomics. 2015 Nov 14;16(1):929. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2125-9.

EWS and FUS bind a subset of transcribed genes encoding proteins enriched in RNA 
regulatory functions.

Luo Y(1), Blechingberg J(2,)(3), Fernandes AM(4,)(5), Li S(6,)(7,)(8), Fryland
T(9,)(10,)(11), Børglum AD(12,)(13,)(14,)(15), Bolund L(16,)(17,)(18), Nielsen
AL(19,)(20,)(21).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, The Bartholin Building, Aarhus, 
DK-8000, Denmark. alun@biomed.au.dk. (2)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus
University, The Bartholin Building, Aarhus, DK-8000, Denmark.
Jenny.Friis@rsyd.dk. (3)Present address: Clinical Microbiological Section,
Lillebælt Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. Jenny.Friis@rsyd.dk. (4)Department of
Biomedicine, Aarhus University, The Bartholin Building, Aarhus, DK-8000, Denmark.
anamiguel.fernandes@mdc-berlin.de. (5)Present address: Epigenetic Regulation and 
Chromatin Architecture group, Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology,
Max-Delbrück Centre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
anamiguel.fernandes@mdc-berlin.de. (6)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus
University, The Bartholin Building, Aarhus, DK-8000, Denmark.
shengting@biomed.au.dk. (7)Center for Integrative Sequencing, iSEQ, Aarhus
University, Aarhus, Denmark. shengting@biomed.au.dk. (8)Lundbeck Foundation
Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, iPSYCH, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark. shengting@biomed.au.dk. (9)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus
University, The Bartholin Building, Aarhus, DK-8000, Denmark. tue@biomed.au.dk.
(10)Center for Integrative Sequencing, iSEQ, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. 
tue@biomed.au.dk. (11)Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric 
Research, iPSYCH, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. tue@biomed.au.dk.
(12)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, The Bartholin Building, Aarhus,
DK-8000, Denmark. anders@biomed.au.dk. (13)Center for Integrative Sequencing,
iSEQ, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. anders@biomed.au.dk. (14)Lundbeck
Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, iPSYCH, Aarhus
University, Aarhus, Denmark. anders@biomed.au.dk. (15)Psychiatric Department P,
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark. anders@biomed.au.dk. (16)Department 
of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, The Bartholin Building, Aarhus, DK-8000,
Denmark. bolund@biomed.au.dk. (17)Center for Integrative Sequencing, iSEQ, Aarhus
University, Aarhus, Denmark. bolund@biomed.au.dk. (18)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen,
China. bolund@biomed.au.dk. (19)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, The
Bartholin Building, Aarhus, DK-8000, Denmark. aln@biomed.au.dk. (20)Center for
Integrative Sequencing, iSEQ, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
aln@biomed.au.dk. (21)Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric 
Research, iPSYCH, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. aln@biomed.au.dk.

BACKGROUND: FUS (TLS) and EWS (EWSR1) belong to the FET-protein family of RNA and
DNA binding proteins. FUS and EWS are structurally and functionally related and
participate in transcriptional regulation and RNA processing. FUS and EWS are
identified in translocation generated cancer fusion proteins and involved in the 
human neurological diseases amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and fronto-temporal
lobar degeneration.
RESULTS: To determine the gene regulatory functions of FUS and EWS at the level
of chromatin, we have performed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by next
generation sequencing (ChIP-seq). Our results show that FUS and EWS bind to a
subset of actively transcribed genes, that binding often is downstream the
poly(A)-signal, and that binding overlaps with RNA polymerase II. Functional
examinations of selected target genes identified that FUS and EWS can regulate
gene expression at different levels. Gene Ontology analyses showed that FUS and
EWS target genes preferentially encode proteins involved in regulatory processes 
at the RNA level.
CONCLUSIONS: The presented results yield new insights into gene interactions of
EWS and FUS and have identified a set of FUS and EWS target genes involved in
pathways at the RNA regulatory level with potential to mediate normal and
disease-associated functions of the FUS and EWS proteins.

PMCID: PMC4647676
PMID: 26573619  [PubMed - in process]


38. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Mar;40(3):386-94. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000545.

Expanding the Spectrum of Renal Tumors in Children: Primary Renal Myoepithelial
Carcinomas With a Novel EWSR1-KLF15 Fusion.

Cajaiba MM(1), Jennings LJ, Rohan SM, Leuer KM, Anagnost MR, Fahner JB, Fulton
BK, Geller JI, Perlman EJ.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Robert Lurie Cancer Center, 
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL †Department of Pathology, Colorado
Pathology Consultants, Saint Joseph Hospital, Denver, CO ‡LMC Pathology Services,
Sunrise Children's Hospital, Las Vegas, NV §Department of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology <U+2225>Spectrum Health Regional Laboratory, Helen DeVos Children's 
Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI ¶Division of Pediatric Oncology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH.

We report the first 2 examples of primary renal myoepithelial carcinoma (MEC),
both occurring in children. Both tumors had the unique morphologic features,
immunophenotype, and EWSR1 gene rearrangements supporting the diagnosis. In
keeping with the previous observations of an aggressive behavior in pediatric
MEC, both cases presented with advanced local stage and distant metastases at the
time of diagnosis. The EWSR1 translocation partner was identified as the
Kruppel-like factor 15 (KLF15) gene in both tumors, and the novel EWSR1-KLF15
gene fusion transcripts were verified using reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction and Sanger dideoxy sequencing. So far, a role for KLF15 in
carcinogenesis has not been established, in contrast to other members of the
Kruppel-like family of transcription factors, and no rearrangements involving
this gene have been documented to our knowledge. These findings expand the
spectrum of pediatric renal tumors to include MEC. The characterization of novel 
EWSR1-KLF15 fusion transcripts carries important diagnostic implications, as well
as clues to understand the pathogenesis of these neoplasms.

PMID: 26523541  [PubMed - in process]


39. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015 Oct 27. pii: 1066896915613433. [Epub ahead of print]

Primary Intracranial Myoepithelial Neoplasm: A Potential Mimic of Meningioma.

Choy B(1), Pytel P(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL, USA peter.pytel@uchospitals.edu.

Myoepithelial neoplasms were originally described in the salivary glands but
their spectrum has been expanding with reports in other locations, including soft
tissue. Intracranial cases are exceptionally rare outside the sellar region where
they are assumed to be arising from Rathke pouch rests. Two cases of pediatric
intracranial myoepithelial neoplasm in the interhemispheric fissure and the right
cerebral hemisphere are reported here. Imaging studies suggest that the second
case was associated with cerebrospinal fluid dissemination. Both cases showed
typical variation in morphology and immunophenotype between more epithelioid and 
more mesenchymal features. The differential diagnosis at this particular anatomic
location includes meningioma, which can show some overlap in immunophenotype
since both tumors express EMA as well as GLUT1. One case was positive for EWSR1
rearrangement by fluorescence in situ hybridization. One patient is disease free 
at last follow-up while the other succumbed to the disease within days
illustrating the clinical spectrum of these tumors.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26510861  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Oct;75 Suppl 1:S51. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.10.820. Epub 2014 Dec 10.

Oxidative stress affects FET proteins localization and alternative pre-mRNA
processing in cellular models of ALS.

Svetoni F(1), Caporossi D(2), Paronetto MP(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Rome "Foro Italico" (University of Rome "Foro Italico"),
Department of Health Science, Piazza Lauro de Bosis, 6, 00135, Rome, Italy..
Electronic address: francesca.svetoni@uniroma4.it. (2)University of Rome "Foro
Italico" (University of Rome "Foro Italico"), Department of Health Science,
Piazza Lauro de Bosis, 6, 00135, Rome, Italy.

FUS/TLS, EWS and TAF15 are members of the FET family of DNA and RNA binding
proteins, involved in multiple steps of DNA and RNA processing and implicated in 
the regulation of gene expression and cell-signaling. All members of the FET
family contribute to human pathologies, as they are involved in sarcoma
translocations and neurodegenerative diseases. Mutations in FUS/TLS, in EWSR1 and
in TAF15 genescause Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), a fatal human
neurodegenerative disease that affects primarily motor neurons and is
characterized by the progressive loss of motor neurons and degradation of the
neuromuscular junctions.ALS-associated FET mutations cause FET protein
relocalization into cytoplasmic aggregates, thus impairing their normal function.
Protein aggregation has been suggested as a co-opting factor during the disease
pathogenesis. Cytoplasmic mislocalization of FET proteins contributes to the
formation of cytoplasmic aggregates that may alter RNA processing and initiate
motor neuron degeneration. Interestingly, oxidative stress, which is implicated
in the pathogenesis of ALS, triggers the accumulation of mutant FUS in
cytoplasmic stress granules where it binds and sequester wild-type FUS.In order
to evaluate the role of FET proteins in ALS and their involvement in the response
to oxidative stress, we have developed cellular models of ALS expressing
ALS-related FET mutants in neuroblastoma cell lines. Upon treatment with sodium
arsenite, cells were analysed by immunofluorescence to monitor the localization
of wild-type and mutated FET proteins. Furthermore, we have characterized signal 
transduction pathways and cell survival upon oxidative stress in our cellular
models of ALS. Interestingly, we found that EWS mutant proteins display a
different localization from FUS mutants and neither wild-type nor mutated EWS
protein translocate into stress granules upon oxidative stress treatment.
Collectively, our data provide a new link between the oxidative stress response
and RNA metabolism in ALS disease.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26461404  [PubMed]


41. Diagn Pathol. 2015 Oct 9;10:186. doi: 10.1186/s13000-015-0420-z.

Primary sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma of kidney with variant
histomorphologic features: report of 2 cases and review of the literature.

Ertoy Baydar D(1), Kosemehmetoglu K(2), Aydin O(3), Bridge JA(4), Buyukeren B(5),
Aki FT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
dertoy@hacettepe.edu.tr. (2)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. dokemal@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Pathology,
Ondokuz Mayis University Hospital, Samsun, Turkey. uzaydin@yahoo.com.
(4)Departments of Pathology/Microbiology, Pediatrics and Orthopaedic Surgery,
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. jbridge@unmc.edu. (5)Department of
Pathology, Hacettepe University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
berrinbuyukeren@hotmail.com. (6)Department of Urology, Hacettepe University
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. ftuncayaki@yahoo.com.

The authors present two cases of primary sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma
(SEF) of the kidney. Both patients had a mass in the upper part of the left
kidney without any primary extrarenal neoplastic lesions. Grossly, the tumors
were solid masses both measuring 7.5 cm in the greatest diameter. Histologically,
one of the lesions exhibited a predominantly lobular growth of round or oval
small uniform epithelioid cells in variable cellularity. Circular zones of
crowded tumor cells alternating with hypocellular collagenous tissue in a
concentric fashion around entrapped native renal tubules were distinctive. The
second case was distinctive with significant cytological atypia in the neoplastic
cells and prominent reactive proliferations in the trapped renal tubules.
Immunohistochemically, vimentin, bcl-2 and MUC4 were diffusely positive in both. 
They were negative for S-100 protein, CD34, and desmin, whereas CD99 were
positive in one lesion. Fluorescence in situ hybridization assay using dual
staining probes detected EWSR1-CREB3L1 fusion in each lesion, which is
characteristic molecular findings of SEF. One patient presented widespread
distant metastases at the time of diagnosis. In the other, no tumor deposits were
detected other than primary. Both patients have been alive with 30 and 10 month
follow-ups, respectively. These tumors are 6th and 7th cases of primary renal SEF
in the literature confirmed by FISH study, which exhibit unique and remarkable
histomorphologic features.

PMCID: PMC4599747
PMID: 26449317  [PubMed - in process]


42. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 Nov;211(11):877-82. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.08.003. Epub
2015 Sep 8.

Ewing-like sarcoma with CIC-DUX4 gene fusion in a patient with neurofibromatosis 
type 1. A hitherto unreported association.

Tardío JC(1), Machado I(2), Navarro L(3), Idrovo F(4), Sanz-Ortega J(5), Pellín
A(6), Llombart-Bosch A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario de Fuenlabrada, 28942 Madrid, 
Spain. Electronic address: jtardio.hflr@salud.madrid.org. (2)Department of
Pathology, Instituto Valenciano de Oncología, 46009 Valencia, Spain. Electronic
address: isidro.machado@uv.es. (3)Department of Pathology, Molecular Biology
Section, Universidad de Valencia, 46010 Valencia, Spain. Electronic address:
lara.navarro@uv.es. (4)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario de
Fuenlabrada, 28942 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
franklineduardo.idrovo@salud.madrid.org. (5)Department of Pathology. Hospital
Clínico San Carlos, 28040 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
jsanzo@salud.madrid.org. (6)Department of Pathology, Molecular Biology Section,
Universidad de Valencia, 46010 Valencia, Spain. Electronic address:
antonio.pellin@uv.es. (7)Department of Pathology, Universidad de Valencia, 46010 
Valencia, Spain. Electronic address: antonio.llombart@uv.es.

Sarcoma with CIC-DUX4 gene fusion is emerging as the most prevalent subset of
Ewing-like undifferentiated small round cell sarcomas with around 50 cases
published. We report hereby the case of a 40-year-old male who presented a
CIC-DUX4 sarcoma in deep soft tissues in his thigh. He had been diagnosed with
neurofibromatosis type 1 at age 19 and over the years underwent resection of
multiple neural neoplasms, including two malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
with classical spindle-cell histopathology. The CIC-DUX4 sarcoma was treated with
surgical resection, radiation and chemotherapy, but lung and brain metastases
developed and the patient died from the disease 14 months after diagnosis. This
is the first case of sarcoma with CIC-DUX4 gene fusion reported in a patient with
NF1. Whether this association is coincidental or CIC-DUX4 sarcomas could be
related to NF1 remains to be clarified. Study of alternative molecular
alterations in EWSR1-negative undifferentiated small round cell sarcomas is
clinically relevant, since CIC-DUX4 sarcomas seem to be a very aggressive subset 
with poor response to the presently used therapeutic regimens.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26386605  [PubMed - in process]


43. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2015 Oct;142(10):541-8. doi: 10.1016/j.annder.2015.07.007.
Epub 2015 Sep 9.

[Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma in children: 6 cases].

[Article in French]

Bohelay G(1), Kluger N(2), Battistella M(3), Biaggi-Frassati A(4), Plantier F(5),
Harraudeau A(6), Avril MF(7), Pedeutour F(8), Fraitag S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Service de dermatologie, hôpital Avicenne, AP-HP, 125, rue de Stalingrad,
93000 Bobigny, France. (2)Departments of Dermatology, Allergology and
Venereology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Helsinki, Skin and
Allergies Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Meilahdentie 2, PO Box 
160, 00029 HUS, Finlande. (3)Service d'anatomie pathologique, hôpital
Saint-Louis, AP-HP, 1, avenue Claude-Vellefaux, 75010 Paris, France. (4)Service
d'anatomie pathologique, université Paris-Descartes Paris V, hôpital
Necker-Enfants-Malades, AP-HP, 149, rue de Sèvres, 75743 Paris cedex 15, France. 
(5)Laboratoire d'anatomie pathologique, hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, 27, rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. (6)Cabinet de dermatologie, 34, rue 
du Général-Gallieni, 78510 Triel-sur-Seine, France. (7)Service de dermatologie,
université René-Descartes Paris V, hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, 27, rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. (8)Institut de recherche sur le
cancer et le vieillissement de Nice (IRCAN), laboratoire de génétique des tumeurs
solides, faculté de médecine, CHU de Nice, 28, avenue de Valombrose, 06107 Nice
cedex 02, France. (9)Service d'anatomie pathologique, université Paris-Descartes 
Paris V, hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, AP-HP, 149, rue de Sèvres, 75743 Paris
cedex 15, France. Electronic address: sylvie.fraitag@nck.aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a soft-tissue tumour of
uncertain differentiation most often arising in the extremities of children and
young adults. AFH is a little-known neoplasm and its rarity may result in it
being misdiagnosed as either a reactive lesion or a benign or higher-grade
tumour. We report 6 cases of AFH in children and we review the
clinicopathological and molecular features of this neoplasm published in the
literature.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The children (aged 4 to 16 years) presented a single nodule
involving the forearm (4/6), the trunk or the buttock, and all 5 nodules appeared
spontaneously. Microscopic examination revealed well-circumscribed nodular
lesions comprising a fibrous pseudo-capsule, haemorrhagic non-endothelial-lined
pseudocystic spaces, and sheets of spindle and ovoid cells with dense surrounding
lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. Tumours were positive for desmin, CD68, CD99 and
smooth-muscle actin markers. A fusion gene (EWSR1-ATF1) was found in the 3 cases 
in which molecular investigation was performed.
DISCUSSION: In our series, a diagnosis of AFH had in no event been evoked after
clinical examination and radiological investigation. The diagnosis was based in
all cases on recognition of characteristic features during histological
examination and it was confirmed in 3 cases by the recognition of fusion genes.
Complete excision with wide margins allowed complete cure in all cases,
supporting a good prognosis of AFH, although long-term follow-up is still
mandatory to rule out relapse or metastases, which although rare, are responsible
for fatal cases. To avoid unnecessary surgery in patients with AFH, an ultrasound
core-needle biopsy should be performed as a first step in order to provide
precise diagnosis enabling complete excision to be performed, with the margins
being decided in multidisciplinary meetings involving teams specialised in
soft-tissue tumours.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26363999  [PubMed - in process]


44. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):964-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.3387.

Linking germline and somatic variation in Ewing sarcoma.

Gomez NC(1), Davis IJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and the Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1073-8.

The identification of gene-regulatory polymorphisms that influence cancer
susceptibility can identify key oncogenic pathways. A new study links a germline 
variant to Ewing sarcoma disease susceptibility and EWSR1-FLI1-mediated gene
activation.

PMID: 26313223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2015 Jul-Sep;58(3):341-4. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.162869.

Primary Ewing sarcoma of vulva, confirmed with molecular cytogenetic analysis: A 
rare case report with diagnostic and treatment implications.

Rekhi B(1), Chinnaswamy G, Vora T, Shah S, Rangarajan V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Tata Memorial Centre, Parel, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India.

Primary vulvar Ewing sarcoma (ES)/PNET is an uncommonly documented tumor,
especially with molecular results. A 10-year-old girl presented with left vulvar 
swelling, a year ago. Her abdominopelvic ultrasound revealed a 12 cm × 8 cm
sized, mixed echogenic blood-filled lesion in the left vulva; radiologically
considered as a hematoma. Vulvectomy revealed a multinodular grey-brown tumor,
microscopically comprising malignant round cells. Immunohistochemically, tumor
cells diffusely expressed MIC2/CD99 and Fli1 and subsequently displayed EWSR1
rearrangement, confirming diagnosis of ES/PNET. Subsequently, PET-CT scan
revealed residual local lesion with lung metastases. The patient was induced on
EFT 2001 chemotherapy protocol. Three months after chemotherapy completion, there
was no metabolically active disease on PET scan. Four months later, MRI disclosed
recurrent primary and metastatic pulmonary lesions. She was planned for scar
excision and adjuvant radiotherapy, but unfortunately defaulted further
treatment. This forms the eighth case of primary vulvar ES/PNET confirmed with
molecular cytogenetic result, underscoring therapeutic value of objective
diagnosis in such cases.

PMID: 26275259  [PubMed - in process]


46. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1073-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3363. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Chimeric EWSR1-FLI1 regulates the Ewing sarcoma susceptibility gene EGR2 via a
GGAA microsatellite.

Grünewald TG(1,)(2), Bernard V(3), Gilardi-Hebenstreit P(4), Raynal V(1,)(2,)(3),
Surdez D(1,)(2), Aynaud MM(1,)(2), Mirabeau O(1,)(2), Cidre-Aranaz F(5), Tirode
F(1,)(2), Zaidi S(1,)(2), Perot G(6), Jonker AH(1,)(2), Lucchesi C(1,)(2), Le
Deley MC(7), Oberlin O(8), Marec-Bérard P(9), Véron AS(10), Reynaud S(11),
Lapouble E(11), Boeva V(12,)(13), Rio Frio T(3), Alonso J(5), Bhatia S(14),
Pierron G(11), Cancel-Tassin G(15), Cussenot O(15), Cox DG(10), Morton LM(16),
Machiela MJ(16), Chanock SJ(16), Charnay P(4), Delattre O(1,)(2,)(3,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Biology of Cancers Unit, Institut Curie, PSL Research University,
Paris, France. (2)INSERM U830, Institut Curie Research Center, Paris, France.
(3)Institut Curie Genomics of Excellence (ICGex) Platform, Institut Curie
Research Center, Paris, France. (4)École Normale Supérieure (ENS), Institut de
Biologie de l'ENS (IBENS), INSERM U1024, CNRS UMR8197, Paris, France.
(5)Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos
III, Madrid, Spain. (6)INSERM U916 Biology of Sarcomas, Institut Bergonié,
Bordeaux, France. (7)Département d'Epidémiologie et de Biostatistiques, Institut 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (8)Département de Pédiatrie, Institut Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France. (9)Institute for Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Leon-Bérard Cancer Center, University of Lyon, Lyon, France. (10)INSERM U1052,
Léon-Bérard Cancer Centre, Cancer Research Center of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(11)Unité Génétique Somatique (UGS), Institut Curie Centre Hospitalier, Paris,
France. (12)INSERM U900, Bioinformatics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology and
Computational Systems Biology of Cancer, Institut Curie Research Center, Paris,
France. (13)Mines ParisTech, Fontainebleau, France. (14)Institute for Cancer
Outcomes and Survivorship, School of Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA. (15)Centre de Recherche sur les Pathologies Prostatiques
(CeRePP)-Laboratory for Urology, Research Team 2, UPMC, Hôpital Tenon, Paris,
France. (16)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics (DCEG), National Cancer 
Institute (NCI), Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):964-5.

Deciphering the ways in which somatic mutations and germline susceptibility
variants cooperate to promote cancer is challenging. Ewing sarcoma is
characterized by fusions between EWSR1 and members of the ETS gene family,
usually EWSR1-FLI1, leading to the generation of oncogenic transcription factors 
that bind DNA at GGAA motifs. A recent genome-wide association study identified
susceptibility variants near EGR2. Here we found that EGR2 knockdown inhibited
proliferation, clonogenicity and spheroidal growth in vitro and induced
regression of Ewing sarcoma xenografts. Targeted germline deep sequencing of the 
EGR2 locus in affected subjects and controls identified 291 Ewing-associated
SNPs. At rs79965208, the A risk allele connected adjacent GGAA repeats by
converting an interspaced GGAT motif into a GGAA motif, thereby increasing the
number of consecutive GGAA motifs and thus the EWSR1-FLI1-dependent enhancer
activity of this sequence, with epigenetic characteristics of an active
regulatory element. EWSR1-FLI1 preferentially bound to the A risk allele, which
increased global and allele-specific EGR2 expression. Collectively, our findings 
establish cooperation between a dominant oncogene and a susceptibility variant
that regulates a major driver of Ewing sarcomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC4591073 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26214589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 16;16(7):16176-215. doi: 10.3390/ijms160716176.

Sequencing Overview of Ewing Sarcoma: A Journey across Genomic, Epigenomic and
Transcriptomic Landscapes.

Sand LG(1), Szuhai K(2), Hogendoorn PC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 ZA, The
Netherlands. L.G.L.Sand@lumc.nl. (2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 ZA, The Netherlands. k.szuhai@lumc.nl.
(3)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 ZA, The
Netherlands. p.c.w.hogendoorn@lumc.nl.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive neoplasm occurring predominantly in adolescent
Caucasians. At the genome level, a pathognomonic EWSR1-ETS translocation is
present. The resulting fusion protein acts as a molecular driver in the tumor
development and interferes, amongst others, with endogenous transcription and
splicing. The Ewing sarcoma cell shows a poorly differentiated, stem-cell like
phenotype. Consequently, the cellular origin of Ewing sarcoma is still a hot
discussed topic. To further characterize Ewing sarcoma and to further elucidate
the role of EWSR1-ETS fusion protein multiple genome, epigenome and transcriptome
level studies were performed. In this review, the data from these studies were
combined into a comprehensive overview. Presently, classical morphological
predictive markers are used in the clinic and the therapy is dominantly based on 
systemic chemotherapy in combination with surgical interventions. Using
sequencing, novel predictive markers and candidates for immuno- and targeted
therapy were identified which were summarized in this review.

PMCID: PMC4519945
PMID: 26193259  [PubMed - in process]


48. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Aug;39(8):1102-13. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000466.

Myoepithelioma-like Tumors of the Vulvar Region: A Distinctive Group of
SMARCB1-deficient Neoplasms.

Yoshida A(1), Yoshida H, Yoshida M, Mori T, Kobayashi E, Tanzawa Y, Yasugi T,
Kawana K, Ishikawa M, Sugiura H, Maeda D, Fukayama M, Kawai A, Hiraoka N, Motoi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology and Clinical Laboratories †Musculoskeletal Oncology 
<U+2225>Gynecology, National Cancer Center Hospital Departments of ‡Gynecology
††Pathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome
Hospital §Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medicine
#Department of Pathology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo ¶Department of Pathology,
Kawasaki Municipal Hospital, Kanagawa **Department of Cellular and Organ
Pathology, Akita University, Akita, Japan.

We describe 9 tumors that resemble soft tissue myoepitheliomas but possess
certain traits that do not fit perfectly into this category. These tumors, herein
referred to as "myoepithelioma-like tumors of the vulvar region," occurred in the
subcutis of the vulva and surrounding regions of adult women aged 24 to 65 years.
Histologically, the tumors measured 2 to 7.7 cm and were well circumscribed,
focally encapsulated, and lobulated. Tumor cells had an epithelioid to spindled
shape, with fine amphophilic cytoplasm, and uniform nuclei with vesicular
chromatin and nucleoli. The tumor stroma was relatively hypervascular, and
comprised a mixture of myxoid and nonmyxoid components. Myxoid areas accounted
for <5% to 95% of the tumor volume, wherein cells proliferated singly or in a
loosely cohesive manner. In nonmyxoid areas, tumors cells grew in diffuse sheets 
or storiform arrangements. Immunohistochemically, all tested tumors were positive
for vimentin, epithelial membrane antigen, and estrogen receptor; most tumors
expressed actin. All tumors were negative for S100 protein, glial fibrillary
acidic protein, and CD34. Cytokeratin expression was absent in all but 2 tumors, 
which showed rare positivity. SMARCB1 expression was deficient in all cases.
EWSR1, FUS, and NR4A3 rearrangements were absent. All tumors were treated through
surgery. Although 3 tumors regrew or recurred after intralesional excision, all 9
patients were alive without metastases at a mean follow-up of 66 months.
Myoepithelioma-like tumors of the vulvar region constitute a distinct group of
tumors, although future research is required to determine whether they are an
unusual subtype of soft tissue myoepitheliomas or a separate disease.

PMID: 26171919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jul;10(1):349-353. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Atypical amplification of chromosome region 22q12 in melanoma: A case report.

Liguori G(1), Cantile M(1), Collina F(1), Marra L(1), DE Chiara A(1), Franco
R(1), Caraglia M(2), Botti G(1), D'Andrea M(3), Nicoletti GF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Unit, National Cancer Institute IRCCS 'Fondazione G. Pascale',
Naples 80131, Italy. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and General
Pathology, Second University of Naples, Naples 80138, Italy. (3)Department of
Medical-Surgical and Dental Specialities, Second University of Naples, Naples
80138, Italy.

Morphological, ultrastructural and immunohistochemical characteristics of clear
cell sarcoma (CCS) of the soft tissue frequently overlap with those of malignant 
melanoma. Thus, the differential diagnosis between the two lesions represents an 
important diagnostic dilemma. However, a number of genetic factors can be used to
differentiate the two tumors; in particular, the t(12;22)(q13;q12) chromosomal
translocation is typical of CCS, resulting in fusion of the EWSR1 gene on
chromosome 22q12 and the ATF1 gene on chromosome 12q13. The detection of this
molecular alteration has proved useful in the differential diagnosis of the two
lesions. The present study reports the case of a 71-year-old male patient with a 
suspicious lymph node mass. Immunohistochemical analysis of the lesion indicated 
a diagnosis of metastatic melanoma, however, cytogenetic analysis using
fluorescence in situ hybridization was additionally performed to investigate the 
chromosomal rearrangements of the 22q12 region and completely exclude the
possibility of CCS. The current case did not demonstrate the presence of the
translocation, supporting the diagnosis of melanoma. However, a clear orange
amplification signal was observed relative to an ~500-kb region adjacent to the
EWSR1 gene in the centromeric direction of chromosome 22q12. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first description of a 22q12 chromosomal alteration in
melanoma. Furthermore, despite the presence of numerous genes in this region,
their amplification has not previously been associated with the pathogenesis of
melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4487132
PMID: 26171028  [PubMed]


50. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2015 Oct;37(7):554-9. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000390.

Paraneoplastic Syndrome of Angiomatoid Fibrous Histiocytoma May Be Caused by
EWSR1-CREB1 Fusion-induced Excessive Interleukin-6 Production.

Akiyama M(1), Yamaoka M, Mikami-Terao Y, Yokoi K, Inoue T, Hiramatsu T, Ashizuka 
S, Yoshizawa J, Katagi H, Ikegami M, Ida H, Nakazawa A, Okita H, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pediatrics §Pathology ‡Division of Pediatric Surgery †Division
of Molecular Genetics, Institute of DNA Medicine, The Jikei University School of 
Medicine <U+2225>Department of Pathology, National Center for Child Health and
Development Departments of ¶Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Research #Allergy
and Immunology, National Research Institute for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo, Japan.

We describe a 7-year-old girl with angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH)
presenting severe inflammatory symptoms. The cytokine/chemokine profile of serum 
samples before and after surgery demonstrated that interleukin (IL)-6 had
decreased by the greatest percentage. The AFH cells were immunopathologically
positive for IL-6 and Tyr705-phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator
of transcription 3. The EWSR1-CREB1 fusion gene detected in the tumor leads to
continuous activation of CREB1 and IL-6 production, because the promoter region
of IL-6 has a CREB binding site. Thus, IL-6 plays pivotal roles in both
paraneoplastic syndrome and the oncogenesis of AFH.

PMID: 26165403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 Sep;211(9):688-92. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.06.001. Epub
2015 Jun 17.

An unusual association of malignant gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor (clear
cell sarcoma-like) and Ewing sarcoma.

Insabato L(1), Guadagno E(2), Natella V(2), Somma A(2), Bihl M(3), Pizzolorusso
A(4), Mainenti PP(2), Apice G(4), Tornillo L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dip. Scienze Biomorfologiche e Chirurgiche, Università Federico II Napoli,
Italy. Electronic address: insabato@unina.it. (2)Dip. Scienze Biomorfologiche e
Chirurgiche, Università Federico II Napoli, Italy. (3)Department of Pathology,
University Hospital of Basel, Switzerland. (4)SSD Oncologia medica Sarcomi dei
Tessuti molli e delle Ossa, Istituto Tumori, Fondazione G. Pascale, Naples,
Italy.

Very recently a new designation of "Malignant Neuroectodermal Gastrointestinal
Tumor" has been proposed for an aggressive form of neuroectodermal tumor with
features similar to that of Clear Cell Sarcoma of Soft Tissue, however without a 
melanocytic differentiation. Also known as "clear cell sarcoma-like tumors of the
gastrointestinal tract", these tumors show some features strongly suggesting an
origin from a gastrointestinal neuroectodermal precursor cell unable to
differentiate along the melanocytic lineage. They occur mainly in young and
middle-aged adults, and have a poor prognosis with a high rate of liver and
lymphnode metastases. Histologically they are composed of epithelioid or oval-to 
spindle cells with a sheet-like or nested pattern of growth, strongly positive
for neural markers (S-100, SOX10, and vimentin) and negative for the melanocytic 
ones. EWSR1 gene rearrangements including EWSR1-ATF1 or EWSR1-CREB1 GENE fusions 
are typically assessed in these tumors. Here we report a case of malignant
neuroectodermal gastrointestinal tumor which immunophenotypically unusually
expressed FLI-1, occurring in a 29-year-old man with a previous medical history
of Ewing sarcoma. We finally suggest that this case might be a further evidence
of a link between these two entities.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26163185  [PubMed - in process]


52. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015 Sep;23(6):454-60. doi: 10.1177/1066896915593801. Epub
2015 Jul 1.

DOG1 Expression in Low-Grade Fibromyxoid Sarcoma: A Study of 11 Cases, With
Molecular Characterization.

Thway K(1), Ng W(2), Benson C(2), Chapman J(3), Fisher C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk. (2)Royal Marsden
Hospital, London, UK. (3)Ipswich Hospital, Ipswich, UK.

DOG1 is a highly sensitive marker for gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) and
is in the routine diagnostic antibody repertoire of many surgical pathology
laboratories. Moreover, GIST is well recognized by both pathologists and
clinicians in the differential diagnosis of intra-abdominal and pelvic neoplasms.
Low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (LGFMS) is, however, much less frequently
anticipated, particularly when occurring at unusual sites, because of its rarity 
and bland histology, particularly on core biopsy. We describe a case of a
53-year-old male with a large pelvic and pararectal mass, which on biopsy showed 
a moderately cellular spindle cell neoplasm within fibrous stroma.
Immunohistochemistry at the referring center showed diffuse and strong expression
of DOG1 with negativity for other markers. After referral to a tertiary center,
repeat DOG1 immunohistochemistry again showed diffuse expression, but MUC4 was
also positive, and this was confirmed to be LGFMS, harboring FUS-CREB3L2 fusion
transcripts by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and FUS
rearrangement with fluorescence in situ hybridization. In view of this we
assessed DOG1 expression in 10 other LGFMS (all MUC4 positive, and 9 molecularly 
confirmed to harbor FUS-CREB3L2 fusion transcripts and/or FUS or EWSR1 gene
rearrangement), of which 5 showed DOG1 expression in up to 75% of tumor cells,
varying in intensity from weak to strong. While LGFMS and GIST are generally
morphologically dissimilar, less typical variants of each exist, and both can
contain bland spindled cells within fibrous stroma. As the morphologic spectrum
of LGFMS is wide, and as it can occur in unusual sites and may not be well
recognized by general pathologists and non-soft tissue pathologists, we highlight
the potential for diagnostic confusion with GIST owing to aberrant DOG1
expression. This is clinically pertinent, as the management and prognosis of
these 2 neoplasms differs significantly.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26135531  [PubMed - in process]


53. BMB Rep. 2015 Jul;48(7):371-2.

Modulation of autophagy by miRNAs.

Kim Y(1), Lee J(2), Ryu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuromedicine, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul
136-791, Korea. (2)VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA 02130, USA; Boston
University Alzheimer's Disease Center and Department of Neurology, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Comment on
    Autophagy. 2015;11(5):796-811.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) can regulate the expression of genes that are involved in
multiple cellular pathways. However, their targets and mechanism of action
associated with the autophagy pathway are not fully investigated yet. EWSR1 (EWS 
RNA-Binding Protein 1/Ewing Sarcoma Break Point Region 1) gene encodes a RNA/DNA 
binding protein that is ubiquitously expressed and plays roles in numerous
cellular processes. Recently, our group has shown that EWSR1 deficiency leads to 
developmental failure and accelerated senescence via processing of miRNAs, but
its role in the regulation of autophagy remains elusive. In this context, we
further investigated and found that EWSR1 deficiency triggers the activation of
the DROSHA-mediated microprocessor complex and increases the levels of miR125a
and miR351, which directly target Uvrag. Interestingly, the miR125a- and
miR351-targeted reduction of Uvrag led to the inhibition of autophagy in both
ewsr1 knockout (KO) MEFs and ewsr1 KO mice. In summary, our study demonstrates
that EWSR1 is associated with the posttranscriptional regulation of Uvrag via
miRNA processing. The regulation of autophagy pathway in miRNAs-Uvrag-dependent
manner provides a novel mechanism of EWSR1 deficiency-related cellular
dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC4577285
PMID: 26129673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015 Sep;23(6):500-4. doi: 10.1177/1066896915591584. Epub 2015
Jun 26.

Molecular Confirmation of Ewing Sarcoma in an 85-Year-Old Woman.

Monument MJ(1), Grossmann AH(2), Baker CC(3), Randall RL(1), Liu T(2), Albertson 
DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (2)University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA. (3)ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt
Lake City, UT, USA. (4)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA ARUP Institute
for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
dan.albertson@path.utah.edu.

We report a case of a Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in an
85-year-old woman who presented with an enlarging circumscribed left flank mass. 
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 3 × 5 × 10 cm heterogeneous mass arising
from the 10th rib. Computed tomography demonstrated a small nodule in the right
middle lobe and bilateral pleural effusions. The patient underwent computed
tomography-guided biopsy followed by open biopsy. The tumor cells were
characterized by loosely cohesive sheets of tumor cells with uniform nuclei, and 
scant, granular, eosinophilic cytoplasm with indistinct cell membranes. Frequent 
mitoses, apoptosis, and necrosis were present. The cells were positive for CD99
with a strong concentric staining pattern. Epithelial, hematopoietic, and neural 
markers were all negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed and
demonstrated EWSR1 (22q12) gene rearrangement. Sanger sequencing of the reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction product from the patient's tumor
demonstrated the EWSR1-FLI1 type 1 fusion. Following diagnosis the patient
elected to proceed with localized radiation and declined chemotherapy. She
developed progressive lung disease and subsequently died of her disease a year
after her initial diagnosis. Ewing sarcoma is predominantly a pediatric disease
and uncommon in patients older than 40 years of age. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the oldest documented case of Ewing sarcoma, diagnosed using
modern molecular techniques.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26116579  [PubMed - in process]


55. Diagn Cytopathol. 2015 Sep;43(9):743-6. doi: 10.1002/dc.23297. Epub 2015 Jun 10.

Cytomorphology and immunohistochemistry of a recurrent clear cell odontogenic
carcinoma with molecular analysis: A case report with review of literature.

Harbhajanka A(1), Lamzabi I(1), Jain R(1), Gattuso P(1), Kluskens L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois.

Clear cell odontogenic carcinoma (CCOC) is a rare, odontogenic tumor of the jaws 
with mandibular involvement usually present in sixth decade of life with female
preponderance. It is classified as a malignant tumor of odontogenic origin in
2005 by the World Health Organization because of its aggressive and destructive
growth capacity and potential to metastasize. It needs to be distinguished from
other primary and metastatic clear cell tumors of the oral and maxillofacial
region. Recently, CCOCs have been noted to harbor a Ewing sarcoma breakpoint
region 1 gene RNA-binding protein 1 (EWSR1) and activating transcription factor
(ATF) gene translocation. To date, cytologic features of only one case have been 
reported in the literature. We report an additional case of 55-year-old woman
with enlarging mass in the left mandible. This report describes cytologic and
immunohistochemical features of CCOC with positive EWSR1 gene rearrangements by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). As diagnosis of CCOC is challenging on
fine-needle aspiration, immunohistochemistry and FISH analysis are very useful
diagnostic tool in clear cell lesions of mandible.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26061809  [PubMed - in process]


56. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 7;6(22):18875-90.

The PARP inhibitor olaparib enhances the sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma to
trabectedin.

Ordóñez JL(1,)(2), Amaral AT(1,)(2), Carcaboso AM(3), Herrero-Martín D(4), del
Carmen García-Macías M(2), Sevillano V(2), Alonso D(2), Pascual-Pasto G(3),
San-Segundo L(2), Vila-Ubach M(3), Rodrigues T(2), Fraile S(2), Teodosio C(2),
Mayo-Iscar A(5), Aracil M(6), Galmarini CM(6), Tirado OM(4), Mora J(3), de Álava 
E(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS),
Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville,
Spain. (2)Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Instituto de Biología Molecular y
Celular del Cáncer/Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad
de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (3)Developmental Tumor Biology Laboratory,
Preclinical Therapeutics and Drug Delivery Research Program, Hospital Sant Joan
de Deu Barcelona, Spain. (4)Sarcoma Research Group, Laboratori d'Oncología
Molecular, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet
de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Statistics and Operations Research Department,
University of Valladolid, Spain. (6)Cell Biology and Pharmacogenomics Department,
Pharmamar, Madrid, Spain.

Recent preclinical evidence has suggested that Ewing Sarcoma (ES) bearing
EWSR1-ETS fusions could be particularly sensitive to PARP inhibitors (PARPinh) in
combination with DNA damage repair (DDR) agents. Trabectedin is an antitumoral
agent that modulates EWSR1-FLI1 transcriptional functions, causing DNA damage.
Interestingly, PARP1 is also a transcriptional regulator of EWSR1-FLI1, and
PARPinh disrupts the DDR machinery. Thus, given the impact and apparent
specificity of both agents with regard to the DNA damage/DDR system and
EWSR1-FLI1 activity in ES, we decided to explore the activity of combining
PARPinh and Trabectedin in in vitro and in vivo experiments. The combination of
Olaparib and Trabectedin was found to be highly synergistic, inhibiting cell
proliferation, inducing apoptosis, and the accumulation of G2/M. The drug
combination also enhanced <U+03B3>H2AX intranuclear accumulation as a result of DNA
damage induction, DNA fragmentation and global DDR deregulation, while EWSR1-FLI1
target expression remained unaffected. The effect of the drug combination was
corroborated in a mouse xenograft model of ES and, more importantly, in two ES
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models in which the tumors showed complete
regression. In conclusion, the combination of the two agents leads to a
biologically significant deregulation of the DDR machinery that elicits relevant 
antitumor activity in preclinical models and might represent a promising
therapeutic tool that should be further explored for translation to the clinical 
setting.

PMCID: PMC4662461
PMID: 26056084  [PubMed - in process]


57. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Sep;39(9):1267-74. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000460.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing family tumors of the head and neck: a pitfall in the
differential diagnosis of basaloid and myoepithelial carcinomas.

Bishop JA(1), Alaggio R, Zhang L, Seethala RR, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD §Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pittsburgh, PA ‡Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, NY †Department of Pathology, Padova University Hospital, Padova, Italy.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors (EFTs) of the head and neck are rare and may be
difficult to diagnose, as they display significant histologic overlap with other 
more common undifferentiated small blue round cell malignancies. Occasionally,
EFTs may exhibit overt epithelial differentiation in the form of diffuse
cytokeratin immunoexpression or squamous pearls, resembling the so-called
adamantinoma-like EFTs and being challenging to distinguish from bona fide
carcinomas. Furthermore, the presence of EWSR1 gene rearrangement correlated with
strong keratin expression may suggest a myoepithelial carcinoma. Herein, we
analyze a series of 7 adamantinoma-like EFTs of the head and neck, most of them
being initially misdiagnosed as carcinomas because of their anatomic location and
strong cytokeratin immunoexpression, and subsequently reclassified as EFT by
molecular techniques. The tumors arose in the sinonasal tract (n=2), parotid
gland (n=2), thyroid gland (n=2), and orbit (n=1), in patients ranging in age
from 7 to 56 years (mean, 31 y). Microscopically, they departed from the typical 
EFT morphology by growing as nests with peripheral nuclear palisading and
prominent interlobular fibrosis, imparting a distinctly basaloid appearance.
Moreover, 2 cases exhibited overt keratinization in the form of squamous pearls, 
and 1 sinonasal tumor demonstrated areas of intraepithelial growth. All cases
were positive for CD99, pancytokeratin, and p40. A subset of cases showed
synaptophysin, S100 protein, and/or p16 reactivity, further confounding the
diagnosis. Fluorescence in situ hybridization assays showed EWSR1 and FLI1
rearrangements in all cases. Our results reinforce that a subset of head and neck
EFTs may show strong cytokeratin expression or focal keratinization, and are
therefore histologically indistinguishable from more common true epithelial
neoplasms. Thus, CD99 should be included in the immunopanel of a round cell
malignancy regardless of strong cytokeratin expression or anatomic location, and 
a strong and diffuse CD99 positivity should prompt molecular testing for the
presence of EWSR1 gene rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC4537687 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26034869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Case Rep Oncol. 2015 Apr 28;8(1):205-11. doi: 10.1159/000382118.

A Case of Renal Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor Confirmed by Fluorescence in situ
Hybridization.

Etani T(1), Naiki T(1), Ando R(1), Iida K(1), Naiki-Ito A(2), Takahashi S(2),
Kobayashi D(1), Kawai N(1), Tozawa K(1), Yasui T(1), Kohri K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephro-Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City
University, Nagoya, Japan. (2)Department of Experimental Pathology and Tumor
Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya,
Japan.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is a member of the Ewing's sarcoma family 
of tumors (ESFT). We report a case of PNET in a 66-year-old male who presented
with a large solid tumor within the parenchyma of the middle pole of the left
kidney with metastases to the left adrenal gland and right ischium. A fine-needle
biopsy was performed and showed a small round cell tumor. Results of
immunohistochemical staining suggested this tumor belonged to ESFT. Preoperative 
VDC-IE (combined vincristine, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by
another combination of ifosfamide and etoposide) chemotherapy and left radical
nephrectomy and adrenalectomy were performed. The histopathological findings of
the resected tumor were similar to those in the biopsy specimen, but the results 
of AE1/AE3 were different. For the diagnosis, fluorescence in situ hybridization 
was performed. Split signals of the EWSR1 gene were detected, and transmission
electron microscopy showed neuroendocrine granules and microtubules. The final
diagnosis of this tumor was PNET of the kidney.

PMCID: PMC4448065
PMID: 26034481  [PubMed]


59. J Immunol. 2015 Jul 1;195(1):298-306. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402465. Epub 2015
May 29.

PRMT1 Upregulated by Epithelial Proinflammatory Cytokines Participates in COX2
Expression in Fibroblasts and Chronic Antigen-Induced Pulmonary Inflammation.

Sun Q(1), Liu L(2), Roth M(3), Tian J(2), He Q(2), Zhong B(2), Bao R(2), Lan
X(2), Jiang C(2), Sun J(2), Yang X(4), Lu S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Sciences,
Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, People's 
Republic of China; Key Laboratory of Environment and Genes Related to Diseases,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Ministry of Education, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, People's
Republic of China; University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, 4031 Basel,
Switzerland; and. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of 
Basic Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi
710061, People's Republic of China; Key Laboratory of Environment and Genes
Related to Diseases, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Ministry of Education, Xi'an,
Shaanxi 710061, People's Republic of China; (3)University Hospital Basel,
University of Basel, 4031 Basel, Switzerland; and. (4)Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health
Science Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, People's Republic of China; Key Laboratory
of Environment and Genes Related to Diseases, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Ministry
of Education, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, People's Republic of China;
shemin.lu@gmail.com ewsr1@163.com. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, School of Basic Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science
Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, People's Republic of China; Key Laboratory of
Environment and Genes Related to Diseases, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Ministry of
Education, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, People's Republic of China; Department of
Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Xi'an Jiaotong
University Health Science Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, People's Republic of
China shemin.lu@gmail.com ewsr1@163.com.

Protein arginine methyltransferase (PRMT)1, methylating both histones and key
cellular proteins, has emerged as a key regulator of various cellular processes. 
This study aimed to identify the mechanism that regulates PRMT1 in chronic
Ag-induced pulmonary inflammation (AIPI) in the E3 rat asthma model. E3 rats were
challenged with OVA for 1 or 8 wk to induce acute or chronic AIPI. Expression of 
mRNAs was detected by real-time quantitative PCR. PRMT1, TGF-ß, COX2, and
vascular endothelial growth factor protein expression in lung tissues was
determined by immunohistochemistry staining and Western blotting. In the in vitro
study, IL-4-stimulated lung epithelial cell (A549) medium (ISEM) with or without 
anti-TGF-ß Ab was applied to human fibroblasts from lung (HFL1). The
proliferation of HFL1 was determined by MTT. AMI-1 (pan-PRMT inhibitor) was
administered intranasally to chronic AIPI rats to determine PRMT effects on
asthmatic parameters. In lung tissue sections, PRMT1 expression was significantly
upregulated, mainly in epithelial cells, in acute AIPI lungs, whereas it was
significantly upregulated mainly in fibroblasts in chronic AIPI lungs. The in
vitro study revealed that ISEM elevates PRMT1, COX2, and vascular endothelial
growth factor expressions, and it promoted fibroblast proliferation. The
application of anti-TGF-ß Ab suppressed COX2 upregulation by ISEM. AMI-1
inhibited the expression of COX2 in TGF-ß-stimulated cells. In the in vivo
experiment, AMI-1 administered to AIPI rats reduced COX2 production and humoral
immune response, and it abrogated mucus secretion and collagen generation. These 
findings suggested that TGF-ß-induced PRMT1 expression participates in fibroblast
proliferation and chronic airway inflammation in AIPI.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26026059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 May 14;8:1053-9. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S80879. eCollection
2015.

Primary paraesophageal Ewing's sarcoma: an uncommon case report and literature
review.

Tarazona N(1), Navarro L(2), Cejalvo JM(3), Gambardella V(3), Pérez-Fidalgo
JA(3), Sempere A(2), Navarro S(2), Cervantes A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, GI and Lymphoma Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation
Trust, London and Surrey, UK. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Valencia,
Valencia, Spain. (3)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Biomedical
Research Institute, INCLIVA, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

Ewing's sarcoma is a rare and highly aggressive cancer most frequently arising in
people under 20 years of age. We report an uncommon case of primary
paraesophageal Ewing's sarcoma in a 25-year-old male harboring the infrequent
EWSR1/ERG fusion transcript with multiple splice variants coexisting in the same 
tumor. The patient was totally refractory to chemotherapy and died 17 months
after diagnosis. We underscore the need for better understanding of the molecular
pathogenesis of the disease and improved systemic therapy options.

PMCID: PMC4437600
PMID: 25999740  [PubMed]


61. Head Neck Pathol. 2015 May 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Oral Cavity Clear Cell Odontogenic Carcinoma.

Ginat DT(1), Villaflor V, Cipriani NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Pritzker School of Medicine, University of Chicago,
5841 S Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA, dtg1@uchicago.edu.

A case of clear cell odontogenic carcinoma of the oral cavity is described in
this sine qua non radiology-pathology correlation article. CT demonstrated a
solid and cystic mass arising from the mandible. Histology demonstrated
variably-sized nests of clear to pale eosinophilic cells with occasional central 
necrosis embedded in a hyalinized to fibrocellular stroma. The specimen was also 
positive for the characteristic rearrangement of the EWSR1 (22q12) locus in
93.5 % of interphase cells.

PMID: 25994920  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


62. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Aug;19(4):221-5. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.04.005.
Epub 2015 May 6.

Sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma of the kidney: clinicopathologic and
molecular study of a rare neoplasm at a novel location.

Ohlmann CH(1), Brecht IB(2), Junker K(1), van der Zee JA(1), Nistor A(3), Bohle
RM(3), Stöckle M(1), Metzler M(2), Hartmann A(4), Agaimy A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology & Pediatric Urology, Saarland University, Homburg/Saar, 
Germany. (2)University Children's Hospital, Friedrich-Alexander-University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, Saarland
University, Homburg/Saar, Germany. (4)Institute of Pathology,
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. (5)Institute
of Pathology, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen,
Germany. Electronic address: abbas.agaimy@uk-erlangen.de.

Sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma (SEF) is a rare fibrosarcoma variant with
specific histomorphology and consistent translocation (EWSR1-CREB3L1/2). To date,
110 cases have been reported; only 15 originated within the abdomen. With only 2 
cases reported parallel to our study and one case briefly mentioned in a previous
series, primary renal SEF is exceptionally rare but might be underrecognized. We 
herein describe 2 cases affecting a 23-year-old woman and a 43-year-old man.
Tumor size was 22 and 4.2 cm, respectively. Patient 1 developed skeletal and
multiple pulmonary metastases. She died of disease 82 months later, despite
aggressive multimodality therapy. Patient 2 has no evidence of recurrence or
metastasis (8 months after surgery). Histologic examination showed similar
appearance with monotonous bland medium-sized epithelioid cells with rounded
slightly vesicular nuclei and clear cytoplasm imparting a carcinoma-like
appearance set within a highly sclerotic hyaline fibrous stroma. The tumor cells 
were arranged in nests, single cell cords, trabeculae, or solid sheets with
frequent entrapment of renal tubules and glomeruli. Immunohistochemistry showed
strong expression of vimentin, bcl2, CD99, and MUC4, whereas cytokeratin and
other markers were negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed a
translocation involving the EWSR1 gene locus in case 2. Molecular analysis in
case 1 was not successful due to poor signal quality. To our knowledge, this is
the second report documenting primary renal SEF. Awareness of this entity would
help avoid misinterpretation as clear cell carcinoma, sclerosing perivascular
epithelioid cell tumor, Xp.11 translocation carcinoma, and other more frequent
neoplasms at this site.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25990776  [PubMed - in process]


63. J Oral Pathol Med. 2016 Feb;45(2):101-10. doi: 10.1111/jop.12329. Epub 2015 May
20.

Molecular signature of salivary gland tumors: potential use as diagnostic and
prognostic marker.

Fonseca FP(1), Sena Filho M(1), Altemani A(2), Speight PM(3), Vargas PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis (Pathology), Piracicaba Dental School, University
of Campinas, Piracicaba, Brazil. (2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. (3)Unit of Oral and
Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Clinical Dentistry, The University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

Salivary gland tumors are a highly heterogeneous group of lesions with diverse
microscopic appearances and variable clinical behavior. The use of clinical and
histological parameters to predict patient prognosis and survival rates has been 
of limited utility, and the search for new biomarkers that could not only aid in 
a better understanding of their pathogenesis but also be reliable auxiliaries for
prognostic determination and useful diagnostic tools has been performed in the
last decades with very exciting results. Hence, gene rearrangements such as
CRTC1-MAML2 in mucoepidermoid carcinomas have shown excellent specificity, and
more than that, it has been strongly correlated with low-grade tumors and
consequently with an increased survival rate and better prognosis of patients
affected by neoplasms carrying this translocation. Moreover, MYB-NFIB and
EWSR1-ATF1 gene fusions were shown to be specifically found in cases of adenoid
cystic carcinomas and hyalinizing clear cell carcinomas, respectively, in the
context of salivary gland tumors, becoming reliable diagnostic tools for these
entities and potential therapeutic targets for future therapeutic protocols.
Finally, the identification of ETV6-NTRK3 in cases previously diagnosed as
uncommon acinic cell carcinomas, cystadenocarcinomas, and adenocarcinomas not
otherwise specified led to the characterization of a completely new and now
widely accepted entity, including, therefore, mammary analogue secretory
carcinoma in the list of well-recognized salivary gland carcinomas. Thus, further
molecular investigations of salivary gland tumors are warranted, and the
recognition of other genetic abnormalities can lead to the acknowledgment of new 
entities and the acquirement of reliable biomarkers.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25990369  [PubMed - in process]


64. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 May 14;21(18):5739-43. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i18.5739.

Esophageal subepithelial lesion diagnosed as malignant gastrointestinal
neuroectodermal tumor.

Kim SB(1), Lee SH(1), Gu MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sung Bum Kim, Si Hyung Lee, Department of Internal Medicine, Yeungnam
University Hospital, Daegu 705-802, South Korea.

A 21-year-old male visited our hospital with a complaint of aggravating dysphagia
and odynophagia for a few days. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed huge bulging
mucosa with an intact surface causing luminal narrowing at 35 cm from the incisor
teeth. Endoscopic ultrasonography showed an about 35 mm sized irregular margined 
in-homogenous hypoechoic lesion with an obscure layer of origin. Endoscopic
ultrasonography fine needle aspiration revealed spindle cell proliferation
without immunoreactivity for CD117, SMA, and cytokeratin. The patient underwent
excision of the subepithelial lesion at the distal esophagus. On pathologic
examination of the specimen, the tumor was composed of short fascicles of oval to
spindle cells with eosinophilic and clear cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei. The
tumor cells were positive for S-100 and SOX10 and negative for CD117, SMA,
HMB-45, melan-A, cytokeratin, and CD99. The split-apart signal was detected in
EWSR1 on FISH, suggesting a malignant gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor. At 
the time of writing, the patient is on radiation therapy at the operated site of 
esophagus and doing well, with no recurrence for three months. Malignant
gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor is a rare gastrointestinal tumor with
features of clear cell sarcoma, without melanocytic differentiation, and shows a 
poor prognosis. This is the first reported case of malignant gastrointestinal
neuroectodermal tumor arising as subepithelial lesion in the esophagus.

PMCID: PMC4427700
PMID: 25987801  [PubMed - in process]


65. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Feb 1;8(2):2171-5. eCollection 2015.

Clear cell sarcoma of the pancreas: a case report and review of literature.

Huang J(1), Luo RK(1), Du M(1), Zeng HY(1), Chen LL(1), Ji Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University Shanghai 200032,
China.

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS), is an uncommon malignant soft tissue neoplasm that
displays melanocytic differentiation with a distinct molecular profile. It is
very rarely localized in gastrointestinal tract. We reported the first case of a 
primary CCS arising in pancreas. A 36-year-old man presented with jaundice for
one month. A preoperative abdominal computer tomography showed a low-density mass
in the head of pancreas. Whipple procedure was performed and the tumor was
resected. Pathological examination showed polygonal or fusiform cells arranged in
a uniform nested to fascicular growth pattern with thin fibrous septa.
Immunohistochemical studies revealed positivity for HMB-45, Melan A, S-100, MiTF 
and vimentin protein. Fluorescence in situ hybridization on paraffin section
showed a translocation involving the EWSR1 gene region. No BRAF and NRAS mutation
was detected. The patient underwent transcatheter arterial chemoembolization
(TACE) six times and eventually died of diffuse liver metastasis 10 months later.
This case illustrates that the pancreas is a potential site for primary clear
cell sarcoma and molecular studies play an important role in making a conclusive 
diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4396256
PMID: 25973121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jul;14(7):1591-604. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0334.
Epub 2015 May 11.

An Oral Formulation of YK-4-279: Preclinical Efficacy and Acquired Resistance
Patterns in Ewing Sarcoma.

Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE(1), Menegaz BA(1), Ramamoorthy V(1), Aiyer RA(2), Maywald
RL(3), Buford AS(1), Doolittle DK(4), Culotta KS(4), O'Dorisio JE(5), Ludwig
JA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas. (2)Shasta BioVentures, San Jose, California. (3)Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (4)Laboratory of
Experimental Therapeutics, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (5)Star
Biotechnology, LLC, San Francisco, California. (6)Department of Sarcoma Medical
Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. jaludwig@mdanderson.org.

Ewing sarcoma is a transcription factor-mediated pediatric bone tumor caused by a
chromosomal translocation of the EWSR1 gene and one of several genes in the ETS
family of transcription factors, typically FLI1 or ERG. Full activity of the
resulting oncogenic fusion protein occurs only after binding RNA helicase A
(RHA), and novel biologically targeted small molecules designed to interfere with
that interaction have shown early promise in the preclinical setting. Herein, we 
demonstrate marked preclinical antineoplastic activity of an orally bioavailable 
formulation of YK-4-279 and identify mechanisms of acquired chemotherapy
resistance that may be exploited to induce collateral sensitivity. Daily enteral 
administration of YK-4-279 led to significant delay in Ewing sarcoma tumor growth
within a murine model. In advance of anticipated early-phase human clinical
trials, we investigated both de novo and acquired mechanism(s) by which Ewing
sarcoma cells evade YK-4-279-mediated cell death. Drug-resistant clones, formed
by chronic in vitro exposure to steadily increased levels of YK-4-279,
overexpressed c-Kit, cyclin D1, pStat3(Y705), and PKC isoforms. Interestingly,
cross-resistance to imatinib and enzastaurin (selective inhibitors of c-Kit and
PKC-ß, respectively), was observed and the use of YK-4-279 with enzastaurin in
vitro led to marked drug synergy, suggesting a potential role for combination
therapies in the future. By advancing an oral formulation of YK-4-279 and
identifying prominent mechanisms of resistance, this preclinical research takes
us one step closer to a shared goal of curing adolescents and young adults
afflicted by Ewing sarcoma.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25964201  [PubMed - in process]


67. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;16(5-6):385-92. doi:
10.3109/21678421.2015.1040029. Epub 2015 May 11.

Whole genome analyses reveal no pathogenetic single nucleotide or structural
differences between monozygotic twins discordant for amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.

Meltz Steinberg K(1), Nicholas TJ(1), Koboldt DC(1), Yu B(2), Mardis E(1),
Pamphlett R(3).

Author information: 
(1)a The Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis , 
Missouri , USA. (2)b Department of Medical Genomics , Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital and Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney , New South Wales , 
Australia. (3)c The Stacey MND Laboratory, Discipline of Pathology, Sydney
Medical School, The Brain & Mind Research Institute, The University of Sydney ,
New South Wales , Australia.

The contribution of genetic and environmental factors to the pathogenesis of
sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) remains unclear. To investigate the 
genetic component of the disease, we performed whole genome sequencing on ALS
discordant monozygotic twins. Illumina whole genome sequencing on white blood
cell DNA of five ALS-discordant monozygotic twin pairs (10 samples in total)
yielded ~30x coverage per individual. All single nucleotide variants, indels, and
structural variants (copy number variants, inversions and translocations) were
called and evaluated for functional consequence, evolutionary conservation,
population frequency and overlap with known ALS associated variants and genes.
Results showed that no validated discordant coding or regulatory single
nucleotide variants or indels were found, and nor were any genome-wide discordant
structural variants detected. Concordant variants of particular interest were: 1)
two rare, highly-conserved heterozygous non-synonymous variants in SYT9 and
EWSR1, genes previously associated with ALS (out of 2044 rare heterozygous
variants detected); 2) three rare homozygous missense variants; and 3) three
novel copy number deletions that overlapped genes. In conclusion, no convincing
coding or regulatory nucleotide or genome-wide structural differences were found 
between ALS discordant monozygotic twins. The results suggest that more work is
needed to elucidate possible environmental, epigenetic, oligogenic and somatic
genetic factors that could underlie susceptibility to sporadic ALS.

PMID: 25960086  [PubMed - in process]


68. J Cytol. 2015 Jan-Mar;32(1):30-2. doi: 10.4103/0970-9371.155229.

Upregulation of NKX2.2, a target of EWSR1/FLI1 fusion transcript, in primary
renal Ewing sarcoma.

Yamamoto Y(1), Yamazaki K(1), Ishida Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University, Chiba Medical Center, Ichihara,
Chiba, Japan.

Renal Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a rare malignant tumor characterized by fusion of the
EWSR1 gene with a member of the ETS family of oncogenes, arising at a specific
chromosomal translocation. Diagnosis of ES can be problematic, especially from
cytological or small bioptical specimens because the differential diagnoses
comprising a diverse group of small round blue cell tumors (SRBCTs). We report a 
case of primary renal ES in a young male, which had a t(11;22) (q24;q12)
chromosome translocation encoding a type2 EWSR1/FLI1 fusion transcript. The tumor
cells showed diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for CD99 and diffuse nuclear
immunoreactivity for NKX2.2, an important oncogenic transcriptional target of
EWSR1/FLI1, not only in the histological, but also in the cytological specimens. 
From the results of this case, we speculate that NKX2.2, in combination with
CD99, may be a useful immunocytochemical marker to distinguish renal ES from
other SRBCTs of kidney.

PMCID: PMC4408675
PMID: 25948942  [PubMed]


69. Autophagy. 2015;11(5):796-811. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1035503.

Uvrag targeting by Mir125a and Mir351 modulates autophagy associated with Ewsr1
deficiency.

Kim Y(1), Kang YS, Lee NY, Kim KY, Hwang YJ, Kim HW, Rhyu IJ, Her S, Jung MK, Kim
S, Lee CJ, Ko S, Kowall NW, Lee SB, Lee J, Ryu H.

Author information: 
(1)a Laboratory for Neuronal Gene Regulation and Epigenetics; Center for
NeuroMedicine; Korea Institute of Science and Technology ; Seoul , Korea.

Comment in
    BMB Rep. 2015 Jul;48(7):371-2.

The EWSR1 (EWS RNA-binding protein 1/Ewing Sarcoma Break Point Region 1) gene
encodes a RNA/DNA binding protein that is ubiquitously expressed and involved in 
various cellular processes. EWSR1 deficiency leads to impairment of development
and accelerated senescence but the mechanism is not known. Herein, we found that 
EWSR1 modulates the Uvrag (UV radiation resistance associated) gene at the
post-transcription level. Interestingly, EWSR1 deficiency led to the activation
of the DROSHA-mediated microprocessor complex and increased the level of Mir125a 
and Mir351, which directly target Uvrag. Moreover, the Mir125a- and
Mir351-mediated reduction of Uvrag was associated with the inhibition of
autophagy that was confirmed in ewsr1 knockout (KO) MEFs and ewsr1 KO mice. Taken
together, our data indicate that EWSR1 is involved in the post-transcriptional
regulation of Uvrag via a miRNA-dependent pathway, resulting in the deregulation 
of autophagy inhibition. The mechanism of Uvrag and autophagy regulation by EWSR1
provides new insights into the role of EWSR1 deficiency-related cellular
dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC4509448 [Available on 2016-05-06]
PMID: 25946189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Fam Cancer. 2015 Sep;14(3):449-53. doi: 10.1007/s10689-015-9804-1.

3'-UTR poly(T/U) repeat of EWSR1 is altered in microsatellite unstable colorectal
cancer with nearly perfect sensitivity.

Kondelin J(1), Tuupanen S, Gylfe AE, Aavikko M, Renkonen-Sinisalo L, Järvinen H, 
Böhm J, Mecklin JP, Andersen CL, Vahteristo P, Pitkänen E, Aaltonen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Medicum/Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki,
00014, Helsinki, Finland, johanna.kondelin@helsinki.fi.

Approximately 15% of colorectal cancers exhibit instability of short nucleotide
repeat regions, microsatellites. These tumors display a unique clinicopathologic 
profile and the microsatellite instability status is increasingly used to guide
clinical management as it is known to predict better prognosis as well as
resistance to certain chemotherapeutics. A panel of five repeats determined by
the National Cancer Institute, the Bethesda panel, is currently the standard for 
determining the microsatellite instability status in colorectal cancer. Recently,
a quasimonomorphic mononucleotide repeat 16T/U at the 3' untranslated region of
the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 gene was reported to show perfect
sensitivity and specificity in detecting mismatch repair deficient colorectal,
endometrial, and gastric cancers in two independent populations. To confirm this 
finding, we replicated the analysis in 213 microsatellite unstable colorectal
cancers from two independent populations, 148 microsatellite stable colorectal
cancers, and the respective normal samples by PCR and fragment analysis. The
repeat showed nearly perfect sensitivity for microsatellite unstable colorectal
cancer as it was altered in 212 of the 213 microsatellite unstable (99.5%) and
none of the microsatellite stable colorectal tumors. This repeat thus represents 
the first potential single marker for detecting microsatellite instability.

PMID: 25930744  [PubMed - in process]


71. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015 May;139(5):674-82. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2014-0234-RA.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: the current status of pathology and genetics.

Thway K(1), Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)From the Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, England.

CONTEXT: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue neoplasm of
intermediate biologic potential and uncertain differentiation, most often arising
in the superficial extremities of children and young adults. While it has
characteristic histologic features of nodular distributions of ovoid and spindle 
cells with blood-filled cystic cavities and a surrounding dense lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrate, there is a significant morphologic spectrum, which coupled with its
rarity and lack of specific immunoprofile can make diagnosis challenging.
Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is associated with 3 characteristic gene
fusions, EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1, which are also described in other neoplasms,
and rarely FUS-ATF1. Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is now recognized at an
increasing number of sites and is known to display a variety of unusual
histologic features.
OBJECTIVE: To review the current status of AFH, discussing putative etiology,
histopathology with variant morphology and differential diagnosis, and current
genetics, including overlap with other tumors harboring EWSR1-CREB1 and
EWSR1-ATF1 fusions.
DATA SOURCES: Review of published literature, including case series, case
reports, and review articles, in online medical databases.
CONCLUSIONS: The occurrence of AFH at several unusual anatomic sites and its
spectrum of morphologic patterns can result in significant diagnostic difficulty,
and correct diagnosis is particularly important because of its small risk of
metastasis and death. This highlights the importance of diagnostic recognition,
ancillary molecular genetic confirmation, and close clinical follow-up of
patients with AFH. Further insight into the genetic and epigenetic changes
arising secondary to the characteristic gene fusions of AFH will be integral to
understanding its tumorigenic mechanisms.

PMID: 25927151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 May 12;112(19):6074-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1504391112. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Inactivation of EWS reduces PGC-1a protein stability and mitochondrial
homeostasis.

Park JH(1), Kang HJ(1), Lee YK(2), Kang H(3), Kim J(4), Chung JH(3), Chang JS(4),
McPherron AC(5), Lee SB(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112; (2)Molecular Endocrinology Branch, National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; (3)Laboratory of Obesity and Aging Research, National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892. (4)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Metabolism, Pennington Biomedical
Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70808; and. (5)Genetics of Development and
Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. (6)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112;
slee30@tulane.edu.

EWS (Ewing sarcoma) encodes an RNA/ssDNA binding protein that is frequently
rearranged in a number of different cancers by chromosomal translocations.
Physiologically, EWS has diverse and essential roles in various organ development
and cellular processes. In this study, we uncovered a new role of EWS in
mitochondrial homeostasis and energy metabolism. Loss of EWS leads to a
significant decrease in mitochondria abundance and activity, which is caused by a
rapid degradation of Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> Coactivator
(PGC-1a), a central regulator of mitochondria biogenesis, function, and cellular 
energy metabolism. EWS inactivation leads to increased ubiquitination and
proteolysis of PGC-1a via proteasome pathway. Complementation of EWS in
Ews-deficient cells restores PGC-1a and mitochondrial abundance. We found that
expression of E3 ubiquitin ligase, FBXW7 (F-box/WD40 domain protein 7), is
increased in the absence of Ews and depletion of Fbxw7 in Ews-null cells restores
PGC-1a expression and mitochondrial density. Consistent with these findings,
mitochondrial abundance and activity are significantly reduced in brown fat and
skeletal muscles of Ews-deficient mice. Furthermore, expression of mitochondrial 
biogenesis, respiration and fatty acid ß-oxidation genes is significantly reduced
in the liver of Ews-null mice. These results demonstrate a novel role of EWS in
mitochondrial and cellular energy homeostasis by controlling PGC-1a protein
stability, and further implicate altered mitochondrial and energy metabolism in
cancers harboring the EWS translocation.

PMCID: PMC4434744
PMID: 25918410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2015 May;13(5):441-8. doi: 10.1111/ddg.12600.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma - case series with emphasis on a late fibrotic
variant.

Wilk M(1), Zelger BG, Debiec-Rychter M, Sciot R, Zelger B.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatohistological Laboratory, P.O. Box 4145, 90021, Nuernberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare, low-grade
malignant, subcutaneous neoplasm in children or young adults.
METHODS: AFHs in different disease stages were studied histologically, in part,
also immunohistologically, and by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Depending on the degree of fibrosclerosis, nine AFH were divided into
the following categories: classic type (n = 3): well-defined subcutaneous lesions
composed of multinodular spindle to epithelioid (histiocytoid) cells surrounding 
a pseudoangiomatous space filled with blood. Peripherally, there is a fibrous
pseudocapsule and an inflammatory infiltrate. Early sclerotic type (n = 4): the
fibrous capsule extends more to the inner circle of the lesion, focally replacing
the cellular neoplastic component and pseudoangiomatous spaces. Late sclerotic
type (n = 2): the architecture of AFH with its zonal arrangement of an outer
fibrous and inner cellular component is largely replaced by fibrosis occluding
the pseudovascular space in the center of the lesion. Immunohistochemistry was
available in 5/9 cases with positivity for EMA (5/5), desmin (3/5), caldesmon
(1/2), and CD99 (2/5). One of two cases tested displayed EWSR1 rearrangement.
CONCLUSION: Late-stage AFH may present with marked fibrosis obscuring the real
nature of the lesion and may easily be misinterpreted by the unwary as a harmless
fibrotic condition.

© 2015 Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft (DDG). Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25918088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Feb;44(2):140-5.

[Soft tissue tumors with EWSR1 gene rearrangements].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong Q, Fan Q(1), Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)E-mail: fanqinhe@aliyun.com.

PMID: 25916650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Apr 14;21(14):4391-6. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i14.4391.

Myoepithelial carcinoma of the stomach: a diagnostic pitfall.

Tseng CE(1), Hsieh YH(1), Wei CK(1), Huang HY(1), Chi CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chih-En Tseng, Chen-Lin Chi, Department of Pathology, Buddhist Dalin Tzu Chi
Hospital, Chiayi 62247, Taiwan.

Myoepithelioma/myoepithelial carcinomas are not commonly found in soft tissues
and are especially rare at visceral sites. This report describes a case of a rare
low-grade myoepithelial carcinoma of the stomach. A 61-year-old female patient
presented with postprandial abdominal discomfort. Endoscopy revealed a 1.1 cm
submucosal lesion. Local excision was performed after malignancy was confirmed by
biopsy. The resection margin is free of tumor and she received no adjuvant
therapy. The tumor was characterized by multinodular growth with biphasic
epithelioid and spindle components. Infiltrative margin and nuclear pleomorphism 
are seen. Tumor cells were positive for both epithelial and myoepithelial
markers. Evidence of epithelial differentiation was confirmed by electron
microscopy. No EWSR1 rearrangement was detected. The final diagnosis was
low-grade myoepithelial gastric carcinoma. The patient is currently well, and no 
evidence of recurrence or metastasis was found after ten-month of follow-up.
Myoepithelial carcinoma should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a
biphasic gastric tumor.

PMCID: PMC4394103
PMID: 25892892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Malays J Pathol. 2015 Apr;37(1):53-6.

Sinonasal haemangiopericytoma: histomorphology and differential diagnoses.

Leow WQ(1), Sng I.

Author information: 
(1)Singapore General Hospital, Pathology Department, 20 College Road, Academia,
Level 10, Diagnostics Tower, Singapore 169856. leow.wei.qiang@sgh.com.sg.

A 39-year-old female presented with a fleshy nasal polyp occluding the left nasal
cavity, associated with haemopurulent discharge. Computed Tomography (CT) and
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans of the paranasal cavities revealed a large
polypoid tumour arising from the left middle turbinate and obstructing the left
maxillary sinus ostium. However, no bony or intracranial involvement was
identified. A biopsy revealed a tumour with small blue round cell morphology. The
tumour cells showed diffuse strong membranous CD99 positivity and patchy CD34
positivity. Ancillary cytogenetic tests for the EWSR1 and SS18/SYT gene
translocations were negative. In view of the non-invasive nature of the tumour
and the low cell proliferative index (Ki-67) of 5%, a medial maxillectomy
resection was performed. The resection revealed additional areas with
spindle-cell morphology and focal haemangiopericytic vasculature. The tumour
continued to show immunoreactivity to CD99 and CD34, as well as Smooth Muscle
Actin (SMA) and Muscle Specific Actin (MSA). The overall findings are in keeping 
with a sinonasal haemangiopericytoma. With clear surgical resection margins, the 
patient is on routine follow-up and is currently disease-free.

PMID: 25890615  [PubMed - in process]


77. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 14;10(4):e0124288. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124288.
eCollection 2015.

Fusion of the genes EWSR1 and PBX3 in retroperitoneal leiomyoma with
t(9;22)(q33;q12).

Panagopoulos I(1), Gorunova L(1), Bjerkehagen B(2), Heim S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway. (2)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (3)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute 
for Cancer Genetics and Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Retroperitoneal leiomyoma is a rare benign smooth muscle tumor almost exclusively
found in women and with histopathological features similar to uterine leiomyomas.
The pathogenesis of retroperitoneal leiomyoma is unclear and next to nothing is
known about the cytogenetics and molecular genetics of the tumor. We present here
a retroperitoneal leiomyoma with a t(9;22)(q33;q12) as the sole karyotypic
aberration. The translocation resulted in an EWSR1-PBX3 fusion gene in which exon
9 of EWSR1 (nucleotide 1320 accession number NM_013986 version 3) was in-frame
fused to exon 5 of PBX3 (nucleotide 824 accession number NM_006195 version 5).
The EWSR1-PBX3 fusion transcript codes for a 529 amino acids long chimeric
EWSR1-PBX3 protein which contains the N-terminal transactivation part of EWSR1
and the homeodomain of PBX3. The present study, together with our previous
finding of a retroperitoneal leiomyoma with t(10;17)(q22;q21) as the sole
karyotypic aberration and a KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion gene, indicates that
retroperitoneal leiomyomas may be characterized by fusion genes coding for
chimeric proteins. However, cytogenetic and molecular heterogeneity exists in
these tumors and it is too early to tell how many and which different pathways
lead to retroperitoneal leiomyomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC4397011
PMID: 25875009  [PubMed - in process]


78. Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 May;143(5):659-64. doi: 10.1309/AJCPFHFX07JFCRGU.

Ewing sarcoma with extensive neural differentiation: a clinicopathologic,
immunohistochemical, and molecular analysis of three cases.

Weissferdt A(1), Kalhor N(2), Moran CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston. aweissferdt@mdanderson.org. (2)From the Department of Pathology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 Oct;144(4):677.
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 Oct;144(4):676-7.

OBJECTIVES: Three patients with Ewing sarcomas showing extensive neural
differentiation are presented.
METHODS: The patients were two women and one man between the ages of 15 and 35
years. Anatomically, one tumor was in the lung, one in the testis, and one in the
cervix uteri. The symptoms were determined by the location of the neoplasm and
included respiratory symptoms, testicular pain, and pelvic manifestations,
respectively. Complete surgical resection of the tumors was performed.
RESULTS: Histologically, all neoplasms showed similar characteristics-namely, a
neoplastic cellular proliferation arranged in sheets and composed of small blue
cells with round to oval nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli typical for Ewing
sarcoma. In addition, in two cases, there were areas characterized by the
presence of neuropil, ganglion cells, and small cells most compatible with
ganglioneuroblastoma, while in one tumor, the neural component was characterized 
by the presence of small cells with prominent perivascular pseudorosettes more
closely resembling ependymoma. Immunohistochemical studies in all cases and
molecular analysis in two tumors were in keeping with a diagnosis of Ewing
sarcoma.
CONCLUSIONS: The recognition of such histologic variants is important in the
diagnostic assessment of these tumors to avoid misinterpretation, especially in
small biopsy specimens.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 25873499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Sep;34(5):437-44. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000171.

Ovarian Hemangiomas Do Not Harbor EWSR1 Rearrangements: Clinicopathologic
Characterization of 10 Cases.

Schoolmeester JK(1), Greipp PT, Keeney GL, Soslow RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology (J.K.S., P.T.G., G.L.K.), Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota Department of Pathology (R.A.S.), Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.

Hemangiomas of the ovary are rare with a majority described as individual reports
of unusual clinical presentations or morphologic findings. Both the expected and 
unexpected pathologic features of these tumors in the ovary are not well
detailed. Therefore, we collected the largest series of ovarian hemangiomas to
comprehensively define their clinicopathologic associations and examine the
significance of hormone receptors in their pathogenesis. In addition, a novel
EWSR1-NFATC1 fusion has recently been described in a case of hemangioma of bone. 
To our knowledge, EWSR1 rearrangement has not been evaluated in hemangiomas of
other sites or in a case series. Accordingly, we used fluorescence in situ
hybridization to investigate EWSR1 status in a majority of our cases. Clinical
presentation was variable and dependent on tumor size. Patient age ranged 48 to
87 yr (median 63 yr). Tumors involved the right (n=6) and left (n=3) ovaries with
laterality unknown in 1 case, and size ranged from 0.2 to 5.0 cm (median 1.0 cm).
Three of 4 radiologic reports were either equivocal or could not exclude
malignancy. Seven cases were of the cavernous type and 3 were mixed cavernous and
capillary type. All lesions formed a single discrete, circumscribed mass that
displaced the surrounding cortical stroma. The cavernous type showed dilated,
thin-walled vessels and vascular thrombi, some of which were associated with
dystrophic calcification. In addition to cavernous morphology, the mixed form
exhibited features of capillary hemangioma such as lobulated growth of
capillary-sized vascular spaces that lacked atypia or multilayering and were
linked to a larger feeding vessel. Each tumor expressed CD31, CD34, FLI-1, ERG,
but not D240. The hemangioma stromal cells, but not endothelium, expressed
estrogen and progesterone receptors in every case. Stromal luteinization was seen
in 2 cases. Follow-up ranged 1 to 139 mo and all patients were disease free. All 
cases were negative for EWSR1 rearrangement; however, 2 cases demonstrated
additional intact copies of EWSR1 indicating aneusomy 22 or a structural
abnormality of chromosome 22 resulting in apparent duplication of the EWSR1 gene 
region (at 22q12). Although an uncommon entity, awareness of ovarian hemangioma's
unique and diverse clinical presentation as well as its potential to
radiologically imitate malignant ovarian neoplasms are important.

PMID: 25851709  [PubMed - in process]


80. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Jun;75(6):1317-20. doi:
10.1007/s00280-015-2726-7. Epub 2015 Mar 26.

Targeting the EWS-FLI1 transcription factor in Ewing sarcoma.

Tancredi R(1), Zambelli A, DaPrada GA, Fregoni V, Pavesi L, Riccardi A, Burdach
S, Grohar PJ, D'Incalci M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, I.R.C.C.S. Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, Via Salvatore 
Maugeri, 10, 27100, Pavia, Italy.

PURPOSE: Preclinical data indicate there is strong synergism of action against
Ewing sarcoma in sequential treatment with trabectedin followed by irinotecan and
it appears to be related to a selective blockade of the transcription factor
EWS-FLI1. This combination was evaluated in Ewing sarcoma patient who was
progressing with standard therapies.
METHODS: Trabectedin was given as a 24-h iv infusion on day 1 at the dose of
1 mg/sqm, and irinotecan 75 mg/sqm on day 2 and then on days 2 and 4, every
3 weeks from the seventh course.
RESULTS: The therapy was well tolerated with transient hematological toxicity and
transaminitis and induced stabilization of the disease lasting for 11 courses,
with clinical improvement and marked reduction of the need for opioids. However, 
shortly before the 12th course, sudden death occurred, possibly due to cerebral
stroke, presumably not related to the drug treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The encouraging clinical benefit observed with the combination and
its good tolerability deserves further investigation in Ewing sarcoma.

PMID: 25809543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2015 Oct;42(5):412-5. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2015.02.015. Epub
2015 Mar 21.

Nasopharyngeal hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma with EWSR1 rearrangements
diagnosed by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Fukuda A(1), Tagami Y(2), Takasawa A(2), Sugita S(3), Kuramoto R(4), Imai S(4),
Hasegawa T(3), Iizuka K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Kushiro City General Hospital, 1-12, Syunkodai, 
Kushiro-shi, Hokkaido 085-0822, Japan. Electronic address:
a.fukuda1019@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pathology, Sapporo Medical University
School of Medicine, Minami 1, Nishi 17, Chuou-ku, Sapporo-shi, Hokkaido 060-8556,
Japan. (3)Department of Surgical Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of 
Medicine, Minami 1, Nishi 16, Chuou-ku, Sapporo-shi, Hokkaido 060-8543, Japan.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Kushiro City General Hospital, 1-12, Syunkodai, 
Kushiro-shi, Hokkaido 085-0822, Japan.

Hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma (HCCC) is a rare, low-grade salivary gland
neoplasm with a predilection for the palate and tongue. A 63-year-old woman
presented a 14×14×17-mm mass at the roof of the nasopharynx. Endoscopic resection
was performed via a transnasal approach. Histopathological findings of the
salivary gland tumor indicated hyalinization of the stroma and neoplastic cells
with clear cytoplasm without mucin. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis
revealed that the tumor cells were positive for EWSR1 rearrangement. We finally
diagnosed this case as HCCC of the nasopharynx. EWSR1 rearrangements are
non-existent in other salivary gland tumors with clear cell change; thus, the
identification of this rearrangement was very useful in accurately diagnosing
HCCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25805066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Head Neck Pathol. 2015 Mar;9(1):32-8. doi: 10.1007/s12105-015-0618-0. Epub 2015
Mar 25.

Myoepithelial neoplasms of soft tissue: an updated review of the
clinicopathologic, immunophenotypic, and genetic features.

Jo VY(1), Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

Myoepithelial tumors in skin and soft tissue are uncommon but have been
increasingly characterized over the past decade. Men and women are equally
affected across all age groups and lesions arise most frequently on the
extremities and limb girdles. Approximately 20 % of cases occur in pediatric
patients, in whom they are frequently malignant. Similar to their salivary gland 
counterparts, myoepithelial tumors of soft tissue demonstrate heterogeneous
morphologic and immunophenotypic features. Tumors are classified as mixed
tumor/chondroid syringoma, myoepithelioma, and myoepithelial carcinoma; in soft
tissue, tumors having at least moderate cytologic atypia are classified as
malignant. Mixed tumor and myoepithelioma show a benign clinical course, with
recurrence in up to 20 % (typically secondary to incomplete excision), and do not
metastasize. In contrast, myoepithelial carcinoma shows more aggressive behavior 
with recurrence and metastasis in up to 40-50 % of cases. The majority of
myoepithelial neoplasms typically coexpress epithelial antigens (cytokeratin
and/or EMA) and S-100 protein; GFAP and p63 are frequently positive and a subset 
of malignant neoplasms lose INI1 expression. Up to 45 % of myoepitheliomas and
myoepithelial carcinomas harbor EWSR1 gene rearrangements, unlike mixed
tumor/chondroid syringoma which is characterized by PLAG1 gene rearrangement.
While mixed tumor/chondroid syringoma are likely related to primary salivary
myoepithelial tumors, soft tissue myoepithelioma and myoepithelial carcinoma
appear to be pathologically distinct neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC4382482
PMID: 25804378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Jun;19(3):137-42. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.03.004. 
Epub 2015 Mar 14.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: comparison of fluorescence in situ
hybridization and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction as adjunct
diagnostic modalities.

Thway K(1), Gonzalez D(2), Wren D(2), Dainton M(3), Swansbury J(3), Fisher C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK. Electronic address:
khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk. (2)Molecular Diagnostics, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, 
Surrey, UK. (3)Clinical Cytogenetics, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, Surrey, UK.
(4)Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue neoplasm of
intermediate biologic potential and uncertain differentiation, most often arising
in the extremities of children and young adults. Although it has characteristic
histologic features of a lymphoid cuff surrounding nodules of ovoid cells with
blood-filled cystic cavities, diagnosis is often difficult due to its morphologic
heterogeneity and lack of specific immunoprofile. Angiomatoid fibrous
histiocytoma is associated with recurrent chromosomal translocations, leading to 
characteristic EWSR1-CREB1, EWSR1-ATF1, and, rarely, FUS-ATF1 gene fusions;
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), detecting EWSR1 or FUS rearrangements,
and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for EWSR1-CREB1 and 
EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcripts have become routine ancillary tools. We present a
large comparative series of FISH and RT-PCR for AFH. Seventeen neoplasms (from 16
patients) histologically diagnosed as AFH were assessed for EWSR1 rearrangements 
or EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcripts. All 17 were positive for either
FISH or RT-PCR or both. Of 16, 14 (87.5%) had detectable EWSR1-CREB1 or
EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcripts by RT-PCR, whereas 13 (76.5%) of 17 had positive
EWSR1 rearrangement with FISH. All 13 of 13 non-AFH control neoplasms failed to
show EWSR1-CREB1 or EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcripts, whereas EWSR1 rearrangement
was present in 2 of these 13 cases (which were histopathologically myoepithelial 
neoplasms). This study shows that EWSR1-CREB1 or EWSR1-ATF1 fusions predominate
in AFH (supporting previous reports that FUS rearrangement is rare in AFH) and
that RT-PCR has a comparable detection rate to FISH for AFH. Importantly, cases
of AFH can be missed if RT-PCR is not performed in conjunction with FISH, and
RT-PCR has the added advantage of specificity, which is crucial, as EWSR1
rearrangements are present in a variety of neoplasms in the histologic
differential diagnosis of AFH, that differ in behavior and treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25804255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):973-82. eCollection 2015.

Beware of immunohistochemistry--report of a cytokeratin-, desmin- and
INI-1-negative pelvic desmoplastic small round cell tumor in a 51 year old woman.

Soon GS(1), Petersson F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National University Health System Singapore.

We present a 51 year old female patient with a pelvic desmoplastic small round
cell tumor with an unusual immunohistochemical profile, including absence of
significant cytokeratin expression, complete negativity for desmin and widespread
loss of nuclear INI-1 expression (>90% of tumor cells). The neoplastic cells were
positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), vimentin, and WT-1 (antibody
against the C-terminus). The tumor showed classic histopathological features with
no rhabdoid cells. Fluorescent in situ hybridization revealed EWSR1 gene
rearrangement and absent SYT gene rearrangement. Reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction showed presence of EWSR1-WT1 transcript.

PMCID: PMC4348931
PMID: 25755805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):960-6. eCollection 2015.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors of the maxillary sinus: a case report of
multidisciplinary examination enabling prompt diagnosis.

Tajima S(1), Ohkubo A(2), Yoshida M(2), Koda K(3), Nameki I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Pathology, Fujieda Municipal General Hospital
Shizuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Fujieda Municipal General
Hospital Shizuoka, Japan. (3)Department of Pathology, Fujieda Municipal General
Hospital Shizuoka, Japan.

There have been approximately 10 reports in English literature of cases of
Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) arising in the maxillary sinus. In this
location, some tumors mimic EFT, and are more frequently encountered. Herein, we 
present an additional case of an EFT originating in the maxillary sinus. The
patient was a 15-year-old boy complaining of a non-tender swelling of the left
cheek. Laboratory tests showed no abnormalities. Computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging revealed a mass centered in the maxillary sinus with
degeneration of the surrounding bones. Pathological examination along with flow
cytometry and G-banding enabled the prompt diagnosis of EFT with the EWS/FLI1
fusion gene. The patient is planned to undergo chemotherapy. An origin in the
head and neck and the presence of the typical EWS/FLI1, in conjunction with an
opportunity for immediate treatment, may predict a relatively better prognosis
for EFT in our case.

PMCID: PMC4348822
PMID: 25755803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):772-8. eCollection 2015.

Clinicopathological features of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: a series of 21 
cases with variant morphology.

Shi H(1), Li H(1), Zhen T(1), Zhang F(1), Dong Y(1), Zhang W(1), Han A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University
Guangzhou, China.

We analyzed the clinicopathological features of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma 
(AFH) in 21 cases with emphasis on variant morphology. In our series, ten
patients were male and eleven were female. The patients' mean age was 26.9 years 
old. Tumors were located on the lower limbs in eight cases, upper limbs in three,
trunk in five, head and neck in four, and trachea in one. Microscopically,
thirteen cases were characterized by typical AFH. Tumor cells showed marked tumor
pleomorphism with giant hyperchromatic nuclei in two cases. Mitotic figures
(2-3/10HPF) were found in two cases. Focal necrosis was found in one case. A
number of multinucleated giant cells were found in two cases. Two cases showed
obvious myxoid change in the stromal. Prominent sclerosing changes in the stromal
component were found in two cases. Immunohistochemistry staining showed tumor
cells were positive for EMA, desmin, and CD68. Five cases demonstrated the
presence of rearrangement of the EWSR1 gene by FISH detection. Only two patients 
had tumor recurrence at 3 and 6 months after tumor resection, respectively. In
conclusion, AFH has variant histological patterns. The differential diagnosis
includes inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, aneurysmal fibrous histiocytoma,
follicular dendritic cell tumor, and metastatic tumor of lymph node.

PMCID: PMC4348856
PMID: 25755773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):260-74. eCollection 2015.

Primary intracranial Ewing's sarcoma with unusual features.

VandenHeuvel KA(1), Al-Rohil RN(2), Stevenson ME(1), Qian J(2), Gross NL(3),
McNall-Knapp R(4), Li S(4), Wartchow EP(5), Mierau GW(5), Fung KM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Albany Medical College Albany, NY 12208, USA. (3)Department of Neurosurgery,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital of 
Colorado CO, USA. (6)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA ; Department of Pathology, Oklahoma 
City Veterans Administration Medical Center Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Pediatric primary "small round blue cell" tumors in the CNS represent several
entities, some more common than others. Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (ES/pPNET) is rare and must be distinguished from other
tumors such as medulloblastoma [1, 2], atypical rhabdoid/teratoid tumor,
ependymomal tumors, metastatic sarcomas, hematologic malignancies, and other
mimics. Although therapy for ES/pPNET is effective, it brings severe side
effects, including cardiac toxicity, making correct recognition important [3]. As
small blue cell tumors look similar, diagnosis often depends on special stains,
immunohistochemistry, and molecular techniques. While the combination of
membranous immunohistochemical reactivity for CD99 with cytoplasmic glycogen
provides effective screening, demonstration of characteristic translocations of
EWSR1 (chromosome 22) or FUS (chromosome 16) by fluorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH) can confirm the diagnosis. We are reporting three primary ES/pPNET of the 
CNS, two of which occurred in children. While the adult case demonstrates the
classic histopathology, the two pediatric cases have histopathology that
significantly deviates from the usual. One is suggestive of a primary sarcoma,
and the other mimics an ependymoma, but all three cases are confirmed with FISH. 
These observations suggest that primary ES in the CNS may have histology
different from the classic morphology and a high index of suspicion should be
maintained in order to make the correct diagnosis. A search of the literature
suggests that these tumors are most frequently seen in children and young adults.
Imaging often shows a supratentorial enhancing mass that touches the
leptomeninges. Survival over three years is good but long term prognosis is
unknown [3, 4].

PMCID: PMC4348914
PMID: 25755713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 9;10(3):e0119066. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119066.
eCollection 2015.

The cell cycle regulator CCDC6 is a key target of RNA-binding protein EWS.

Duggimpudi S(1), Larsson E(2), Nabhani S(1), Borkhardt A(1), Hoell JI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Center
for Child and Adolescent Health, Heinrich Heine University, Medical Faculty,
Duesseldorf, Germany. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell biology,
Institute of Biomedicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Sweden.

Genetic translocation of EWSR1 to ETS transcription factor coding region is
considered as primary cause for Ewing sarcoma. Previous studies focused on the
biology of chimeric transcription factors formed due to this translocation.
However, the physiological consequences of heterozygous EWSR1 loss in these
tumors have largely remained elusive. Previously, we have identified various
mRNAs bound to EWS using PAR-CLIP. In this study, we demonstrate CCDC6, a known
cell cycle regulator protein, as a novel target regulated by EWS. siRNA mediated 
down regulation of EWS caused an elevated apoptosis in cells in a CCDC6-dependant
manner. This effect was rescued upon re-expression of CCDC6. This study provides 
evidence for a novel functional link through which wild-type EWS operates in a
target-dependant manner in Ewing sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4353705
PMID: 25751255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Prion. 2015;9(2):90-109. doi: 10.1080/19336896.2015.1020277.

Engineering enhanced protein disaggregases for neurodegenerative disease.

Jackrel ME(1), Shorter J.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics ; Perelman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania ; Philadelphia , PA USA.

Protein misfolding and aggregation underpin several fatal neurodegenerative
diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). There are no treatments that directly
antagonize the protein-misfolding events that cause these disorders. Agents that 
reverse protein misfolding and restore proteins to native form and function could
simultaneously eliminate any deleterious loss-of-function or toxic
gain-of-function caused by misfolded conformers. Moreover, a disruptive
technology of this nature would eliminate self-templating conformers that spread 
pathology and catalyze formation of toxic, soluble oligomers. Here, we highlight 
our efforts to engineer Hsp104, a protein disaggregase from yeast, to more
effectively disaggregate misfolded proteins connected with PD, ALS, and FTD.
Remarkably subtle modifications of Hsp104 primary sequence yielded large gains in
protective activity against deleterious a-synuclein, TDP-43, FUS, and TAF15
misfolding. Unusually, in many cases loss of amino acid identity at select
positions in Hsp104 rather than specific mutation conferred a robust therapeutic 
gain-of-function. Nevertheless, the misfolding and toxicity of EWSR1, an
RNA-binding protein with a prion-like domain linked to ALS and FTD, could not be 
buffered by potentiated Hsp104 variants, indicating that further amelioration of 
disaggregase activity or sharpening of substrate specificity is warranted. We
suggest that neuroprotection is achievable for diverse neurodegenerative
conditions via surprisingly subtle structural modifications of existing
chaperones.

PMCID: PMC4601286
PMID: 25738979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 17;112(11):E1307-16. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1500536112. Epub 2015 Mar 3.

Oncogenic fusion protein EWS-FLI1 is a network hub that regulates alternative
splicing.

Selvanathan SP(1), Graham GT(1), Erkizan HV(1), Dirksen U(2), Natarajan TG(3),
Dakic A(4), Yu S(4), Liu X(4), Paulsen MT(5), Ljungman ME(5), Wu CH(3), Lawlor
ER(6), Üren A(1), Toretsky JA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pediatrics, Georgetown University, Washington, DC
20057; (2)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital
Münster, Westfalian Wilhelms University Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany;
(3)Protein Information Resource, Georgetown University and University of
Delaware, Washington, DC 20057; (4)Department of Pathology, Center for Cell
Reprogramming, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057; and. (5)Department of
Radiation Oncology and Translational Oncology Program and. (6)Departments of
Pediatrics and Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, MI 48109. 
(7)Department of Oncology and Pediatrics, Georgetown University, Washington, DC
20057; jat42@georgetown.edu.

The synthesis and processing of mRNA, from transcription to translation
initiation, often requires splicing of intragenic material. The final mRNA
composition varies based on proteins that modulate splice site selection.
EWS-FLI1 is an Ewing sarcoma (ES) oncoprotein with an interactome that we
demonstrate to have multiple partners in spliceosomal complexes. We evaluate the 
effect of EWS-FLI1 on posttranscriptional gene regulation using both exon array
and RNA-seq. Genes that potentially regulate oncogenesis, including CLK1, CASP3, 
PPFIBP1, and TERT, validate as alternatively spliced by EWS-FLI1. In a CLIP-seq
experiment, we find that EWS-FLI1 RNA-binding motifs most frequently occur
adjacent to intron-exon boundaries. EWS-FLI1 also alters splicing by directly
binding to known splicing factors including DDX5, hnRNP K, and PRPF6. Reduction
of EWS-FLI1 produces an isoform of <U+03B3>-TERT that has increased telomerase activity 
compared with wild-type (WT) TERT. The small molecule YK-4-279 is an inhibitor of
EWS-FLI1 oncogenic function that disrupts specific protein interactions,
including helicases DDX5 and RNA helicase A (RHA) that alters RNA-splicing
ratios. As such, YK-4-279 validates the splicing mechanism of EWS-FLI1, showing
alternatively spliced gene patterns that significantly overlap with EWS-FLI1
reduction and WT human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC). Exon array analysis of 75
ES patient samples shows similar isoform expression patterns to cell line models 
expressing EWS-FLI1, supporting the clinical relevance of our findings. These
experiments establish systemic alternative splicing as an oncogenic process
modulated by EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1 modulation of mRNA splicing may provide insight
into the contribution of splicing toward oncogenesis, and, reciprocally, EWS-FLI1
interactions with splicing proteins may inform the splicing code.

PMCID: PMC4371969
PMID: 25737553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015 Mar;139(3):407-12. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0547-RS.

Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal tract: an evolving entity.

Wang J(1), Thway K.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Histopathology, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom.

Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal tract (CCSLGT) is a rare
malignant neoplasm that occurs in the wall of the small bowel, stomach, or large 
bowel, predominantly in young adults. It is an aggressive neoplasm that
frequently presents with metastatic disease and has a high mortality rate.
Histologically, it is usually composed of medium-sized primitive ovoid or
epithelioid cells with pale or clear cytoplasm that are arranged in sheets or in 
papillary or alveolar architectures. Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the
gastrointestinal tract is positive for S100 protein, invariably negative for
melanocyte-specific markers and is often also positive for neuroendocrine
markers. The etiology of CCSLGT is unknown, but many studies have shown
associations with EWSR1-CREB1 gene fusions and, less frequently, with EWSR1-ATF1 
fusions. Here, we discuss the current status of CCSLGT, including histologic,
immunophenotypic, and molecular findings.

PMID: 25724038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 May;39(5):691-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000412.

Small cell osteosarcoma: clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular
analysis of 36 cases.

Righi A(1), Gambarotti M, Longo S, Benini S, Gamberi G, Cocchi S, Vanel D, Picci 
P, Bertoni F, Simoni A, Franchi A, Dei Tos AP.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Rizzoli Institute †Department of Biomedical and
Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna ‡Department of Pathology, Villa Erbosa
Hospital, Bologna §Section of Pathological Anatomy, Department of Surgery and
Translational Medicine, University of Florence, Florence <U+2225>Department of
Pathology, Treviso Regional Hospital, Treviso, Italy.

Small round cell osteosarcoma is a very rare type of osteosarcoma, histologically
mimicking other small round cell malignancies of bone, most notably Ewing
sarcoma. To distinguish small cell osteosarcoma from other primary small cell
malignancies of bone, we evaluated the immunohistochemical (IHC) expression of
CD99 and SATB2, a marker of osteoblastic differentiation. Second, we analyzed
EWSR1 and FUS gene aberrations using fluorescence in situ hybridization and/or
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) techniques to assess
whether small cell osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma share the same genetic
alteration analysis. Thirty-six cases of primitive small cell osteosarcoma of
bone were included in this study. All the cases of small cell osteosarcoma showed
strong nuclear expression of SATB2 associated with negativity for CD99 antibody
or weak, cytoplasmic staining in few neoplastic cells. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction was negative for EWS-FLI1 type 1-2,
EWS-ERG type 1, and CIC-DUX4 in the 10 available cases of small cell osteosarcoma
analyzed. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis was feasible with a
readable signal in 13 cases of small cell osteosarcoma, and none of these cases
showed any EWSR1 and FUS gene rearrangements. In conclusion, it appears extremely
useful to combine IHC analysis of SATB2 and CD99 with molecular analysis of Ewing
sarcoma-associated genetic aberrations, to differentiate small cell osteosarcoma 
from other small round cell malignancies of bone. The strong IHC expression of
SATB2 associated with CD99 immunonegativity and the absence of EWSR1 and FUS gene
rearrangements in small cell osteosarcoma argues against the existence of a
morphologic/genetic continuum with Ewing sarcoma.

PMID: 25723116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):7151-65.

High neuropeptide Y release associates with Ewing sarcoma bone dissemination - in
vivo model of site-specific metastases.

Hong SH(1), Tilan JU(2,)(3), Galli S(4), Izycka-Swieszewska E(5), Polk T(3),
Horton M(3), Mahajan A(1,)(4), Christian D(3), Jenkins S(4), Acree R(3), Connors 
K(3), Ledo P(4), Lu C(6), Lee YC(1), Rodriguez O(1), Toretsky JA(1), Albanese
C(1,)(7), Kitlinska J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University Medical Center, Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA.
(2)Department of Nursing, School of Nursing and Health Studies, Georgetown
University, Washington DC, USA. (3)Department of Human Science, School of Nursing
and Health Studies, Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA. (4)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA. (5)Department of Pathology and
Neuropathology, Medical University of GdaÅ<U+0084>sk, Poland. (6)McGovern Institute,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA, USA. (7)Department of
Pathology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Georgetown University,
Washington DC, USA.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) develops in bones or soft tissues of children and adolescents.
The presence of bone metastases is one of the most adverse prognostic factors,
yet the mechanisms governing their formation remain unclear. As a transcriptional
target of EWS-FLI1, the fusion protein driving ES transformation, neuropeptide Y 
(NPY) is highly expressed and released from ES tumors. Hypoxia up-regulates NPY
and activates its pro-metastatic functions. To test the impact of NPY on ES
metastatic pattern, ES cell lines, SK-ES1 and TC71, with high and low peptide
release, respectively, were used in an orthotopic xenograft model. ES cells were 
injected into gastrocnemius muscles of SCID/beige mice, the primary tumors
excised, and mice monitored for the presence of metastases. SK-ES1 xenografts
resulted in thoracic extra-osseous metastases (67%) and dissemination to bone
(50%) and brain (25%), while TC71 tumors metastasized to the lungs (70%). Bone
dissemination in SK-ES1 xenografts associated with increased NPY expression in
bone metastases and its accumulation in bone invasion areas. The genetic
silencing of NPY in SK-ES1 cells reduced bone degradation. Our study supports the
role for NPY in ES bone invasion and provides new models for identifying pathways
driving ES metastases to specific niches and testing anti-metastatic
therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4466675
PMID: 25714031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Mar 11;43(5):2780-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv123. Epub 2015
Feb 20.

EWS-FLI1 employs an E2F switch to drive target gene expression.

Schwentner R(1), Papamarkou T(2), Kauer MO(1), Stathopoulos V(2), Yang F(3),
Bilke S(3), Meltzer PS(3), Girolami M(2), Kovar H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna
1090, Austria. (2)Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 
7AL, UK. (3)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. 
Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna 1090, Austria Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical
University, Vienna 1090, Austria heinrich.kovar@ccri.at.

Cell cycle progression is orchestrated by E2F factors. We previously reported
that in ETS-driven cancers of the bone and prostate, activating E2F3 cooperates
with ETS on target promoters. The mechanism of target co-regulation remained
unknown. Using RNAi and time-resolved chromatin-immunoprecipitation in Ewing
sarcoma we report replacement of E2F3/pRB by constitutively expressed repressive 
E2F4/p130 complexes on target genes upon EWS-FLI1 modulation. Using mathematical 
modeling we interrogated four alternative explanatory models for the observed
EWS-FLI1/E2F3 cooperation based on longitudinal E2F target and regulating
transcription factor expression analysis. Bayesian model selection revealed the
formation of a synergistic complex between EWS-FLI1 and E2F3 as the by far most
likely mechanism explaining the observed kinetics of E2F target induction.
Consequently we propose that aberrant cell cycle activation in Ewing sarcoma is
due to the de-repression of E2F targets as a consequence of transcriptional
induction and physical recruitment of E2F3 by EWS-FLI1 replacing E2F4 on their
target promoters.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4357724
PMID: 25712098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2015 May;54(5):267-75. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22240. Epub
2015 Feb 23.

Novel FUS-KLF17 and EWSR1-KLF17 fusions in myoepithelial tumors.

Huang SC(1), Chen HW, Zhang L, Sung YS, Agaram NP, Davis M, Edelman M, Fletcher
CD, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, 
College of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.

Myoepithelial (ME) tumors of soft tissue and bone display a heterogeneous
histologic spectrum and in about half of the cases harbor EWSR1 gene
rearrangements. Despite rare case reports, the prevalence of fused in sarcoma
(FUS) gene abnormalities and its related fusion partners remains undetermined
among ME tumors. Therefore, we screened 66 EWSR1-negative ME tumors for FUS
abnormalities by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). In an index
FUS-rearranged case, 3'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) was applied to
identify the fusion partner. Results were further confirmed by reverse
transcription-PCR, followed by FISH screening the entire cohort of FUS-rearranged
and EWSR1-positive ME lesions lacking a known fusion partner. The correlation
between genotype and clinicopathological features was also investigated. As a
result, six (9%) FUS-rearranged cases were identified, spanning divergent age
groups, tumor locations, and morphologic features. A novel FUS-KLF17 fusion was
identified by 3'-RACE in an 11-year-old girl with a foot lesion associated with
locoregional metastases. Three additional cases with FUS-KLF17 fusions were
identified and one KLF17 rearrangement (6.3%) was found among the 16
EWSR1-positive cases tested. The KLF17-related ME tumors affected younger
patients and often exhibited trabecular growth in a myxohyaline stroma, but this 
genotype did not correlate with a malignant phenotype. In conclusion, a small
subset of ME tumors harbor FUS rearrangements, two thirds of them being
associated with KLF17 fusion. FUS FISH analysis is recommended in EWSR1-negative 
lesions in which a ME diagnosis is suspected. KLF17 is also a rare gene fusion
partner to EWSR1-rearranged ME tumors.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4376655
PMID: 25706482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell Rep. 2015 Feb 24;10(7):1082-95. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.042. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

Epigenome mapping reveals distinct modes of gene regulation and widespread
enhancer reprogramming by the oncogenic fusion protein EWS-FLI1.

Tomazou EM(1), Sheffield NC(2), Schmidl C(2), Schuster M(2), Schönegger A(2),
Datlinger P(2), Kubicek S(2), Bock C(3), Kovar H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, 1090
Vienna, Austria. (2)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian
Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria. (3)CeMM Research Center for Molecular 
Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Max
Planck Institute for Informatics, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
cbock@cemm.oeaw.ac.at. (4)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna
Kinderkrebsforschung, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of Pediatrics, Medical
University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
heinrich.kovar@ccri.at.

Transcription factor fusion proteins can transform cells by inducing global
changes of the transcriptome, often creating a state of oncogene addiction. Here,
we investigate the role of epigenetic mechanisms in this process, focusing on
Ewing sarcoma cells that are dependent on the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. We
established reference epigenome maps comprising DNA methylation, seven histone
marks, open chromatin states, and RNA levels, and we analyzed the epigenome
dynamics upon downregulation of the driving oncogene. Reduced EWS-FLI1 expression
led to widespread epigenetic changes in promoters, enhancers, and
super-enhancers, and we identified histone H3K27 acetylation as the most strongly
affected mark. Clustering of epigenetic promoter signatures defined classes of
EWS-FLI1-regulated genes that responded differently to low-dose treatment with
histone deacetylase inhibitors. Furthermore, we observed strong and opposing
enrichment patterns for E2F and AP-1 among EWS-FLI1-correlated and anticorrelated
genes. Our data describe extensive genome-wide rewiring of epigenetic cell states
driven by an oncogenic fusion protein.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4542316
PMID: 25704812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Diagn Cytopathol. 2015 May;43(5):421-6. doi: 10.1002/dc.23259. Epub 2015 Feb 19.

Soft tissue myoepithelial carcinoma with rhabdoid-like features and EWSR1
rearrangement: Fine needle aspiration cytology with histologic correlation.

Machado I(1), López-Soto MV, Rubio L, Navarro L, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Instituto Valenciano De Oncología, Valencia, Spain.

A new case of soft tissue myoepithelial carcinoma (MEC) with rhabdoid-like
differentiation is presented including cytologic, histopathologic,
immunohistochemical, and molecular biologic features. A 45-year-old woman was
admitted to the Hospital with nodular mass involving the lower part of the
abdominal wall. Fine-needle aspiration cytology showed a round cell tumor with
abundant cytoplasm in the myxoid background. The nuclei were uniform, round to
ovoid, with finely distributed chromatin, nucleoli, and pale, vacuolated, or
eosinophilic cytoplasm with rhabdoid-like appearance resembling a soft tissue
malignant rhabdoid tumor. The surgically removed tumor was poorly demarcated,
yellow, soft, and myxoid. The histopathology revealed sheets of poorly
differentiated round malignant cells with focal myxoid stroma and rhabdoid-like
morphology. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for CK (AE1/AE3), EMA, S100,
vimentin, CD99, and SMA; however desmin, CD34, and gliofibrilar acid protein
(GFAP) were negative. Tumor cells revealed loss of INI1 expression. The EWSR1
gene rearrangement was detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), but
molecular biology failed to detect EWSR1/ETS, EWSR1/NR4A3, EWSR1/DDIT3,
EWSR1/ATF1, EWSR1-POU5F1, EWSR1/ZNF444, EWSR1-PBX1 gene fusions. The final
diagnosis was soft tissue malignant myoepithelioma with rhabdoid changes and
EWSR1 gene rearrangement. The differential diagnosis included soft tissue
malignant rhabdoid tumor, cellular extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, proximal 
epithelioid sarcoma, and other soft tissue tumor with EWSR1 rearrangement. To our
knowledge, this is the first case of MEC with rhabdoid features and description
of fine-needle aspiration cytology.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25693574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:798426. doi: 10.1155/2015/798426. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Structure-function based molecular relationships in Ewing's sarcoma.

Todorova R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics and Biomedical Engineering, Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences, Acad. G. Bonchev Strasse, Building 21, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria.

Ewing's Sarcoma Oncogene (ews) on chromosome 22q12 is encoding a ubiquitously
expressed RNA-binding protein (EWS) with unknown function that is target of
tumor-specific chromosomal translocations in Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors. A 
model of transcription complex was proposed in which the heterodimer Rpb4/7 binds
to EAD, connecting it to Core RNA Pol II. The DNA-binding domain, provided by
EFP, is bound to the promoter. Rpb4/7 binds RNA, stabilizing the transcription
complex. The complex Rpb4/7 can stabilize the preinitiation complexes by
converting the conformation of RNA Pol II. EWS may change its conformation, so
that NTD becomes accessible. Two different mechanisms of interaction between EWS 
and RNA Pol II are proposed: (I) an intermolecular EWS-EWS interaction between
two molecules, pushing conformation from "closed" to "open" state, or (II) an
intramolecular interaction inside the molecule of EWS, pushing conformation of
the molecule from "closed" to "open" state. The modified forms of EWS may
interact with Pol II subunits hsRpb5 and hsRpb7. The EWS and EFPs binding
partners are described schematically in a model, an attempt to link the
transcription with the splicing. The proposed model helps to understand the
functional molecular interactions in cancer, to find new partners and ways to
treat cancer.

PMCID: PMC4320925
PMID: 25688366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Dec 1;7(12):8967-71. eCollection 2014.

Primary malignant neuroectodermal tumor of the ileum with predominantly uncommon 
pseudopapillary architecture.

Zhao Z(1), Zhang D(1), Li W(1), Zhang L(1), Li Z(1), Zhou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou, China.

A malignant gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor (GNET), a distinctive entity
covering the characteristics of clear cell sarcoma (CCS) of gastrointestinal
tract described recently, arising primarily in the ileum of a 33-year-old woman
is reported. Histologically, the neoplasm involved the full thickness of the
intestinal wall. Tumor cells, mainly displayed epithelioid or polygonal
appearance with oval or round nuclei, arranged in strand, nested, and solid
pattern with prominent pseudopapillary architecture instead of the familiar
histological image with multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells. They were
positive for vimentin, S-100, synaptophysin, CD56 and CD99 protein, but negative 
for AE1/AE3, EMA, CEA, LCA, Desmin, CK7, CK20, Villin, CgA, CD117, Dog-1, GFAP,
Melan-A, HMB-45, CD34, CR, WT1, D2-40. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
showed the presence of chromosomal translocation involving EWSR. The patients
lived through a calm period after a tumor resection and 4 cycles of chemotherapy 
combining ifosfamide and epirubicin. This case demonstrates that GNET is a rare
tumor in gastrointestinal tract, and furthermore, various misleading histological
characteristics should been taken into consideration in the diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4313982
PMID: 25674274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cesk Patol. 2015;51(1):42-6.

[Small cell type (Ewing-like) clear cell sarcoma of soft parts: a case report].

[Article in Czech]

Kinkor Z, Meciarová I, Grossman P, Vanecek T, Švec A, Kokavec M.

The authors present a unique case of small cell variant of clear cell sarcoma of 
soft parts in a 42-year old woman. The tumor originally arose in the right flank 
of the soft tissues and ultimately developed both a local recurrence and multiple
distant skin metastases two years and ten months thereafter. Nonspecific
morphology of small blue round cell tumor was preserved at all microscopically
verified sites and initially led to the spectrum of erroneous diagnoses such as
an extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma as well as malignant
melanoma. The distinctive features of clear cell sarcoma such as fascicular
nested growth pattern, spindling, clear cell change and/or eosinophilic cytoplasm
were not disclosed even by extensive sampling. Immunohistochemically, the tumor
expressed only S100protein and HMB45; all other markers (CD99, FLI1,
cytokeratins, EMA) were completely negative. The molecular analysis carried out
in one of the cutaneous metastases revealed translocation t(12;22) (EWSR1-ATF1)
and ultimately led to the correct diagnosis of unusual Ewing-like clear cell
sarcoma. Discussed is the implementation of molecular tests in routine
diagnostics considering the existence of both histologically and biologically
different tumors with an identical pathogenic molecular background.

PMID: 25671361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biomaterials. 2015 Mar;45:93-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.12.007. Epub
2015 Jan 16.

Plasma hydrogenated cationic detonation nanodiamonds efficiently deliver to human
cells in culture functional siRNA targeting the Ewing sarcoma junction oncogene.

Bertrand JR(1), Pioche-Durieu C(2), Ayala J(3), Petit T(4), Girard HA(4), Malvy
CP(3), Le Cam E(2), Treussart F(5), Arnault JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Vectorologie et Thérapeutiques Anticancéreuses, UMR 8203 CNRS, 
Université Paris Sud, Institut Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France.
Electronic address: jean-remi.bertrand@gustaveroussy.fr. (2)Signalisation, Noyaux
et Innovations en Cancérologie, UMR 8126 CNRS, Université Paris Sud, Institut
Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. (3)Laboratoire de Vectorologie et
Thérapeutiques Anticancéreuses, UMR 8203 CNRS, Université Paris Sud, Institut
Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. (4)CEA, LIST, Diamond Sensors
Laboratory, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. (5)Laboratoire Aimé Cotton, CNRS,
Université Paris Sud and ENS Cachan, 91405 Orsay, France. Electronic address:
francois.treussart@ens-cachan.fr. (6)CEA, LIST, Diamond Sensors Laboratory,
F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Electronic address: jean-charles.arnault@cea.fr.

The expression of a defective gene can lead to major cell dysfunctions among
which cell proliferation and tumor formation. One promising therapeutic strategy 
consists in silencing the defective gene using small interfering RNA (siRNA). In 
previous publications we showed that diamond nanocrystals (ND) of primary size
35 nm, rendered cationic by polyethyleneimine-coating, can efficiently deliver
siRNA into cell, which further block the expression of EWS/FLI-1 oncogene in a
Ewing sarcoma disease model. However, a therapeutic application of such
nanodiamonds requires their elimination by the organism, particularly in urine,
which is impossible for 35 nm particles. Here, we report that hydrogenated
cationic nanodiamonds of primary size 7 nm (ND-H) have also a high affinity for
siRNA and are capable of delivering them in cells. With siRNA/ND-H complexes, we 
measured a high inhibition efficacy of EWS/FLI-1 gene expression in Ewing sarcoma
cell line. Electron microscopy investigations showed ND-H in endocytosis
compartments, and especially in macropinosomes from which they can escape before 
siRNA degradation occurred. In addition, the association of EWS/FLI-1 silencing
by the siRNA/ND-H complex with a vincristine treatment yielded a potentiation of 
the toxic effect of this chemotherapeutic drug. Therefore ND-H appears as a
promising delivery agent in anti-tumoral gene therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25662499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Jun;39(6):836-49. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000397.

SMARCB1-deficient Vulvar Neoplasms: A Clinicopathologic, Immunohistochemical, and
Molecular Genetic Study of 14 Cases.

Folpe AL(1), Schoolmeester JK, McCluggage WG, Sullivan LM, Castagna K, Ahrens WA,
Oliva E, Biegel JA, Nielsen GP.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
‡Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia ¶Department of Pediatrics at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
and the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA §Department of Pathology, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte,
NC <U+2225>Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
†Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, Northern
Ireland, UK.

Loss of expression of the SMARCB1 (INI1/BAF47/SNF5) tumor-suppressor protein,
originally identified in pediatric malignant rhabdoid tumors, has been noted in
significant percentages of epithelioid sarcomas of classical and proximal-type
and in myoepithelial carcinomas. Epithelioid sarcoma and myoepithelial carcinoma 
are very rare in the vulvar region, and few of these cases have been evaluated
for SMARCB1 protein loss by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or for SMARCB1 gene
alterations by molecular genetic techniques. We studied the clinicopathologic,
IHC, and molecular genetic features of 14 SMARCB1-deficient vulvar neoplasms. All
available routinely stained sections were reexamined, and IHC analysis for
wide-spectrum cytokeratins, high-molecular weight cytokeratins, epithelial
membrane antigen, S100 protein, CD34, smooth muscle actin, desmin, and SMARCB1
was performed. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and DNA
sequencing of the SMARCB1 gene was performed on 12 cases with sufficient
available tissue. The 14 vulvar tumors occurred in adult women (mean age 46 y,
range 22 to 62 y) and measured 1.1 to 8.8 cm in size (mean 4.7 cm). Tumors were
classified as classical-type epithelioid sarcoma (N=1), proximal-type epithelioid
sarcoma (N=6), myoepithelial carcinoma (N=4), and "SMARCB1-deficient vulvar
sarcoma, not otherwise specified" (N=3) on the basis of combined histopathologic 
and IHC findings. One myoepithelial carcinoma showed divergent rhabdomyoblastic
differentiation. All tested cases showed partial or complete SMARCB1 deletions
(homozygous: 9 cases; heterozygous: 3 cases). One case with a heterozygous
deletion also showed a c.528delC mutation in exon 5. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization for EWSR1 rearrangement was performed for 3 cases classified as
myoepithelial carcinoma and was negative. Follow-up (13 patients, range 5 to 72
mo, mean 31 mo) data showed 3 patients dead of disease, 1 alive with unresectable
metastatic disease, 1 alive with radiographic evidence of extensive lymph nodal
disease, and 8 alive without disease. We conclude that SMARCB1-deficient vulvar
neoplasms chiefly comprise epithelioid sarcoma and myoepithelial carcinoma,
although some defy easy classification. No association was seen between clinical 
behavior and the type of SMARCB1 alteration.

PMID: 25651469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Epigenetics. 2014 Dec;9(12):1613-25. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.988048.

Overexpression of HOX genes is prevalent in Ewing sarcoma and is associated with 
altered epigenetic regulation of developmental transcription programs.

Svoboda LK(1), Harris A, Bailey NJ, Schwentner R, Tomazou E, von Levetzow C,
Magnuson B, Ljungman M, Kovar H, Lawlor ER.

Author information: 
(1)a Translational Oncology Program and the Departments of Pediatric and
Communicable Diseases; University of Michigan ; Ann Arbor , MI USA.

The polycomb proteins BMI-1 and EZH2 are highly overexpressed by Ewing sarcoma
(ES), a tumor of stem cell origin that is driven by EWS-ETS fusion oncogenes,
most commonly EWS-FLI1. In the current study we analyzed expression of
transcription programs that are controlled by polycomb proteins during embryonic 
development to determine if they are abnormal in ES. Our results show that
polycomb target gene expression in ES deviates from normal tissues and stem cells
and that, as expected, most targets are relatively repressed. However, we also
discovered a paradoxical up regulation of numerous polycomb targets and these
were highly enriched for homeobox (HOX) genes. Comparison of HOX profiles between
malignant and non-malignant tissues revealed a distinctive HOX profile in ES,
which was characterized by overexpression of posterior HOXD genes. In addition,
ectopic expression of EWS-FLI1 during stem cell differentiation led to aberrant
up regulation of posterior HOXD genes. Mechanistically, this up regulation was
associated with altered epigenetic regulation. Specifically, ES and EWS-FLI1+
stem cells displayed a relative loss of polycomb-dependent H3K27me3 and gain of
trithorax-dependent H3K4me3 at the promoters of posterior HOXD genes and also at 
the HOXD11.12 polycomb response element. In addition, a striking correlation was 
evident between HOXD13 and other genes whose regulation is coordinately regulated
during embryonic development by distal enhancer elements. Together, these studies
demonstrate that epigenetic regulation of polycomb target genes, in particular
HOXD genes, is altered in ES and that these changes are mediated downstream of
EWS-FLI1.

PMCID: PMC4622732
PMID: 25625846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 24;10(1):e0116627. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116627.
eCollection 2015.

Ewing sarcoma ewsa protein regulates chondrogenesis of Meckel's cartilage through
modulation of Sox9 in zebrafish.

Merkes C(1), Turkalo TK(1), Wilder N(1), Park H(1), Wenger LW(1), Lewin SJ(1),
Azuma M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, 7031 Haworth, 1200 Sunnyside
Avenue, Lawrence, KS 66045, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0123487.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most common skeletal (bone and cartilage) cancer in
adolescents, and it is characterized by the expression of the aberrant chimeric
fusion gene EWS/FLI1. Wild-type EWS has been proposed to play a role in mitosis, 
splicing and transcription. We have previously shown that EWS/FLI1 interacts with
EWS, and it inhibits EWS activity in a dominant manner. Ewing sarcoma is a cancer
that specifically develops in skeletal tissues, and although the above data
suggests the significance of EWS, its role in chondrogenesis/skeletogenesis is
not understood. To elucidate the function of EWS in skeletal development, we
generated and analyzed a maternal zygotic (MZ) ewsa/ewsa line because the ewsa/wt
and ewsa/ewsa zebrafish appeared to be normal and fertile. Compared with wt/wt,
the Meckel's cartilage of MZ ewsa/ewsa mutants had a higher number of
craniofacial prehypertrophic chondrocytes that failed to mature into hypertrophic
chondrocytes at 4 days post-fertilization (dpf). Ewsa interacted with Sox9, which
is the master transcription factor for chondrogenesis. Sox9 target genes were
either upregulated (ctgfa, ctgfb, col2a1a, and col2a1b) or downregulated (sox5,
nog1, nog2, and bmp4) in MZ ewsa/ewsa embryos compared with the wt/wt zebrafish
embryos. Among these Sox9 target genes, the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) 
experiment demonstrated that Ewsa directly binds to ctgfa and ctgfb loci.
Consistently, immunohistochemistry showed that the Ctgf protein is upregulated in
the Meckel's cartilage of MZ ewsa/ewsa mutants. Together, we propose that Ewsa
promotes the differentiation from prehypertrophic chondrocytes to hypertrophic
chondrocytes of Meckel's cartilage through inhibiting Sox9 binding site of the
ctgf gene promoter. Because Ewing sarcoma specifically develops in skeletal
tissue that is originating from chondrocytes, this new role of EWS may provide a 
potential molecular basis of its pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4305327
PMID: 25617839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jan 22;15:16. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1017-3.

Ewing sarcoma of the liver with multilocular cystic mass formation: a case
report.

Ozaki Y(1), Miura Y(2), Koganemaru S(3), Suyama K(4), Inoshita N(5), Fujii T(6), 
Hashimoto M(7), Tamura T(8), Takeuchi K(9), Takano T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan. 1755ozaki@gmail.com. (2)Department of Medical 
Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan.
yujmiura@mac.com. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2
Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan. shigehiro_koganemaru@yahoo.co.jp.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan. kou_susan@yahoo.co.jp. (5)Department of
Pathology, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. inonao3939@gmail.com. (6)Department 
of Pathology, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. tkshfj@gmail.com. (7)Department
of Digestive Surgery, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
masaji.hashimoto@gmail.com. (8)Department of Gastrointestinal Medicine, Toranomon
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. tetsu-t@toranomon.gr.jp. (9)Department of
Gastrointestinal Medicine, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
ktakeuchi@toranomon.gr.jp. (10)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon
Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan.
takano@toranomon.gr.jp.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma is a rare tumor that occurs commonly in the long bones 
of children or adolescents that can also arise in soft tissues including the
extremities, retroperitoneum, chest wall, and rarely in the liver as primary
sites. We report a case of Ewing sarcoma arising primarily in the liver and, to
our knowledge, this is the fourth reported case of Ewing sarcoma occurring in the
liver.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 27-year-old Japanese woman was admitted with sudden onset
right upper abdominal pain. Clinical examination revealed a multilocular cystic
mass consisting of thickened, irregular septa and nodal walls in the right
hepatic lobe. Ultrasound-guided aspiration biopsy of the liver mass showed
clusters of small atypical round cells and the clinical preoperative diagnosis
was mucinous cystadenoma of the liver. The patient underwent an extended right
hepatectomy and histopathological findings revealed sheet-like proliferation of
small- to medium-sized round cells. Tumor cells were positive for periodic
acid-Schiff reaction and immunoreactive for glycoprotein C99 and gene NKX2.2, as 
well as the neuroendocrine markers, CD56 and synaptophysin. EWS-FLI-1 fusion
transcript type 1 was detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction. Pathological and molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis of Ewing
sarcoma arising primarily in the liver and the patient received adjuvant systemic
chemotherapy with vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide, alternating
with ifosfamide and etoposide. We found no evidence of recurrence 15 months after
completing chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: We present an extremely rare case of Ewing sarcoma arising primarily 
in the liver. To our knowledge, this is the fourth reported case of Ewing sarcoma
occurring in the liver, and the first case with a multilocular cystic liver mass.
Imaging examinations of the other three reported cases showed solid tumors and a 
diffuse enlarged liver without mass lesion. Clinicians should consider the
possibility of Ewing sarcoma in young patients with a multilocular cystic mass
with thick and/or irregular cyst walls in the liver.

PMCID: PMC4307901
PMID: 25608963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 16;5:7826. doi: 10.1038/srep07826.

Somatic chromosomal translocation between Ewsr1 and Fli1 loci leads to dilated
cardiomyopathy in a mouse model.

Tanaka M(1), Yamaguchi S(1), Yamazaki Y(1), Kinoshita H(2), Kuwahara K(2), Nakao 
K(2), Jay PY(3), Noda T(4), Nakamura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (2)Department of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 54
Kawaracho Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (3)Departments of Pediatrics 
and Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S Euclid Avenue, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, U.S.A. (4)Division of Cell Biology, The Cancer Institute,
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, 
Japan.

A mouse model that recapitulates the human Ewing's sarcoma-specific chromosomal
translocation was generated utilizing the Cre/loxP-mediated recombination
technique. A cross between Ewsr1-loxP and Fli1-loxP mice and expression of
ubiquitous Cre recombinase induced a specific translocation between Ewsr1 and
Fli1 loci in systemic organs of both adult mice and embryos. As a result
Ewsr1-Fli1 fusion transcripts were expressed, suggesting a functional Ews-Fli1
protein might be synthesized in vivo. However, by two years of age, none of the
Ewsr1-loxP/Fli1-loxP/CAG-Cre (EFCC) mice developed any malignancies, including
Ewing-like small round cell sarcoma. Unexpectedly, all the EFCC mice suffered
from dilated cardiomyopathy and died of chronic cardiac failure. Genetic
recombination between Ewsr1 and Fli1 was confirmed in the myocardial tissue and
apoptotic cell death of cardiac myocytes was observed at significantly higher
frequency in EFCC mice. Moreover, expression of Ews-Fli1 in the cultured cardiac 
myocytes induced apoptosis. Collectively, these results indicated that ectopic
expression of the Ews-Fli1 oncogene stimulated apoptotic signals, and suggested
an important relationship between oncogenic signals and cellular context in the
cell-of-origin of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 25591392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Mar;39(3):338-48. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000364.

Clear cell myoepithelial carcinoma of salivary glands showing EWSR1
rearrangement: molecular analysis of 94 salivary gland carcinomas with prominent 
clear cell component.

Skálová A(1), Weinreb I, Hyrcza M, Simpson RH, Laco J, Agaimy A, Vazmitel M,
Majewska H, Vanecek T, Talarcik P, Manajlovic S, Losito SN, Šteiner P, Klimkova
A, Michal M.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine in Plzen, Charles University
††Bioptic Laboratory Ltd, Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Plzen <U+2225>The Fingerland
Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Charles
University in Prague, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic †Department of Pathology,
University Health Network, Toronto, ON ‡Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC §Department of Anatomical
Pathology, University of Calgary, Foothills Medical Centre, Calgary, AB, Canada
¶Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, Erlangen, Germany #Department of
Pathology, N.N. Alexandrov's Research Center of Oncology and Medical Radiology,
Minsk, Republic of Belarus **Department of Pathology, Medical University of
Gdansk, Poland ‡‡Department of Pathology, Cytopathos, Slovakia §§Department of
Pathology, University of Zagreb, Croatia <U+2225><U+2225>Department of Pathology, National
Cancer Institute, Fondazione "G.Pascale", Naples, Italy.

This study examines the presence of the EWSR1 rearrangement in a variety of clear
cell salivary gland carcinomas with myoepithelial differentiation. A total of 94 
salivary gland carcinomas with a prominent clear cell component included 51 cases
of clear cell myoepithelial carcinomas de novo (CCMC), 21 cases of CCMCs ex
pleomorphic adenoma (CCMCexPA), 11 cases of epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma
(EMC), 6 cases of EMC with solid clear cell overgrowth, and 5 cases of
hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma of minor salivary glands. In addition, 10 cases 
of myoepithelial carcinomas devoid of clear cell change and 12 cases of benign
myoepithelioma were included as well. All the tumors in this spectrum were
reviewed, reclassified, and tested by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
for the EWSR1 rearrangement using the Probe Vysis EWSR1 Break Apart FISH Probe
Kit. The EWSR1 rearrangement was detected in 20 of 51 (39%) cases of CCMC, in 5
of 21 (24%) cases of CCMCexPA, in 1 of 11 (9%) cases of EMC, and in 4 of 5 (80%) 
cases of hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma. The 25 EWSR1-rearranged CCMCs and
CCMCexPAs shared similar histomorphology. They were arranged in nodules composed 
of compact nests of large polyhedral cells with abundant clear cytoplasm.
Necrosis, areas of squamous metaplasia, and hyalinization were frequent features.
Immunohistochemically, the tumors expressed p63 (96%), cytokeratin CK14 (96%),
and S100 protein (88%). MIB1 index varied from 10% to 100%, with most cases in
the 20% to 40% range. Clinical follow-up information was available in 21 cases
(84%) and ranged from 3 months to 15 years (mean 5.2 y); 4 patients were lost to 
follow-up. Ten patients are alive with no evidence of recurrent or metastatic
disease in the follow-up period from 3 months to 15 years (mean 5 y), 3 patients 
are alive with recurrent and metastatic disease, and 8 died of disseminated
cancer 9 months to 16 years after diagnosis (mean 6 y). Lymph node metastasis
appeared in 5 patients within 5 months to 4 years after diagnosis (mean 22 mo),
distant metastases were noted in 7 patients with invasion of orbit (2 cases), and
in 1 case each metastasis to the neck soft tissues, liver, lungs, mediastinum,
and thoracic vertebra was noted. We describe for the first time EWSR1 gene
rearrangement in a subset of myoepithelial carcinomas arising in minor and major 
salivary glands. The EWSR1-rearranged CCMC represents a distinctive aggressive
variant composed predominantly of clear cells with frequent necrosis. Most
EWSR1-rearranged CCMCs of salivary glands are characterized by poor clinical
outcomes.

PMID: 25581728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Rare Tumors. 2014 Dec 18;6(4):5586. doi: 10.4081/rt.2014.5586. eCollection 2014.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma presenting as an intradural spinal mass:
report of a rare clinical presentation with an emphasis on differential
diagnostic considerations.

Rao P(1), Colen RR(2), Bruner JM(1), Meis JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Houston, TX, USA. (2)Departments of Radiology,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , Houston, TX, USA.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma is a rare soft tissue neoplasm that occurs
predominantly in the soft tissues of the lower extremities. Herein we present a
case of a 29 year old male who presented with bilateral femoral numbness believed
to be the result of prior injury to his back. A magnetic resonance imaging
revealed a mass in the T4-T5 epidural space compressing the spinal cord.
Laminectomy was performed and the lesion removed piecemeal. The pathology
specimen consisted of multiple fragments of dura involved by a myxoid neoplasm
with a nodular growth pattern. The tumor cells were arranged in anastomosing
cords and strands. Individual tumor cells were small, of uniform size and shape, 
with small hyperchromatic nuclei and scant eosinophilic cytoplasm.
Immunohistochemical stains were performed which showed the tumor cells were
diffusely positive for vimentin and focally positive for EMA, S-100 protein and
cytokeratin, whereas they were negative for CD34 and CD99. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) studies showed a clonal population of cells with
re-arrangement of the EWSR1 locus, confirming the histologic impression of
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. This is the first report of a case of an
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma arising from the dura, confirmed to have
rearrangement of the EWSR1 gene by FISH. There have only been two other cases of 
dural based extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma reported prior to our case. We
also briefly review the published literature and discuss differential diagnostic 
considerations for this rare tumor.

PMCID: PMC4274445
PMID: 25568751  [PubMed]


109. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(2):1069-80. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1328. Epub 2015
Jan 6.

RNA helicase A activity is inhibited by oncogenic transcription factor EWS-FLI1.

Erkizan HV(1), Schneider JA(2), Sajwan K(2), Graham GT(2), Griffin B(3),
Chasovskikh S(4), Youbi SE(2), Kallarakal A(2), Chruszcz M(5), Padmanabhan R(3), 
Casey JL(3), Üren A(2), Toretsky JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, New Research Building E316, Washington, DC
20007, USA hve2@georgetown.edu. (2)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Georgetown University, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, New Research
Building E316, Washington, DC 20007, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Georgetown University Medical Center, SW 309 Med-Dent, Washington, DC
20007, USA. (4)Department of Radiation Medicine, Georgetown University Medical
Center, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, New Research Building E220, Washington, DC 20007,
USA. (5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of South Carolina,
631 Sumter Street, Columbia, SC 29208, USA.

RNA helicases impact RNA structure and metabolism from transcription through
translation, in part through protein interactions with transcription factors.
However, there is limited knowledge on the role of transcription factor influence
upon helicase activity. RNA helicase A (RHA) is a DExH-box RNA helicase that
plays multiple roles in cellular biology, some functions requiring its activity
as a helicase while others as a protein scaffold. The oncogenic transcription
factor EWS-FLI1 requires RHA to enable Ewing sarcoma (ES) oncogenesis and growth;
a small molecule, YK-4-279 disrupts this complex in cells. Our current study
investigates the effect of EWS-FLI1 upon RHA helicase activity. We found that
EWS-FLI1 reduces RHA helicase activity in a dose-dependent manner without
affecting intrinsic ATPase activity; however, the RHA kinetics indicated a
complex model. Using separated enantiomers, only (S)-YK-4-279 reverses the
EWS-FLI1 inhibition of RHA helicase activity. We report a novel RNA binding
property of EWS-FLI1 leading us to discover that YK-4-279 inhibition of RHA
binding to EWS-FLI1 altered the RNA binding profile of both proteins. We conclude
that EWS-FLI1 modulates RHA helicase activity causing changes in overall
transcriptome processing. These findings could lead to both enhanced
understanding of oncogenesis and provide targets for therapy.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4333382
PMID: 25564528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Hum Pathol. 2015 Mar;46(3):471-5. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.11.010. Epub 2014
Nov 26.

Primary pulmonary hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma of bronchial submucosal gland 
origin.

García JJ(1), Jin L(1), Jackson SB(2), Larsen BT(1), Lewis JE(1), Sukov WR(1),
Roden AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
55905, USA. (2)Cox Health Systems, Springfield, MO, 65807, USA. (3)Department of 
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
Electronic address: roden.anja@mayo.edu.

Hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma (HCCC) has only been described in salivary
glands of the head and neck. We report a 38-year-old man with a 2.6-cm lung tumor
that was growing in a peribronchial location and had morphologic features of
HCCC. The tumor cells expressed cytokeratin 7 and keratin AE1/AE3, and the vast
majority of tumor cells marked also with p63 and p40. They were negative for
cytokeratin 20, S-100, smooth muscle actin, napsin A, and thyroid transcription
factor-1. Fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed Ewing Sarcoma Breakpoint
Region 1 (EWSR1) rearrangement, and reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction confirmed the presence of the EWSR1-Activating Transcription Factor 1
(ATF1) fusion transcript, which was subsequently sequenced. The morphologic,
immunophenotypic, cytogenetic, and molecular findings together with the patient's
history and location of the tumor support a diagnosis of primary pulmonary HCCC
of bronchial submucosal gland origin. It is our understanding that this is the
first report of HCCC arising as a primary tumor outside the head and neck region.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25543160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cancer Cell. 2014 Nov 10;26(5):595-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.016. Epub 2014
Nov 10.

ChIP-ping away at EWS/ETS transcription networks.

Denny CT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Gwynne Hazen Cherry
Memorial Laboratories, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Electronic address:
cdenny@ucla.edu.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Nov 10;26(5):668-81.

In this issue of Cancer Cell, Riggi and colleagues use a genomic approach to
define two distinct molecular mechanisms through which the chimeric EWS/FLI1
oncoprotein regulates target genes in Ewing sarcoma, expanding a framework upon
which to model the target gene network and test strategies for antagonizing
growth of this tumor.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25517742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Anticancer Res. 2014 Dec;34(12):7119-27.

Numerical and structural chromosomal anomalies in undifferentiated pleomorphic
sarcoma.

Becerikli M(1), Wieczorek S(2), Stricker I(3), Nambiar S(3), Rittig A(4), Epplen 
JT(2), Tannapfel A(3), Lehnhardt M(4), Steinstraesser L(4), Jacobsen F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, BG University Hospital Bergmannsheil,
Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany mustafa.becerikli@rub.de. (2)Department
of Human Genetics, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany. (3)Institute of
Pathology, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany. (4)Department of Plastic
Surgery, BG University Hospital Bergmannsheil, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) or undifferentiated pleomorphic 
sarcoma (UPS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma of late adult life. Further 
advances in genetic characterization are warranted. The aim of this study was to 
search for numerical and structural chromosomal anomalies in UPS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated five sarcoma-specific chromosomal
translocations, five oncogene amplifications as well as the numerical karyotype
of 19 UPS samples and one UPS/MFH cell line (U2197) using FISH probes on
interphase nuclei.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrate that chromosomal translocations involving CHOP, 
SYT, EWS, FUS and FKHR genes are absent. Furthermore, amplification of ERBB2
(10.5%) and MDM2 (10.5%) was observed whereas the EGFR, C-MYC and N-MYC genes
were not amplified. Interestingly, predominant aneuploidies were found in eight
chromosomes.
CONCLUSION: The data demonstrate rarity of sarcoma-specific chromosomal breaks
and oncogene amplifications in UPS, yet polysomic chromosomes appear more
characteristically in this condition.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25503139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Dec 11;5:e1572. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.508.

A loss of FUS/TLS function leads to impaired cellular proliferation.

Ward CL(1), Boggio KJ(1), Johnson BN(2), Boyd JB(2), Douthwright S(3), Shaffer
SA(4), Landers JE(1), Glicksman MA(2), Bosco DA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Albert
Sherman Center, Worcester, MA, USA. (2)Laboratory for Drug Discovery in
Neurodegeneration, Harvard NeuroDiscovery Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA,
USA. (4)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA [2] Proteomics and Mass
Spectrometry Facility, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Shrewsbury,
MA, USA. (5)1] Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Albert Sherman Center, Worcester, MA, USA [2] Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA.

Fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS or FUS) is a
multifunctional RNA/DNA-binding protein that is pathologically associated with
cancer and neurodegeneration. To gain insight into the vital functions of FUS and
how a loss of FUS function impacts cellular homeostasis, FUS expression was
reduced in different cellular models through RNA interference. Our results show
that a loss of FUS expression severely impairs cellular proliferation and leads
to an increase in phosphorylated histone H3, a marker of mitotic arrest. A
quantitative proteomics analysis performed on cells undergoing various degrees of
FUS knockdown revealed protein expression changes for known RNA targets of FUS,
consistent with a loss of FUS function with respect to RNA processing. Proteins
that changed in expression as a function of FUS knockdown were associated with
multiple processes, some of which influence cell proliferation including cell
cycle regulation, cytoskeletal organization, oxidative stress and energy
homeostasis. FUS knockdown also correlated with increased expression of the
closely related protein EWS (Ewing's sarcoma). We demonstrate that the
maladaptive phenotype resulting from FUS knockdown is reversible and can be
rescued by re-expression of FUS or partially rescued by the small-molecule
rolipram. These results provide insight into the pathways and processes that are 
regulated by FUS, as well as the cellular consequences for a loss of FUS
function.

PMCID: PMC4649830
PMID: 25501833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Annu Rev Biochem. 2015;84:355-79. doi: 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-034325.
Epub 2014 Dec 8.

Biochemical Properties and Biological Functions of FET Proteins.

Schwartz JC(1), Cech TR, Parker RR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and
BioFrontiers Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309; email:
jcschwartz@email.arizona.edu , thomas.cech@colorado.edu ,
roy.parker@colorado.edu.

Members of the FET protein family, consisting of FUS, EWSR1, and TAF15, bind to
RNA and contribute to the control of transcription, RNA processing, and the
cytoplasmic fates of messenger RNAs in metazoa. FET proteins can also bind DNA,
which may be important in transcription and DNA damage responses. FET proteins
are of medical interest because chromosomal rearrangements of their genes promote
various sarcomas and because point mutations in FUS or TAF15 can cause
neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and
frontotemporal lobar dementia. Recent results suggest that both the normal and
pathological effects of FET proteins are modulated by low-complexity or
prion-like domains, which can form higher-order assemblies with novel interaction
properties. Herein, we review FET proteins with an emphasis on how the
biochemical properties of FET proteins may relate to their biological functions
and to pathogenesis.

PMID: 25494299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Pathol Int. 2015 Jan;65(1):48-50. doi: 10.1111/pin.12223. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

A case of pure sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma with a cytogenetic and
fluorescence in situ hybridization study.

Suzuki H(1), Takeda H, Yamashiro K, Soma T, Osanai T, Hiraga H, Isu K, Tamakawa
M, Nojima T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diagnostic Pathology, National Hospital Organization Hokkaido
Cancer Center, Sapporo, Japan.

PMID: 25487991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(15):2391-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.29337.

Ewing sarcoma EWS protein regulates midzone formation by recruiting Aurora B
kinase to the midzone.

Park H(1), Turkalo TK, Nelson K, Folmsbee SS, Robb C, Roper B, Azuma M.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Biosciences; University of Kansas; Lawrence, KS USA.

Ewing sarcoma is a malignant bone cancer that primarily occurs in children and
adolescents. Eighty-five percent of Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the
presence of the aberrant chimeric EWS/FLI1 fusion gene. Previously, we
demonstrated that an interaction between EWS/FLI1 and wild-type EWS led to the
inhibition of EWS activity and mitotic dysfunction. Although defective mitosis is
considered to be a critical step in cancer initiation, it is unknown how
interference with EWS contributes to Ewing sarcoma formation. Here, we
demonstrate that EWS/FLI1- and EWS-knockdown cells display a high incidence of
defects in the midzone, a midline structure located between segregating
chromatids during anaphase. Defects in the midzone can lead to the failure of
cytokinesis and can result in the induction of aneuploidy. The similarity among
the phenotypes of EWS/FLI1- and EWS siRNA-transfected HeLa cells points to the
inhibition of EWS as the key mechanism for the induction of midzone defects.
Supporting this observation, the ectopic expression of EWS rescues the high
incidence of midzone defects observed in Ewing sarcoma A673 cells. We discovered 
that EWS interacts with Aurora B kinase, and that EWS is also required for
recruiting Aurora B to the midzone. A domain analysis revealed that the R565 in
the RGG3 domain of EWS is essential for both Aurora B interaction and the
recruitment of Aurora B to the midzone. Here, we propose that the impairment of
EWS-dependent midzone formation via the recruitment of Aurora B is a potential
mechanism of Ewing sarcoma development.

PMCID: PMC4128884
PMID: 25483190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. World J Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec 5;12:374. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-12-374.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) of the lung in an adult woman.

Gachechiladze M(1), Skarda J, Ibrahim M, Tichý T, Flodr P, Latálová P, Ehrmann J,
Trojanec R, Kolár Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Pathology and Institute of Molecular and 
Translational Medicine (IMTM), Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky
University, Hnevotínská 3, 775 15 Olomouc, Czech Republic. marjammg@gmail.com.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) are extremely rare in the lung
and especially in adult women. We describe a case of PNET of the lung with
aggressive behavior in 31-year-old woman. Diagnosis was based on
histopathological and immunohistochemical studies, and confirmed by molecular
genetic analysis of chromosome rearrangements in the EWSR1 gene region. Clinical 
follow-up, post-mortem findings, and differential diagnosis are also discussed.

PMCID: PMC4289161
PMID: 25475214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hum Pathol. 2015 Jan;46(1):153-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.09.015. Epub 2014
Oct 18.

Low-grade small round cell tumor of the cauda equina with EWSR1-WT1 fusion and
indolent clinical course.

Ud Din N(1), Pekmezci M(2), Javed G(3), Horvai AE(2), Ahmad Z(4), Faheem M(3),
Navarro AL(5), López-Terrada D(5), Perry A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Section of Histopathology, Aga Khan 
University Hospital, Karachi Pakistan. Electronic address: nasir.uddin@aku.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco (UCSF), San
Francisco, CA, 94143. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Aga Khan University
Hospital, Karachi Pakistan. (4)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Section 
of Histopathology, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi Pakistan. (5)Departments
of Pathology and Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital and Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030. (6)Department of Pathology, University of
California San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, CA, 94143; Department of
Neurological Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 
94143.

We report a case of a longstanding, large tumor involving spinal nerve roots of
the cauda equina. The tumor showed small round cells arranged in nests and cords 
and immunophenotypic features of a glomus tumor, along with infrequent mitoses
and a low Ki-67 labeling index, but exhibited some rosette-like structures, with 
focal CD99 and Neu-N expression. Subsequent molecular analysis showed the
presence of an EWSR1-WT1 gene fusion by fluorescence in situ hybridization, which
was confirmed by reverse- transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. To our
knowledge, this is the first case reported with EWSR1-WT1 fusion in a small round
blue cell tumor with smooth muscle differentiation and an indolent course.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25454478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cancer Cell. 2014 Nov 10;26(5):668-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.004. Epub
2014 Oct 30.

EWS-FLI1 utilizes divergent chromatin remodeling mechanisms to directly activate 
or repress enhancer elements in Ewing sarcoma.

Riggi N(1), Knoechel B(2), Gillespie SM(3), Rheinbay E(1), Boulay G(1), Suvà
ML(1), Rossetti NE(4), Boonseng WE(4), Oksuz O(4), Cook EB(4), Formey A(5), Patel
A(6), Gymrek M(7), Thapar V(8), Deshpande V(9), Ting DT(8), Hornicek FJ(10),
Nielsen GP(9), Stamenkovic I(5), Aryee MJ(1), Bernstein BE(11), Rivera MN(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Center 
for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA; Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and
Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (5)Institute of
Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Faculty of Biology and
Medicine, University of Lausanne, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland. (6)Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Department of Neurosurgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(7)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (8)Cancer Center,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA. (9)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (10)Center for Sarcoma and Connective
Tissue Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. (11)Department of Pathology and Center for Cancer
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Electronic address: 
bernstein.bradley@mgh.harvard.edu. (12)Department of Pathology and Center for
Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA. Electronic address: mnrivera@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Nov 10;26(5):595-6.

The aberrant transcription factor EWS-FLI1 drives Ewing sarcoma, but its
molecular function is not completely understood. We find that EWS-FLI1 reprograms
gene regulatory circuits in Ewing sarcoma by directly inducing or repressing
enhancers. At GGAA repeat elements, which lack evolutionary conservation and
regulatory potential in other cell types, EWS-FLI1 multimers induce chromatin
opening and create de novo enhancers that physically interact with target
promoters. Conversely, EWS-FLI1 inactivates conserved enhancers containing
canonical ETS motifs by displacing wild-type ETS transcription factors. These
divergent chromatin-remodeling patterns repress tumor suppressors and mesenchymal
lineage regulators while activating oncogenes and potential therapeutic targets, 
such as the kinase VRK1. Our findings demonstrate how EWS-FLI1 establishes an
oncogenic regulatory program governing both tumor survival and differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4492343
PMID: 25453903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Pathol Res Pract. 2014 Dec;210(12):804-11. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2014.09.009. Epub
2014 Oct 6.

Fluorescence in situ analysis of soft tissue tumor associated genetic alterations
in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue.

Horn H(1), Allmanritter J(2), Doglioni C(3), Marx A(4), Müller J(5), Gattenlöhner
S(6), Staiger AM(7), Rosenwald A(5), Ott G(7), Ott MM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, and Dr. Margarete 
Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany. Electronic 
address: heike.horn@ikp-stuttgart.de. (2)Institute of Pathology, University of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany; Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, L'Ospedale San Raffaele, 
Milano, Italy. (4)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Mannheim,
Mannheim, Germany. (5)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany. (6)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Gießen and Marburg,
Gießen, Germany. (7)Department of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus,
and Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany. (8)Institute of Pathology, Caritas-Hospital, Bad Mergentheim, Germany.

No prospective studies are available to date evaluating the combined analysis of 
chromosomal alterations via interphase FISH in different soft tissue sarcoma
(STS) subtypes. We tested 64 consecutive sarcoma specimens with FISH probes to
detect aberrations specific for a given STS subtype. We first determined the
translocation frequency in the specific STS subtypes in 48 tumors, with the
primary pathological diagnosis as the gold standard. Subsequently, to evaluate
sensitivity and specificity, all FISH probes were hybridized to 16 STS of
hitherto unknown diagnosis. DDIT3 translocations occurred in 8/10 (80%) of myxoid
liposarcomas. FOXO1 translocations were noted in 4/4 (100%) of alveolar but in
none of 7 embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas. All 15 (100%) Ewing sarcomas/PNET and 4
clear cell sarcomas (4/4) harbored EWSR1 translocations. SS18 rearrangements were
demonstrated in 8/9 (89%) synovial sarcomas. MDM2 amplification was noted in 7/8 
(88%) atypical lipomatous tumors/well-differentiated and 3/3 (100%)
dedifferentiated liposarcomas, respectively, but not in four pleomorphic
liposarcomas. Sensitivities and specificities ranged from 80% to 100% and from
93% to 100%, respectively, with the highest values observed for FOXO1 (100%
each). We conclude, therefore, that is possible to accurately predict the STS
subtype using a panel of different subtype-specific FISH probes, thereby greatly 
facilitating the differential diagnosis of these tumors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Sep;38(9):1220-6. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000231.

Diagnostic pitfalls of differentiating desmoplastic small round cell tumor
(DSRCT) from Wilms tumor (WT): overlapping morphologic and immunohistochemical
features.

Arnold MA(1), Schoenfield L, Limketkai BN, Arnold CA.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center
†Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, OH ‡Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) and blastemal-predominant Wilms tumor
(WT) share overlapping histologic features, yet accurate distinction is critical 
because of differing prognosis and treatment. We encountered a neck mass in a
young adult with a concomitant abdominal mass. The neck mass was initially
concerning for DSRCT on the basis of the poorly differentiated morphology,
desmoplastic stroma, and immunoreactivity for desmin and cytokeratin. However,
focal triphasic elements and glomeruloid bodies were identified on deeper
sections, WT1 immunoreactivity was seen with antibodies to both the
amino-terminus and carboxy-terminus, and EWSR1-WT1 rearrangement studies were
negative, supporting the ultimate diagnosis of WT. On the basis of the
overlapping histologic features of DSRCT and blastemal-predominant WT, we
undertook a comparison study of desmin and cytokeratin reactivity patterns. We
found that, whereas desmin reactivity was more frequent in DSRCT (11 of 12) than 
in WT blastema (11 of 22, P=0.024), dot-like perinuclear reactivity was seen with
equal frequency in desmin-reactive DSRCT (10 of 11) and WT blastema (10 of 11),
illustrating an important diagnostic pitfall. Moreover, we demonstrate
coexpression of desmin and cytokeratin in both DSRCT (9 of 12) and WT blastema
(11 of 22). Importantly, although dot-like desmin reactivity and coexpression of 
desmin and cytokeratin are historically associated with DSRCT, we demonstrate
that these features can be seen in either DSRCT or blastemal-predominant WT. In
these challenging cases, detection of an EWSR1-WT1 rearrangement and selective
WT1 carboxy-terminus immunoreactivity (characteristic of DSRCT) or dual
immunoreactivity for the WT1 amino-terminus and carboxy-terminus (characteristic 
of WT) remain the most discriminating diagnostic tools.

PMID: 24832162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015 Jul-Aug;31(4):e89-91. doi:
10.1097/IOP.0000000000000111.

Exenteration and Custom Implant Brachytherapy as a Treatment for Recurrent
Primary Extraskeletal Orbital Ewing Sarcoma.

Klufas MA(1), Wolden SL, Bohle GC 3rd, Wexler LH, Abramson DH.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Ophthalmology, Weill Cornell Medical College; †Department of
Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York;
‡Implant and Prosthodontic Associates, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and §Department
of Pediatrics, and <U+2016>Ophthalmic Oncology Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York, U.S.A.

A 6-year-old boy initially presented to an outside hospital with a right orbital 
mass with biopsy positive for translocation involving EWS RNA-binding protein 1
gene and imaging consistent with primary extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma (ES). There 
was no evidence of metastatic disease. Patient underwent gross tumor resection
and adjuvant chemotherapy (VAdriaC/IE) followed by postoperative 45-Gy proton
beam radiation. After 19 months, a solitary in-field local recurrence occurred,
which was unsuccessfully surgically resected. Thereafter, treatment commenced
with irinotecan and temozolomide, and the patient presented to the center of the 
authors. MRI showed locally recurrent disease without evidence of metastatic
disease. Right orbital exenteration was performed, and an orbital mold was
fashioned to deliver brachytherapy. There were no complications. The patient had 
no evidence of recurrent disease at 37-month follow up. This is the first report 
of orbital implant brachytherapy for recurrent primary ES of the orbit, and an
additional report of primary extraskeletal ES of the orbit, which is a rare
primary orbital tumor.

PMID: 24814278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cell Rep. 2014 May 22;7(4):1211-26. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.077. Epub 2014 
May 10.

Regulation of FAS exon definition and apoptosis by the Ewing sarcoma protein.

Paronetto MP(1), Bernardis I(2), Volpe E(3), Bechara E(4), Sebestyén E(2), Eyras 
E(5), Valcárcel J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
Spain; University of Rome "Foro Italico," Piazza Lauro de Bosis 6, 00135 Rome,
Italy; Laboratories of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology and of
Neuroimmunology, Fondazione Santa Lucia, 00143 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
mariapaola.paronetto@uniroma4.it. (2)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, carrer Doctor
Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (3)Laboratories of Cellular and Molecular
Neurobiology and of Neuroimmunology, Fondazione Santa Lucia, 00143 Rome, Italy.
(4)Centre for Genomic Regulation, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
Spain; Universitat Pompeu Fabra, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
Spain. (5)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
Spain; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Pg Lluis Companys 23,
08010 Barcelona, Spain. (6)Centre for Genomic Regulation, carrer Doctor Aiguader 
88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain; Universitat Pompeu Fabra, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 
08003 Barcelona, Spain; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Pg
Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
juan.valcarcel@crg.eu.

The Ewing sarcoma protein EWS is an RNA and DNA binding protein implicated in
transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, and DNA damage response. Using CLIP-seq, we
identified EWS RNA binding sites in exonic regions near 5' splice sites. A
prominent target was exon 6 of the FAS/CD95 receptor, which is alternatively
spliced to generate isoforms with opposing activities in programmed cell death.
Depletion and overexpression experiments showed that EWS promotes exon 6
inclusion and consequently the synthesis of the proapoptotic FAS/CD95 isoform,
whereas an EWS-FLI1 fusion protein characteristic of Ewing sarcomas shows
decreased activity. Biochemical analyses revealed that EWS binding promotes the
recruitment of U1snRNP and U2AF65 to the splice sites flanking exon 6 and
therefore exon definition. Consistent with a role for EWS in the regulation of
programmed cell death, cells depleted of EWS show decreased sensitivity to
FAS-induced apoptosis, and elevated EWS expression enhances apoptosis in
EWS-haploinsufficient Ewing sarcoma cells.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24813895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Dec;229(12):2049-56. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24663.

RUNX3 facilitates growth of Ewing sarcoma cells.

Bledsoe KL(1), McGee-Lawrence ME, Camilleri ET, Wang X, Riester SM, van Wijnen
AJ, Oliveira AM, Westendorf JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive pediatric small round cell tumor that
predominantly occurs in bone. Approximately 85% of Ewing sarcomas harbor the
EWS/FLI fusion protein, which arises from a chromosomal translocation,
t(11:22)(q24:q12). EWS/FLI interacts with numerous lineage-essential
transcription factors to maintain mesenchymal progenitors in an undifferentiated 
state. We previously showed that EWS/FLI binds the osteogenic transcription
factor RUNX2 and prevents osteoblast differentiation. In this study, we
investigated the role of another Runt-domain protein, RUNX3, in Ewing sarcoma.
RUNX3 participates in mesenchymal-derived bone formation and is a context
dependent tumor suppressor and oncogene. RUNX3 was detected in all Ewing sarcoma 
cells examined, whereas RUNX2 was detected in only 73% of specimens. Like RUNX2, 
RUNX3 binds to EWS/FLI via its Runt domain. EWS/FLI prevented RUNX3 from
activating the transcription of a RUNX-responsive reporter, p6OSE2. Stable
suppression of RUNX3 expression in the Ewing sarcoma cell line A673 delayed
colony growth in anchorage independent soft agar assays and reversed expression
of EWS/FLI-responsive genes. These results demonstrate an important role for
RUNX3 in Ewing sarcoma.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4149590
PMID: 24812032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;53:493-504. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.04.022. 
Epub 2014 May 5.

Round cell sarcomas - biologically important refinements in subclassification.

Mariño-Enríquez A(1), Fletcher CD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address:
cfletcher@partners.org.

Round cell sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors that often affect
children and young adults and, if untreated, often pursue a very aggressive
clinical course. Specific subtypes of round cell sarcoma, like Ewing sarcoma or
rhabdomyosarcoma, respond to well-defined therapeutic regimens so that proper
classification is crucial for appropriate patient management. A subset of round
cell sarcomas, however, lack specific clinical, morphologic, and immunophenotypic
features and cannot be unequivocally classified based on such features.
Systematic application of cytogenetics and molecular genetic techniques has
allowed for the identification of an increasing number of genetically defined
subgroups within this category of undifferentiated tumors. Although the clinical 
relevance of these molecular categories is yet to be proven, the systematic
identification of lesions that share reproducible biologic, and often morphologic
and immunophenotypic features, has great impact in terms of biologic
understanding and coherent classification schemes, and will help to guide the
potential development of rational new therapies. In this review we discuss the
main categories of undifferentiated round cell sarcoma, in relation to Ewing
sarcoma and its molecular variants, with particular emphasis on the genetic and
biologic features of recently described entities including desmoplastic small
round cell tumor and CIC-DUX4 as well as BCOR-CCNB3-associated round cell
sarcomas. This article is part of a Directed Issue entitled: Rare Cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24801613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2014 Oct;118(4):e119-25. doi:
10.1016/j.oooo.2014.02.010. Epub 2014 Feb 21.

An intraosseous sclerosing odontogenic tumor predominantly composed of epithelial
cells: relation to (so-called) sclerosing odontogenic carcinoma and
epithelial-rich central odontogenic fibroma.

Tan SH(1), Yeo JF(2), Kheem Pang BN(3), Petersson F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Registrar, Department of Pathology, National University Health System,
Singapore. (2)Associate Professor, Senior Consultant, Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, National University Health System, Singapore.
(3)Consultant, Department of Pathology, National University Health System,
Singapore. (4)Associate Professor, Senior Consultant, Department of Pathology,
National University Health System, Singapore. Electronic address:
Fredrikpetersson@live.se.

We report a case of an asymptomatic sclerosing odontogenic tumor in a 31-year-old
woman. Radiologically, the tumor was well circumscribed, was predominantly
radiolucent, and had a peripheral sclerotic margin. Histopathologically, the
tumor showed small clusters, strands, and cords of small to medium-sized
epithelial tumor cells in a sclerotic collagenous stroma. Immunohistochemically, 
the tumor cells were positive for broad-spectrum cytokeratins (CKs) (CK7, CK5/6, 
CK19, and CAM 5.2) and p63. Membranous staining for E-cadherin was present. There
was weak to moderate nuclear expression of p16 in 30% of cells. Rare tumor cells 
were positive for p53. Progesterone receptors were expressed in about 60% of the 
tumor cells. The proliferative activity (Ki-67) was approximately 2%. A molecular
genetic (fluorescence in situ hybridization) study showed no EWSR1 (EWS
RNA-binding protein 1) gene rearrangement. No recurrence or metastatic events
have been documented at 1-year follow-up. This tumor represents a classification 
dilemma mainly between epithelial-rich central odontogenic fibroma and the
so-called sclerosing odontogenic carcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24767700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cesk Patol. 2014 Apr;50(2):87-91.

[Where does Ewing sarcoma end and begin - two cases of unusual bone tumors with
t(20;22)(EWSR1-NFATc2) alteration].

[Article in Czech]

Kinkor Z, Vanecek T, Svajdler M Jr, Mukenšnabl P, Veselý K, Baxa J, Kokavec M.

The authors present two cases of Ewing-like sarcoma of the humerus and femur of a
12-year-old boy and a 28-year-old male, respectively. Identical morphology in
both tumors consisted of multiple solid nests with a mosaic collection of small, 
round, uniform cells with clear cytoplasm and no apparent nuclear atypia. A
monotonous structural arrangement, including both rich vascularity of bordering
septae and significant admixtures of eosinophil leucocytes, resulted in a final
organoid "neuroendocrine-like" pattern. Immunohistochemistry revealed diffuse
strong CD10, CD99 and CD138 positivity. Detailed molecular analysis in both
tumors confirmed translocation t(20;22) resulting in an EWSR1-NFATc2 fusion gene.
Additionally, this translocation was accompanied by amplification of the proximal
part of the genes and surrounding areas. Clinically, both neoplasms behaved
aggressively and they were primarily chemoresistant. Four years later, the
patient with the lesion in the humerus developed a massive local recurrence with 
a disruption of osteosynthesis. The last follow-up disclosed suspicious
metastatic deposits in the lung. The boy with the femoral tumor underwent a total
femoral prosthesis and there are no signs of local or systemic recurrence after
11 months of follow-up. The authors discuss the taxonomic placement of these rare
examples of Ewing-like sarcoma family in the light of new molecular discoveries.

PMID: 24758504  [PubMed - in process]


188. Hum Pathol. 2014 May;45(5):1084-91. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.007. Epub 2014
Jan 28.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma with non-EWSR1-NR4A3 variant fusions
correlate with rhabdoid phenotype and high-grade morphology.

Agaram NP(1), Zhang L(2), Sung YS(2), Singer S(3), Antonescu CR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065. Electronic address: agaramn@mskcc.org. (2)Department of Pathology,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065. (3)Department of
Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065.
(4)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065. Electronic address: antonesc@mskcc.org.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMC) are rare soft tissue sarcomas with
distinctive histology and uncertain histogenesis, characterized by Ewing sarcoma 
breakpoint region 1-nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 3 (EWSR1-NR4A3)
fusion in 75% of the cases. A smaller proportion of cases show NR4A3 fused to
other gene partners including TATA binding protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15), 
transcription factor 12 (TCF12), and TRK-fused gene (TFG). The impact of various 
gene fusions on morphology and outcome has not been previously evaluated. We
investigated 26 consecutive EMCs and correlated the genetic findings with
morphology and clinical outcome. There were 5 females and 21 males (median age,
49.5 years). Mean size of the tumors was 11 cm. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis showed EWSR1-NR4A3 gene fusion in 16 cases (62%),
TAF15-NR4A3 gene fusion in 7 cases (27%), and TCF12-NR4A3 gene fusion in 1 case
(4%). Two cases showed only NR4A3 gene rearrangements. Morphologically, most
EWSR1-rearranged tumors (10/16) showed low cellularity, minimal cytologic atypia,
and low mitotic counts. In contrast, 80% of EMCs with variant (non-EWSR1) NR4A3
gene fusions (TAF15, TCF12) had high-grade morphology with increased cellularity,
proliferation, and cytologic atypia, showing a plasmacytoid/rhabdoid morphology
in half the cases. Follow-up showed that only 1 of 16 patients with
EWSR1-rearranged tumors died of disease, in contrast to 3 (43%) of 7
TAF15-rearranged tumors. In conclusion, EMCs with variant NR4A3 gene fusions show
a higher incidence of rhabdoid phenotype, high-grade morphology, and a more
aggressive outcome compared with the EWSR1-NR4A3 positive tumors. Furthermore,
fluorescence in situ hybridization assay for NR4A3, along with EWSR1, may be an
additional ancillary test to confirm diagnosis of EMCs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4015728
PMID: 24746215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2014 Jul-Aug;17(4):302-7. doi: 10.2350/14-03-1454-CR.1. Epub 
2014 Apr 15.

Primary subcutaneous spindle cell Ewing sarcoma with strong S100 expression and
EWSR1-FLI1 fusion: a case report.

Arnold MA(1), Ballester LY, Pack SD, Abdullaev Z, Merchant M, Tsokos MG.

Author information: 
(1)1<U+2009> Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Ohio State University 
College of Medicine and Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.

Ewing sarcoma is described classically as a small, round cell tumor of bone and
soft tissue in children and young adults. Ewing sarcoma most often is
characterized by a fusion of the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) and
the Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI1) genes, forming an EWSR1-FLI1
fusion transcript. We report an exceptional case of primary subcutaneous Ewing
sarcoma in a 16-year-old female composed entirely of spindle cells with focal
fascicular growth and exhibiting strong, diffuse immunohistochemical reactivity
for S100, unlike classic Ewing sarcoma. However, reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis confirmed the presence of a rare variant of the 
EWSR1-FLI1 fusion transcript, featuring fusion of EWSR1 exon 10 to FLI1 exon 6.
To our knowledge, the combined histologic, molecular, and clinical features have 
not been reported previously in Ewing sarcoma, and raise a broad differential
diagnosis emphasizing the importance of molecular techniques in the diagnosis of 
this tumor.

PMID: 24735198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Jul;53(7):622-33. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22172. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

Distinct transcriptional signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 fusion-positive 
round cell tumors compared to EWSR1-rearranged Ewing sarcomas: further evidence
toward distinct pathologic entities.

Specht K(1), Sung YS, Zhang L, Richter GH, Fletcher CD, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Round cell sarcomas harboring CIC-DUX4 fusions have recently been described as
highly aggressive soft tissue tumors of children and young adults. Due to partial
morphologic and immunohistochemical overlap with Ewing sarcoma (ES),
CIC-DUX4-positive tumors have generally been classified as ES-like and managed
similarly; however, a systematic comparison at the molecular and
immunohistochemical levels between these two groups has not yet been conducted.
Based on an initial observation that CIC-DUX4-positive tumors show nuclear
immunoreactivity for WT1 and ETS transcription factors, FLI1 and ERG, we
performed a detailed immunohistochemical and molecular analysis including these
markers, to further investigate the relationship between CIC-DUX4 tumors and ES. 
The study group included 21 CIC-DUX4-positive sarcomas and 20 EWSR1-rearranged
ES. Immunohistochemically, CIC-DUX4 sarcomas showed membranous CD99 positivity in
18 (86%) cases, but only 5 (24%) with a diffuse pattern, while WT1 and FLI1 were 
strongly positive in all cases. ERG was positive in 18% of cases. All ES
expressed CD99 and FLI1, while ERG positivity was only seen in EWSR1-ERG fusion
positive ES. WT1 was negative in all ES. Expression profiling validated by q-PCR 
revealed a distinct gene signature associated with CIC-DUX4 fusion, with
upregulation of ETS transcription factors (ETV4, ETV1, and ETV5) and WT1, among
top overexpressed genes compared to ES, other sarcomas and normal tissue. In
conclusion, the distinct gene signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 sarcomas
suggest a distinct pathogenesis from ES. The consistent WT1 expression may
provide a useful clue in the diagnosis in the context of round cell sarcomas
negative for EWSR1 rearrangement. © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4108073
PMID: 24723486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2014 Oct;118(4):e115-8. doi:
10.1016/j.oooo.2014.02.004. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

EWSR1 and ATF1 rearrangements in clear cell odontogenic carcinoma: presentation
of a case.

Yancoskie AE(1), Sreekantaiah C(2), Jacob J(3), Rosenberg A(4), Edelman M(5),
Antonescu CR(6), Fantasia JE(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, Department of Dental Medicine,
Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY, USA. Electronic
address: ayancosk12@nshs.edu. (2)Division of Cytogenetics and Molecular
Pathology, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Cytogenetics and Molecular Pathology, Long Island Jewish Medical
Center, New Hyde Park, NY, USA. (4)Division of Laboratory Medicine and Histology,
Long Island Jewish Medical Center, New Hyde Park, NY, USA. (5)Department of
Pathology, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. (7)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, Department of Dental
Medicine, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY, USA.

Clear cell odontogenic carcinoma (CCOC) is a rare odontogenic tumor of the jaws
that is more common in the mandible than maxilla and has a female preponderance
with a peak incidence in the sixth decade. It is characterized by locally
aggressive behavior and has the potential to metastasize. This tumor was recently
reported to have a rearrangement of the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 gene
(EWS RNA-binding protein 1, EWSR1) in 5 of 8 cases tested and of the activating
transcription factor 1 gene (ATF1) in 1 case tested. We report a case of CCOC in 
the premolar area of the mandible in a 59-year-old woman. This case demonstrated 
the presence of both EWSR1 and ATF1 gene rearrangements by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24721473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Case Rep Med. 2014;2014:984369. doi: 10.1155/2014/984369. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal tract, presenting as a
second malignancy after childhood hepatoblastoma.

Thway K(1), Judson I(2), Fisher C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW3 6JJ, UK ; Department of
Histopathology, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 203 Fulham Road, London
SW3 6JJ, UK. (2)Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW3 6JJ, UK.

Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal tract (CCSLGT) is a rare
malignant neoplasm arising within the wall of the small bowel, stomach, or large 
bowel, predominantly in children and young adults. It is an aggressive tumor with
a high rate of local recurrence, metastases, and early death from disease.
Histologically, it is composed of relatively monomorphic ovoid or round cells
with clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, arranged in sheets and sometimes papillary 
or alveolar architectures, often with CD68-positive osteoclast-like giant cells
in variable numbers, and is associated with EWSR1-CREB1 gene fusions. Its
pathogenesis is unknown, and histologically it can be easily confused with a
variety of intra-abdominal neoplasms. We describe a case of CCSLGT with molecular
characterization, presenting as an acutely obstructing small bowel mass in a
33-year-old male, which occurred as a second malignant neoplasm 20 years after
treatment with surgery, radiotherapy, and cisplatin and doxorubicin chemotherapy 
for childhood hepatoblastoma. This gives further insight into the clinical
setting of this highly aggressive neoplasm and highlights the use of radiation
therapy as a possible etiologic factor.

PMCID: PMC3970439
PMID: 24715928  [PubMed]


193. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Jun;50(9):1657-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.03.013. Epub 2014 
Apr 2.

Activity of sunitinib in extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Stacchiotti S(1), Pantaleo MA(2), Astolfi A(3), Dagrada GP(4), Negri T(4), Dei
Tos AP(5), Indio V(3), Morosi C(6), Gronchi A(7), Colombo C(7), Conca E(4),
Toffolatti L(5), Tazzari M(8), Crippa F(9), Maestro R(10), Pilotti S(4), Casali
PG(11).

Author information: 
(1)Adult Mesenchymal Tumor Medical Oncology Unit, Cancer Medicine Department,
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
silvia.stacchiotti@istitutotumori.mi.it. (2)Dipartimento di Medicina
Sperimentale, Specialistica e Diagnostica, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Centro Interdipartimentale di Ricerche sul Cancro "G. Prodi", Università di
Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (4)Experimental Molecular Pathology Unit, Department of 
Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Anatomic Pathology, General Hospital of Treviso, Treviso, Italy.
(6)Department of Radiology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan,
Italy. (7)Department of Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori,
Milan, Italy. (8)Unit of Immunotherapy of Human Tumors, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy. (9)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Fondazione
IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy. (10)Unit of Experimental Oncology 
1, CRO Aviano National Cancer Institute, Aviano, Italy. (11)Adult Mesenchymal
Tumor Medical Oncology Unit, Cancer Medicine Department, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is a rare soft tissue
sarcoma, marked by NR4A3 rearrangement. Herein we report on the activity of
sunitinib in a series of 10 patients, strengthening what initially observed in
two cases.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From July 2011, 10 patients with progressive metastatic
translocated EMC have been consecutively treated with sunitinib 37.5mg/day, on a 
named-use basis. In an attempt to interpret the activity of sunitinib in EMC,
genotype/phenotype correlations were carried out by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analyses. Moreover, transcriptome, immunohistochemical and
biochemical analyses of a limited set of samples were performed focusing on some 
putative targets of sunitinib.
RESULTS: Eight of 10 patients are still on therapy. Six patients had a Response
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (RECIST) partial response (PR), two were
stable, two progressed. Positron emission tomography (PET) was consistent in 6/6 
evaluable cases. One patient underwent surgery after sunitinib, with evidence of 
a pathologic response. At a median follow-up of 8.5 months (range 2-28), no
secondary resistance was detected. Median progression free survival (PFS) has not
been reached. Interestingly, all responsive cases turned out to express the
typical EWSR1-NR4A3 fusion, while refractory cases carried the alternative
TAF15-NR4A3 fusion. Among putative sunitinib targets, only RET was expressed and 
activated in analysed samples.
CONCLUSIONS: This report confirms the therapeutic activity of sunitinib in EMC.
Genotype/phenotype analyses support a correlation between response and
EWSR1-NR4A3 fusion. Involvement of RET deserves further investigation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Histopathology. 2014 Aug;65(2):278-82. doi: 10.1111/his.12429. Epub 2014 May 19.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma of the pulmonary artery: a multidisciplinary
discussion.

Ghigna MR(1), Hamdi S, Petitpretz P, Rohnean A, Florea V, Mussot S, Dartevelle P,
Dorfmuller P, Tu L, Thuillet R, Guignabert C, Thomas-de-Montpreville V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Marie Lannelongue Surgical Centre, Le
Plessis-Robinson, France; INSERM UMR 999, LabEx LERMIT, Marie Lannelongue
Surgical Centre, Le Plessis-Robinson, France; School of Medicine, University
Paris-Sud, Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

AIMS: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare neoplastic disease usually
occurring in the dermis or subcutis of the extremities of young adults or
children. Although sporadic cases in deep soft tissue and visceral organs have
been reported, we present here the first description of AFH developing in a large
artery.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Paraffin sections of the surgical specimen were stained with
haematoxylin and eosin, and immunohistochemistry was performed (CKAE1/AE3, EMA,
CD34, p63, CD38, smooth muscle actin, and desmin). In addition, FISH and RT-PCR
were applied in order to check for EWRS rearrangement. The histomorphological
features, and FISH analysis revealing rearrangement of EWSR, indicated the
definitive diagnosis of AFH. RT-PCR confirmed EWSR rearrangement, and detected an
EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcript.
CONCLUSIONS: A thoracic location of AFH has not been reported until very
recently, and shares a differential diagnosis with diverse neoplasms, including
spindle cell carcinoma and low-grade sarcoma. We describe the first reported case
of thoracic AFH arising in a large vessel, and highlight distinctive histological
and molecular features.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24702653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 27;9(3):e93488. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093488. eCollection
2014.

Fusion FISH imaging: single-molecule detection of gene fusion transcripts in
situ.

Markey FB(1), Ruezinsky W(1), Tyagi S(2), Batish M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey Medical School, 
Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America. (2)Public
Health Research Institute, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers University, Newark,
New Jersey, United States of America.

Double-stranded DNA breaks occur on a regular basis in the human genome as a
consequence of genotoxic stress and errors during replication. Usually these
breaks are rapidly and faithfully repaired, but occasionally different
chromosomes, or different regions of the same chromosome, are fused to each
other. Some of these aberrant chromosomal translocations yield functional
recombinant genes, which have been implicated as the cause of a number of
lymphomas, leukemias, sarcomas, and solid tumors. Reliable methods are needed for
the in situ detection of the transcripts encoded by these recombinant genes. We
have developed just such a method, utilizing single-molecule fluorescence in situ
hybridization (sm-FISH), in which approximately 50 short fluorescent probes bind 
to adjacent sites on the same mRNA molecule, rendering each target mRNA molecule 
visible as a diffraction-limited spot in a fluorescence microscope. Utilizing
this method, gene fusion transcripts are detected with two differently colored
probe sets, each specific for one of the two recombinant segments of a target
mRNA; enabling the fusion transcripts to be seen in the microscope as distinct
spots that fluoresce in both colors. We demonstrate this method by detecting the 
BCR-ABL fusion transcripts that occur in chronic myeloid leukemia cells, and by
detecting the EWSR1-FLI1 fusion transcripts that occur in Ewing's sarcoma cells. 
This technology should pave the way for accurate in situ typing of many cancers
that are associated with, or caused by, fusion transcripts.

PMCID: PMC3968151
PMID: 24675777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 25;9(3):e93067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093067. eCollection
2014.

Differentially expressed miRNAs in Ewing sarcoma compared to mesenchymal stem
cells: low miR-31 expression with effects on proliferation and invasion.

Karnuth B(1), Dedy N(2), Spieker T(1), Lawlor ER(3), Gattenlöhner S(4), Ranft
A(5), Dirksen U(5), Jürgens H(5), Bräuninger A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Gerhard-Domagk-Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Münster,
Westfälische Wilhelms-University, Münster, Germany. (2)Department of Orthopedics 
and Tumor Orthopedics, University Hospital Münster, Westfälische
Wilhelms-University, Münster, Germany. (3)Departments of Pediatrics and
Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pathology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany.
(5)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Münster, Westfälische
Wilhelms-University, Münster, Germany. (6)Gerhard-Domagk-Institute for Pathology,
University Hospital Münster, Westfälische Wilhelms-University, Münster, Germany; 
Department of Pathology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany.

Ewing sarcoma, the second most common bone tumor in children and young adults, is
an aggressive malignancy with a strong potential to metastasize. Ewing sarcoma is
characterised by translocations encoding fusion transcription factors with an
EWSR1 transactivation domain fused to an ETS family DNA binding domain. microRNAs
are post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression and aberrantly expressed
microRNAs have been identified as tumor suppressors or oncogenes in most cancer
types. To identify potential oncogenic and tumor suppressor microRNAs in Ewing
sarcoma, we determined and compared the expression of 377 microRNAs in 40 Ewing
sarcoma biopsies, 6 Ewing sarcoma cell lines and mesenchymal stem cells, the
putative cellular origin of Ewing sarcoma, from 6 healthy donors. Of the 35
differentially expressed microRNAs identified (fold change >4 and q<0.05), 19
were higher and 16 lower expressed in Ewing sarcoma. In comparisons between Ewing
sarcoma samples with EWS-FLI or EWS-ERG translocations, with differing
dissemination characteristics and of primary samples and metastases no
significantly differential expressed microRNAs were detected using various
stringency criteria. For miR-31, the microRNA with lowest expression in
comparison to mesenchymal stem cells, functional analyses were performed to
determine its potential as a tumor suppressor in Ewing sarcoma. Two of four
miR-31 transfected Ewing sarcoma cell lines showed a significantly reduced
proliferation (19% and 33% reduction) due to increased apoptosis in one and
increased length of G1-phase in the other cell line. All three tested miR-31
transfected Ewing sarcoma cell lines showed significantly reduced invasiveness
(56% to 71% reduction). In summary, we identified 35 microRNAs differentially
expressed in Ewing sarcoma and demonstrate that miR-31 affects proliferation and 
invasion of Ewing sarcoma cell lines in ex vivo assays.

PMCID: PMC3965523
PMID: 24667836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cancer Cytopathol. 2014 May;122(5):386-93. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21415. Epub 2014 Mar
17.

Fine-needle aspiration in desmoplastic small round cell tumor: a report of 10 new
tumors in 8 patients with clinicopathological and molecular correlations with
review of the literature.

Klijanienko J(1), Colin P, Couturier J, Lagacé R, Fréneaux P, Pierron G, Laé M,
Klijanienko A, Brisse H, Orbach D, Theocharis S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a rare round cell
sarcoma entity characterized by a specific t(11;22)(p13;q12) translocation,
usually intra-abdominal localization and an aggressive clinical outcome. To date,
only 35 DSRCT cases diagnosed by fine-needle aspiration have been described.
METHODS: This study reports the cytological diagnosis of DSRCT. Ten tumors from 8
patients were sampled for diagnosis and analyzed to search the characteristic
translocation using fluorescence in situ hybridization or reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction methods.
RESULTS: Smears were always hypercellular and consisted of nonspecific round cell
sarcoma. Nuclei were polymorphic round, kidney-, or heart-shaped. Nuclear molding
was usually present. Paranuclear cytoplasmic densities were obvious and noted in 
7 cases. Cytonuclear atypia, mitotic figures, numerous crushed nuclei, and
apoptosis were frequently seen. Purple-stained stroma was present in 8 cases
(ranging from few connective tissue fragments to large hyalinized deposits).
Molecular studies based on cytological aspirates were performed in 8 patients.
The presence of the fusion gene EWSR1-WT 1 transcript was identified in all,
which confirmed the diagnosis of DSRCT.
CONCLUSIONS: Smears showing poorly differentiated round cells associated with
cytoplasmic densities and connective stoma, in a specific clinical context, young
adult age, intra-abdominal localization, suggestive immunocytochemical profile,
and a unique cytogenetic abnormality are highly specific and allow an accurate
diagnosis of DSRCT.

© 2014 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24639098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 Oct;22(7):667-72. doi: 10.1177/1066896914526778. Epub
2014 Mar 11.

Nasopharyngeal hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma: report of the histopathologic
features of a case showing EWSR1 rearrangements by FISH and literature review.

Ceballos Sáenz C(1), Argyris PP(2), Manivel JC(3), Urias Barreras CM(1), Koutlas 
IG(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico. (2)University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. (3)Veterans Administration Medical Center,
Minneapolis, MN, USA. (4)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
koutl001@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma (HCCC) is a rare low-grade malignant
tumor affecting the minor salivary glands; nasopharyngeal involvement is
uncommon.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A 38-year-old male patient presented with a 3.2 × 4.5 × 4.4 
cm expansile mass obliterating the lumen of the nasopharynx and extending into
the left nasal cavity. Histopathologically, the tumor was characterized by clear 
round to polygonal epithelial cells arranged in anastomosing trabeculae and solid
nests. The stroma consisted of fibromyxoid connective tissue with areas of
intense hyalinization and desmoplasia. Immunohistochemically, strong and diffuse 
reactivity for AE1/AE3, CK5/6, and p63 was observed. EWSR1 gene rearrangement was
confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization. The diagnosis of nasopharyngeal 
HCCC was rendered. Surgical excision was performed along with adjuvant
radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: HCCC generally demonstrates good prognosis with low metastatic
potential. Identification of EWSR1 gene disruption is usefulin discerning HCCC
from other neoplasms with overlapping microscopic features.

PMID: 24619014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Pathology. 2014 Apr;46(3):199-204. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0000000000000073.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: an expansion of the clinical and histological
spectrum.

Bohman SL(1), Goldblum JR, Rubin BP, Tanas MR, Billings SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United
States.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, a fibrohistiocytic tumour of intermediate
malignancy that usually presents on extremities of young patients, has a broader 
clinical/histological spectrum than is widely appreciated. We summarise our
experience with an emphasis on unusual features. Twenty-seven cases were analysed
for clinical and histological features, including immunohistochemistry and FISH
for rearrangements of EWSR1 or FUS. Five (19%) occurred in patients >40 years
old, and ten (37%) occurred outside the extremities. Three that occurred in
patients >40 years old arose in atypical locations. Evaluation for classical
histological features (lymphocytic cuff, fibrous pseudocapsule, pseudovascular
spaces, haemorrhage, haemosiderin, and histiocytoid morphology) showed that all
had two or more classical features. Unusual features were noted in many cases.
Ten (37%) displayed significant areas of sclerosis; three of these ten had areas 
with a perineurioma-like pattern. Nine displayed at least moderate pleomorphism, 
with two exhibiting striking pleomorphism. Eight had eosinophils in the stroma,
one with numerous eosinophils. One had a reticulated pattern of cells in a myxoid
stroma. Mitotic rates were low [average 0.67/10 high power fields (HPFs)]. Three 
had atypical mitotic figures. Thirteen of 20 (65%) were CD68 positive, 11 of 17
(65%) were EMA positive, and 10 of 18 (56%) were desmin positive. Thirteen of 16 
(81%) had a rearrangement of EWSR1; none had a FUS rearrangement.This series
expands the spectrum of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma.

PMID: 24614712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Head Neck Pathol. 2014 Mar;8(1):1-15. doi: 10.1007/s12105-014-0529-5. Epub 2014
Mar 5.

Envisioning the next WHO head and neck classification.

Brandwein-Gensler M(1), Wei S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 3545 North
Pavilion, 619 19th Street South, Birmingham, AL, 35249-7331, USA,
MGensler@uab.edu.

The next WHO classification should abandon "salivary duct carcinoma";
conventional salivary duct carcinoma should be classified as "high-grade salivary
duct carcinoma". Low-grade salivary duct carcinoma should replace the current
nosology of "low-grade cribriform cystadenocarcinoma". Cystadenocarcinoma should 
be classified with the descriptor "Not Otherwise Specified" and should be
considered an exclusionary diagnostic category. On the other hand, "Not Otherwise
Specified" does not fit for hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma (HCCC). The
EWSR1-ATF1 fusion is specific for HCCC within the context of salivary neoplasia. 
We recommend adding "hyalinizing" even though this feature is not present in all 
cases; the benefit of which is the mental association with a salivary clear cell 
malignancy. Sinonasal Renal Cell-like Adenocarcinoma (SNRCLA) is a distinct clear
cell neoplasm and should be added to the next WHO classification. Future studies 
will bear out whether SNRCLA is even a low-grade carcinoma, or may be
reclassified as "adenoma". Lastly, the next WHO monograph should include the Risk
Model in the general introductory statements on oral squamous cell carcinoma,
under a subheading of "Histological Prognosticators". The positive predictive
value for developing locoregional recurrence in patients with low-stage oral
cavity squamous carcinoma (OSCC) and "worst pattern of invasion type-5" (WPOI-5) 
is 42 %. Low-stage high-risk OSCC with a combination of features other than
WPOI-5 is associated with 32 % likelihood for locoregional progression. WPOI-5
also predicts occult metastatic disease (p = 0.0001, Chi squared, 2 DF). Thus the
Risk Model can also be used to make decisions regarding staged elective neck
dissections.

PMCID: PMC3950391
PMID: 24595418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;20(5):1064-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3194.
Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Molecular precision chemotherapy: overcoming resistance to targeted therapies?

Burdach S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Author's Affiliation: Technische Universität München, München, Germany.

Comment on
    Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;20(5):1190-203.

Cytotoxic drugs may have specific effects on oncogenes and their downstream
targets. Increase of cancer cell sensitivity due to repression of an oncogene
downstream target can be specifically addressed by combined precision
chemotherapy, increasing the therapeutic index of chemotherapy and overcoming
resistance to highly selective targeted therapies.

©2014 AACR

PMID: 24536061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Mol Diagn. 2014 May;16(3):361-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2014.01.002. Epub 2014 
Feb 8.

ChildSeq-RNA: A next-generation sequencing-based diagnostic assay to identify
known fusion transcripts in childhood sarcomas.

Qadir MA(1), Zhan SH(2), Kwok B(1), Bruestle J(3), Drees B(3), Popescu OE(4),
Sorensen PH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. (2)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre,
British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (3)Spiral
Genetics Corporation, Seattle, Washington. (4)Department of Anatomical Pathology,
Children's and Women's Health Centre of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. (5)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer
Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Pathology, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Electronic address:
psor@mail.ubc.ca.

Childhood sarcomas can be extremely difficult to accurately diagnose on the basis
of morphological characteristics alone. Ancillary methods, such as RT-PCR or
fluorescence in situ hybridization, to detect pathognomonic gene fusions can help
to distinguish these tumors. Two major deficiencies of these assays are their
inability to identify gene fusions at nucleotide resolution or to detect multiple
gene fusions simultaneously. We developed a next-generation sequencing-based
assay designated ChildSeq-RNA that uses the Ion Torrent platform to screen for
EWSR1-FLI1 and EWSR1-ERG, PAX3-FOXO1 and PAX7-FOXO1, EWSR1-WT1, and ETV6-NTRK3
fusions of Ewing sarcoma (ES), alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, desmoplastic small
round cell tumor, and congenital fibrosarcoma, respectively. To rapidly analyze
resulting data, we codeveloped a bioinformatics tool, termed ChildDecode, that
operates on a scalable, cloud-computing platform. Total RNA from four ES cell
lines plus 33 clinical samples representing ES, alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma,
desmoplastic small round cell tumor, and congenital fibrosarcoma tumors was
subjected to ChildSeq-RNA. This accurately identified corresponding gene fusions 
in each tumor type, with no examples of false positive fusion detection in this
proof-of-concept study. Comparison with previous RT-PCR findings demonstrated
high sensitivity (96.4%; 95% CI, 82.3%-99.4%) and specificity (100%; 95% CI,
56.6%-100%) of ChildSeq-RNA to detect gene fusions. Herein, we propose
ChildSeq-RNA as a novel tool to detect gene fusions in childhood sarcomas at
single-nucleotide resolution.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24517889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Mol Diagn. 2014 May;16(3):314-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.12.002. Epub 2014 
Feb 7.

Diagnostic utility of molecular investigation in extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma.

Benini S(1), Cocchi S(2), Gamberi G(2), Magagnoli G(3), Vogel D(2), Ghinelli
C(3), Righi A(2), Picci P(3), Alberghini M(2), Gambarotti M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rizzoli Institute, Bologna, Italy. Electronic
address: stefania.benini@ior.it. (2)Department of Pathology, Rizzoli Institute,
Bologna, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental Oncology, Rizzoli Institute,
Bologna, Italy.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma is characterized by the reciprocal
chromosomal translocation t(9;22) and the resultant fused gene EWS RNA-binding
protein 1 and nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 3 (EWSR1-NR4A3). A
second cytogenetic rearrangement t(9;17) involves the genes NR4A3 and TAF 15 RNA 
polymerase II, TATA box binding protein (TBP)-associated factor (TAF15). Less
frequent fusion transcript variants of the NR4A3 gene, transcription factor 12
(TCF12)-NR4A3 and TRK-fused gene (TFG)-NR4A3, are associated with t(9;15) and
t(9;3) respectively. The samples from 42 patients with extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma were examined for the presence of EWSR1-NR4A3, TAF15-NR4A3,
TCF12-NR4A3, and TFG-NR4A3 fusion transcripts by using RT-PCR. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization was performed to analyze the status of EWSR1 and NR4A3 genes. 
The fusion transcripts were detected in 34 of 42 samples (81%); the presence of
an EWSR1 or NR4A3 gene rearrangements were detected in 8 of 42 samples (19%)
which had tested negative for all fusion transcripts detected by RT-PCR. Of the
34 samples evaluable for fusion transcripts, 23 yielded positive results for
EWSR1-NR4A3, 10 for TAF15-NR4A3, and 1 for TCF12-NR4A3. The combination of RT-PCR
and fluorescence in situ hybridization on frozen and paraffin-embedded tissue is 
a sensitive and specific method for molecular detection of recurrent
translocations and is an important ancillary method to establish the diagnosis of
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Jun;38(6):816-23. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000172.

Myxoid variant of so-called angiomatoid "malignant fibrous histiocytoma":
clinicopathologic characterization in a series of 21 cases.

Schaefer IM(1), Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA.

Angiomatoid "malignant fibrous histiocytoma" (AMFH) is a tumor of intermediate
malignancy and undefined lineage, mostly arising in the extremities of young
patients. Examples with a prominent myxoid matrix are very uncommon. Twenty-one
cases of myxoid AMFH (among a total of 414) identified in consult files are
described, including clinicopathologic features, fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis in a subset of cases, and follow-up. Thirteen patients
were female and 8 male, ranging in age from 2 to 51 y (median 17 y). These
circumscribed tumors arose in subcutaneous or deep somatic soft tissue, with a
median size of 2.5 cm (range, 1 to 8 cm), being located in the extremities
(14/21), trunk (4/21), and upper limb girdle (3/21). Characteristic features
included a fibrous pseudocapsule (20/21), peritumoral lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrates (20/21), blood-filled cystic spaces (17/21), and prominent myxoid
morphology comprising 60% to 100% of the tumor surface area examined.
Histiocytoid or spindled tumor cells exhibited vesicular nuclei, inconspicuous
nucleoli, palely eosinophilic cytoplasm, and multinodular growth without
necrosis. Mucin pools and scattered multinucleate giant cells were observed in a 
subset of cases. Mild to moderate atypia was observed in 4 cases; 1 tumor showed 
a pseudochondroid matrix. Immunohistochemically, 14/21 cases expressed desmin,
12/21 expressed EMA, and 4/7 exhibited EWSR1 rearrangement. Follow-up, available 
for 11 patients (median, 43 mo), revealed that 3 developed local recurrence after
2, 7, and 48 months, respectively. All patients were alive without metastases.
AMFH may present with prominent myxoid features making diagnosis difficult and
causing possible confusion with other myxoid tumors including low-grade
fibromyxoid sarcoma, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, and myxoid liposarcoma.

PMID: 24503754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e85814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085814. eCollection 
2014.

Characterization of human mesenchymal stem cells from ewing sarcoma patients.
Pathogenetic implications.

Amaral AT(1), Manara MC(2), Berghuis D(3), Ordóñez JL(4), Biscuola M(5),
Lopez-García MA(5), Osuna D(4), Lucarelli E(6), Alviano F(7), Lankester A(3),
Scotlandi K(2), de Álava E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Program, Institute of Biomedical Research of
Salamanca-Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer 
(IBSAL-CIC), Salamanca, Spain ; Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS),
CSIC-Universidad de Sevilla, Department of Pathology and Biobank, Hospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain. (2)CRS Sviluppo di Terapie
Biomolecolari, Oncologia Sperimentale, Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli (IOR),
Bologna, Italy. (3)Department of Pediatrics and Biobank, Leiden University
Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Molecular Pathology Program,
Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca-Centro de Investigación del Cáncer,
Centro de Investigación del Cáncer (IBSAL-CIC), Salamanca, Spain. (5)Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), CSIC-Universidad de Sevilla, Department of
Pathology and Biobank, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain.
(6)Osteoarticolar Regeneration Laboratory, Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli (IOR),
Bologna, Italy. (7)Dipartimento di Istologia, Embriologia e Biologia, Istituto
Ortopedico Rizzoli (IOR), Bologna, Italy.

Erratum in
    PLoS One.2014;9(4):e94455.

BACKGROUND: Ewing Sarcoma (EWS) is a mesenchymal-derived tumor that generally
arises in bone and soft tissue. Intensive research regarding the pathogenesis of 
EWS has been insufficient to pinpoint the early events of Ewing sarcomagenesis.
However, the Mesenchymal Stem Cell (MSC) is currently accepted as the most
probable cell of origin.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In an initial study regarding a deep characterization of
MSC obtained specifically from EWS patients (MSC-P), we compared them with MSC
derived from healthy donors (MSC-HD) and EWS cell lines. We evaluated the
presence of the EWS-FLI1 gene fusion and EWSR1 gene rearrangements in MSC-P. The 
presence of the EWS transcript was confirmed by q-RT-PCR. In order to determine
early events possibly involved in malignant transformation, we used a
multiparameter quantitative strategy that included both MSC immunophenotypic
negative/positive markers, and EWS intrinsic phenotypical features. Markers
CD105, CD90, CD34 and CD45 were confirmed in EWS samples.
RESULTS: We determined that MSC-P lack the most prevalent gene fusion, EWSR1-FLI1
as well as EWSR1 gene rearrangements. Our study also revealed that MSC-P are more
alike to MSC-HD than to EWS cells. Nonetheless, we also observed that EWS cells
had a few overlapping features with MSC. As a relevant example, also MSC showed
CD99 expression, hallmark of EWS diagnosis. However, we observed that, in
contrast to EWS cells, MSC were not sensitive to the inhibition of CD99.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, our results suggest that MSC from EWS patients behave
like MSC-HD and are phenotypically different from EWS cells, thus raising
important questions regarding MSC role in sarcomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC3911896
PMID: 24498265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2014 Mar;33(2):191-6. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e3182995209.

Myoepithelioma of the ovary: first reported case.

Houghton OP(1), Sumathi VP, Loyson SA, McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (O.P.H., W.G.M.), Royal Group of Hospitals, Belfast,
Northern Ireland Department of Musculoskeletal Pathology (V.P.S.), Royal
Orthopaedic Hospital, Birmingham, UK Department of Pathology, Bronovo Hospital
(S.A.J.L.), Hague, The Netherlands.

A wide variety of neoplasms of varying histogenesis occur within the ovary. We
report the first case of a primary ovarian myoepithelioma, a diagnosis made on
the basis of the morphologic features coupled with immunoreactivity with
epithelial and myoid markers. The tumor had a lobulated appearance with variable 
architectural patterns including anastomosing cords, trabeculae, and nests of
epithelioid to spindled tumor cells within a hyalinised and focally myxoid
stroma. Fluorescence in situ hybridization for EWS gene rearrangement and reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for EWSR1-POU5F1 and EWSR1-PBX1,
molecular abnormalities which are found in some extrasalivary myoepitheliomas,
were negative. In reporting this unique neoplasm, we discuss the wide
differential diagnosis generated by the case.

PMID: 24487475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Oncotarget. 2014 Jan 30;5(2):338-50.

Pharmacokinetic modeling optimizes inhibition of the 'undruggable' EWS-FLI1
transcription factor in Ewing Sarcoma.

Hong SH(1), Youbi SE, Hong SP, Kallakury B, Monroe P, Erkizan HV,
Barber-Rotenberg JS, Houghton P, Üren A, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, USA.

Transcription factors have long been deemed 'undruggable' targets for
therapeutics. Enhanced recognition of protein biochemistry as well as the need to
have more targeted approaches to treat cancer has rendered transcription factors 
approachable for therapeutic development. Since transcription factors lack
enzymatic domains, the specific targeting of these proteins has unique
challenges. One challenge is the hydrophobic microenvironment that affects small 
molecules gaining access to block protein interactions. The most attractive
transcription factors to target are those formed from tumor specific chromosomal 
translocations that are validated oncogenic driver proteins. EWS-FLI1 is a fusion
protein that results from the pathognomonic translocation of Ewing sarcoma (ES). 
Our past work created the small molecule YK-4-279 that blocks EWS-FLI1 from
interacting with RNA Helicase A (RHA). To fulfill long-standing promise in the
field by creating a clinically useful drug, steps are required to allow for in
vivo administration. These investigations identify the need for continuous
presence of the small molecule protein-protein inhibitor for a period of days. We
describe the pharmacokinetics of YK-4-279 and its individual enantiomers. In vivo
studies confirm prior in vitro experiments showing (S)-YK-4-279 as the EWS-FLI1
specific enantiomer demonstrating both induction of apoptosis and reduction of
EWS-FLI1 regulated caveolin-1 protein. We have created the first rat xenograft
model of ES, treated with (S)-YK-4-279 dosing based upon PK modeling leading to a
sustained complete response in 2 of 6 ES tumors. Combining laboratory studies,
pharmacokinetic measurements, and modeling has allowed us to create a paradigm
that can be optimized for in vivo systems using both in vitro data and
pharmacokinetic simulations. Thus, (S)-YK-4-279 as a small molecule drug is ready
for continued development towards a first-in-human, first-in-class, clinical
trial.

PMCID: PMC3964211
PMID: 24481407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Nov;42(11):744-7.

[Solid variant of angiomatoid fibrous histocytoma:report of 3 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Z(1), Fan QH(2), Wang J, Ding YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University,Nanjing 210029, China. (2)E-mail:fanqinhe@ aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features, immunophenotype, molecular
genetics and differential diagnosis of solid variant of angiomatoid fibrous
histocytoma.
METHODS: The clinicopathologic features of 3 cases of solid variant of
angiomatoid fibrous histocytoma were analyzed and the literature was reviewed.
RESULTS: There were a total of 2 males and 1 female. The age of patients ranged
from 9 to 12 years. The patients presented with a painless mass located in left
forearm, left knee or back. The lesions were treated by complete surgical
resection. On gross examination, the tumors varied from 1.6 cm to 4.5 cm in
greatest dimension. They were well-circumscribed and had pale yellow to
grayish-red solid cut surface. Histologically, the tumor was composed of
histocytoid cells arranged in sheet-like pattern. A fibrous pseudocapsule
surrounded by lymphocytes and plasma cells was identified. Immunohistochemical
study showed that the tumor cells in all cases were positive for vimentin and
CD68. They were negative for S100 protein, cytokeratin, CD34, CD31, smooth muscle
actin, CD35, CD21 and CD30. Two cases also expressed CD99 and one of them was
positive for desmin and epithelial membrane antigen. Fluorescence in-situ
hybridization was positive for EWSR1 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Solid type represents a variant of angiomatoid fibrous histocytoma
and is considered as tumor of borderline malignant potential. Definitive
diagnosis requires thorough histologic examination and clinical correlation.
Immunohistochemistry and EWSR1 gene study are helpful in further delineation and 
differential diagnosis. Complete resection or wide local excision with
post-operative follow up is the main modality of treatment.

PMID: 24447551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Head Neck Pathol. 2014;8(3):250-60. doi: 10.1007/s12105-014-0518-8. Epub 2014 Jan
21.

Secretory myoepithelial carcinoma: a histologic and molecular survey and a
proposed nomenclature for mucin producing signet ring tumors.

Bastaki JM(1), Purgina BM, Dacic S, Seethala RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Sabah Hospital, Jamal Abdulnasir St., 3rd floor,
Kuwait, Kuwait, dr.bastaki@gmail.com.

Signet ring cell (mucin producing) adenocarcinoma is a rare low grade salivary
gland malignancy. While currently designated as an adenocarcinoma, myoepithelial 
differentiation has been implied in previously reported cases. We herein perform 
a survey of our cases of signet ring cell adenocarcinoma and review the
literature in order to refine categorization of this rare tumor. Five cases were 
retrieved. One was reclassified as a mammary analogue secretory carcinoma,
leaving four that fulfilled the criteria for signet ring cell adenocarcinoma: the
presence of prominent signet ring or vacuolated cells arranged in islands,
interconnecting strands, cords or sheets in a myxoid or hyaline stroma, or pools 
of mucin. An extensive panel of histochemical and immunohistochemical stains and 
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (modeled after common phenotypes and
molecular alterations seen in signet ring and myoepithelial tumors at other
sites) was performed. The male-to-female ratio was 3:1. The mean age was 56 years
(range 18-81). Sites involved included buccal mucosa (2), soft palate (1) and
deep parotid (1). Perineural and angiolymphatic invasion were present in three
and two cases respectively. One patient was lost to follow up and the remainder
were alive and without disease at time of last follow up (mean 38 months). All
cases showed mucicarmine positive vacuolated/signet ring cells embedded in a
myxoid stroma. Three cases showed at least focal p63 staining and two cases
showed positivity for calponin. Membranous E-cadherin was retained in all cases. 
FISH was negative for ETV6, EWSR1, and ALK1 rearrangements in all four cases.
Based on the current series and the previously reported cases, it is evident that
signet ring adenocarcinomas have a dual secretory and myoepithelial phenotype and
thus as a whole more appropriately designated as 'secretory myoepithelial
carcinoma.' They behave in a fairly indolent fashion and do not share the major
molecular alterations seen in other signet ring and myoepithelial tumor types.

PMCID: PMC4126932
PMID: 24446021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Jun;38(6):801-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000158.

Recurrent EWSR1-CREB3L1 gene fusions in sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma.

Arbajian E(1), Puls F, Magnusson L, Thway K, Fisher C, Sumathi VP, Tayebwa J,
Nord KH, Kindblom LG, Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Skåne 
University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden †Department of Musculoskeletal
Pathology and Orthopaedic Oncology, Royal Orthopaedic Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust and Division of Cancer Studies, Medical School, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham ‡Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.

Sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma (SEF) and low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma
(LGFMS) are 2 distinct types of sarcoma, with a subset of cases showing
overlapping morphologic and immunohistochemical features. LGFMS is characterized 
by expression of the MUC4 protein, and about 90% of cases display a distinctive
FUS-CREB3L2 gene fusion. In addition, SEF is often MUC4 positive, but is
genetically less well studied. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies 
have shown involvement of the FUS gene in the majority of so-called hybrid
LGFMS/SEF and in 10% to 25% of sarcomas with pure SEF morphology. In this study, 
we investigated a series of 10 primary tumors showing pure SEF morphology, 4
cases of LGFMS that at local or distant relapse showed predominant SEF
morphology, and 1 primary hybrid LGFMS/SEF. All but 1 case showed diffuse
expression for MUC4. Using FISH, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction,
and/or mRNA sequencing in selected cases, we found recurrent EWSR1-CREB3L1 fusion
transcripts by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction in 3/10 pure SEF
cases and splits and deletions of the EWSR1 and/or CREB3L1 genes by FISH in 6
additional cases. All 5 cases of LGFMS with progression to SEF morphology or
hybrid features had FUS-CREB3L2 fusion transcripts. Our results indicate that
EWSR1 and CREB3L1 rearrangements are predominant over FUS and CREB3L2
rearrangements in pure SEF, highlighting that SEF and LGFMS are different tumor
types, with different impacts on patient outcome.

PMID: 24441665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cancer. 2014 Feb 15;120(4):579-88. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28555. Epub 2014 Jan 10.

EWS-FLI-1 regulates the neuronal repressor gene REST, which controls Ewing
sarcoma growth and vascular morphology.

Zhou Z(1), Yu L, Kleinerman ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.

BACKGROUND: RE1-silencing transcription factor (REST), a neuronal repressor gene,
regulates neuronal stem cell differentiation. Ewing sarcoma may originate from
neural crest cells. In the current study, the authors investigated whether REST
plays a role in the growth of this tumor.
METHODS: REST expression was determined by Western blot analysis and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction in 3 human Ewing sarcoma cell lines and 7
patient tumor samples. The role of REST in tumor growth and tumor vascular
morphology was determined using a Ewing sarcoma xenograft model.
Immunofluorescence staining, Hypoxyprobe, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assays were performed to
investigate the impact of REST on pericyte marker expression, hypoxia, and
apoptosis in vivo.
RESULTS: High levels of REST were expressed in all 3 human Ewing sarcoma cell
lines and in 6 of the 7 patient tumor samples. Overexpression of EWS-FLI-1 in
human mesenchymal stem cells and human neural progenitor cells was found to
increase REST expression. Inhibition of EWS-FLI-1 using small interfering RNA
decreased REST expression in human Ewing sarcoma cells. Inhibition of REST did
not affect EWS-FLI-1, but significantly suppressed tumor growth in vivo, reduced 
the tumor vessel pericyte markers a- smooth muscle actin (SMA) and desmin,
increased hypoxia and apoptosis in tumor tissues, and decreased the expression of
delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4) and Hes1.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of REST suppressed tumor growth, inhibited pericyte
marker expression, and increased tumor hypoxia and apoptosis. Because tumor
vessel function has been linked to tumor growth and metastases, REST may be a new
therapeutic target in patients with Ewing sarcoma.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3969734
PMID: 24415532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Muscle Nerve. 2014 Jun;49(6):922-7. doi: 10.1002/mus.24165.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor: a rare cause of a progressive brachial
plexopathy.

Mathys J(1), Vajtai I, Vögelin E, Zimmermann DR, Ozdoba C, Hewer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, and University
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is an uncommon,
embryonic-type neoplasm, typically presenting as an abdominal mass in young men. 
A single case of DSRCT arising in the peripheral nervous system has been reported
previously.
METHODS: The clinical course, imaging, electrophysiological, intraoperative,
histopathological, molecular findings, and postoperative follow-up are reported.
RESULTS: A 43-year-old man presented with slowly progressive right brachial
plexopathy. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed an enlarged medial cord with
heterogeneous contrast enhancement. Histology showed a "small round cell"
neoplasm with a polyphenotypic immunoprofile, including epithelial and
mesenchymal markers. A pathognomonic fusion of Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 
and Wilms tumor 1 genes (EWSR1/WT1) was present. Treatment involved gross total
excision and local radiotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings confirm the occurrence of DSRCT as a primary peripheral
nerve tumor. Despite its usually very aggressive clinical course, prolonged
recurrence-free survival may be reached. Histomorphology and immunoprofile of
DSRCT may lead to misdiagnosis as small cell carcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24395394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cancer Genet. 2013 Nov;206(11):387-92. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2013.10.005. Epub
2013 Nov 4.

Multiple EWSR1-WT1 and WT1-EWSR1 copies in two cases of desmoplastic round cell
tumor.

La Starza R(1), Barba G(1), Nofrini V(1), Pierini T(1), Pierini V(1), Marcomigni 
L(2), Perruccio K(2), Matteucci C(1), Storlazzi CT(3), Daniele G(3), Crescenzi
B(1), Giansanti M(4), Giovenali P(5), Dal Cin P(6), Mecucci C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy. (2)Oncology Unit, General Hospital, Perugia, Italy. (3)Department
of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy. (4)Department of
Pathology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy. (5)Diagnostic Cytology and
Histology, Perugia General Hospital, Perugia, Italy. (6)Department of Pathology, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy. Electronic address: cristina.mecucci@unipg.it.

To provide new insights into the genomic profile of desmoplastic round cell
tumors (DSRCT), we applied fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and
metaphase comparative genomic hybridization (M-CGH) to two newly diagnosed cases.
FISH detected multiple subclones bearing one to three copies of
der(11)t(11;22)(p13;q12) and/or der(22)t(11;22)(p13;q12) in both patients. This
peculiar genomic imbalance might result from derivative chromosome duplication
due to non-disjunction and/or mitotic recombination between normal and derivative
chromosomes 11 and 22. Concomitant loss of normal chromosomes (i.e., 11 in
patient 1 and 22 in patient 2) caused loss of the WT1 or EWSR1 wild-type allele. 
M-CGH identified other genomic imbalances: gain at chromosome 3 in both cases and
chromosome 5 polysomy in patient 1. Common genomic events (i.e., trisomy 3 and
extra EWSR1-WT1 and WT1-EWSR1 copies) probably contributed to disease
pathogenesis and/or evolution of DSRCT. Our study demonstrated that an integrated
molecular cytogenetic approach identified EWSR1-WT1 cooperating molecular events 
and genetic markers for prognosis. Thus, FISH and M-CGH might well be applied in 
a large series of patients to elucidate the genomic background of DSRCT.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24388397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Pathology. 2014 Feb;46(2):105-12. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0000000000000049.

Promiscuous genes involved in recurrent chromosomal translocations in soft tissue
tumours.

Antonescu CR(1), Dal Cin P.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
2Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United
States.

Soft tissue tumours represent a heterogeneous group of mesenchymal lesions and
their classification continues to evolve as a result of incorporating advances in
cytogenetic and molecular techniques. In the last decade, traditional diagnostic 
approaches were supplemented with a significant number of reliable molecular
diagnostic tools, detecting tumour type specific genetic alterations.
Additionally, the successful application of some of these techniques to formalin 
fixed, paraffin embedded tissue enabled a broader range of clinical material to
be subjected to molecular analysis. However, despite all these remarkable
advances, the realisation that some of the genetic abnormalities are not fully
histotype specific and that certain gene aberrations can be shared among
different sarcoma types, otherwise completely unrelated clinically or
immunophenotypically, has introduced some drawbacks in surgical pathology
practice. One such common example is the presence of EWSR1 gene rearrangements by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), a test now preferred over the
elaborate RT-PCR testing, in a variety of benign and highly malignant soft tissue
tumours, in addition to a subset of carcinomas. Furthermore, the presence of
identical gene fusions in completely different sarcoma types (i.e., EWSR1-ATF1,
EWSR1-CREB1) or in non-mesenchymal malignancies (epithelial or haematological)
has raised skepticism as to their diagnostic utility, and their lack of
specificity has been compared to the limitations of other ancillary techniques,
in particular immunohistochemistry. This review catalogues the main groups of
genes that behave in a promiscuous manner within recurrent fusion events in soft 
tissue tumours. Although we acknowledge that the present molecular classification
of soft tissue tumours is much more complex than two decades ago, when EWSR1 gene
rearrangements had been described as the hallmark of Ewing sarcoma, we make the
strong argument that with very few exceptions, the prevalence of fusion
transcripts in most sarcomas is such that they come to define these entities and 
can be used as highly specific molecular diagnostic markers in the right clinical
and pathological context.

PMID: 24378390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Bioorg Khim. 2014 Jan-Feb;40(1):20-30.

Disordered binding regions of Ewing's sarcoma fusion proteins.

Todorova R.

A relationship was found between the Amino acid (AA) composition, Intrinsic
Protein Disorder (IPD) and Protein Binding Regions (PBRs) of the functional
regions of Ewing's sarcoma protein (EWS) and oncogenic EWS fusion proteins
(EFPs). EWS has high IPD and 64% predicted Disordered Binding Regions (DBRs) by
ANCHOR. The native Transcription Factors, fused to EWS Activation Domain (EAD) in
EFPs, show high DBRs in N-terminal domain and relatively low in C-terminal
domain. EFPs oncogenic function is related to IPD and PBRs probabilities, high
around breakpoint and decreased in the fused Transcription Factor. The increased 
IPD in EAD around (AA 82), and the small RBRs around (AAs (50-60) and 100) are
consistent with the reported physical interactions with RNA Polymerase II
subunits. The AAs (228-264) of EWS, interacting with ZFM1 (SF1), correspond to
two peaks of DBRs by Anchor and high IPD by IUPred. The IQ domain of EAD (AAs
258-280) that is phosphorylated by PKC and interacts with calmodulin, has high
IPD and DBRs probability. The Ser266, conserved site of PKC phosphorylation, is
situated in DBR and IPD region with about 100% probability. The small PBRs found 
in the EAD correspond to important physical protein-protein interactions,
confirmed by experimental data. Thus regions of EWS and EFPs, included in
functional interactions with other partners, are enriched of Protein Binding
Regions by ANCHOR. The development of IPD- and PBRs-related, EWS-FLI1-directed
specific therapies will help the design of antitumor agents against ESFT because 
of high patient mortality in cases of meta- static disease.

PMID: 25898720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Med Life. 2014;7 Spec No. 3:114-9.

Detection of EWS/FLI-1 fusion in non-Ewing soft tissue tumors.

Trancau IO(1), Huica R(2), Surcel M(3), Munteanu A(3), Ursaciuc C(3).

Author information: 
(1)"Foisor" Orthopedics Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania ; "Carol Davila"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. (2)Immunology
Department, "Victor Babes" National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania ; 
"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Immunology Department, "Victor Babes" National Institute of Pathology,
Bucharest, Romania.

Erratum in
    J Med Life. 2015;8 Spec Issue:124.

OBJECTIVES: EWS/FLI-1 fusion mainly appears in Ewing's sarcoma or the primitive
neuroectodermal tumors and represents a genomic marker for these tumors. However,
it can appear with lower frequency in other soft tissue tumors. The paper
investigates the presence of EWS/FLI-1 fusion in clinically diagnosed sarcoma
belonging to different non-Ewing connective tissue tumors in order to search for 
a possible new biomarker valuable for investigators.
METHODOLOGY: 20 patients with soft tissue tumors, who underwent surgery, were
tested. Intra-operative samples of normal and tumor tissue were collected for
histopathological diagnosis and genetics determinations. The patients' RNA from
tumor and normal peritumoral tissue was extracted and EWS/FLI-1 fusion screened
by quantitative real-time PCR. The relative expression of the fusion in the tumor
sample was compared to the similar expression in normal tissue.
RESULTS: The amplification in the threshold zone was shown by 5 samples (25%): 2 
clear cell sarcoma, 1 fibrosarcoma, 1 malignant tumor of nerve sheath, 1
metastatic adenocarcinoma. We differentiated between the unspecific amplification
and concluded that these are weak positive results.
CONCLUSIONS: Genomic investigation may establish the tumor malignancy and its
possible affiliation earlier than histopathology. It can support the screening of
EWS/FLI-1 fusion in a larger variety of clinically diagnosed soft tissue tumors.

PMCID: PMC4391413
PMID: 25870707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Tumori. 2013 Jul-Aug;99(4):e152-5. doi: 10.1700/1361.15114.

A case of NUT midline carcinoma with no HPV infection, slight EWSR1 rearrangement
and strong expression of EGFR.

Maffini F, French CA, Cameron MJ, Stufano V, Barberis M, Pisa E, Manzotti M,
Cattaneo A, De Fiori E, Viale G.

NUT midline carcinoma (NMC) is a rare neoplasm with a poor prognosis and
involving mostly young patients. Here we describe a classic NMC with a BRD4-NUT
fusion gene in a middle-aged woman. We also analyzed some biological features
that could potentially influence its clinical behavior such as HPV infection,
EWSR1 rearrangement, and the status of the EGFR gene.

PMID: 24326851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2015 Jan;37(1):e51-4. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000081.

Unusual genetic aberrations including a deletion of KLF6 tumor suppressor gene
revealed by integrated cytogenetic approaches in a pediatric ewing sarcoma.

White JC(1), Halligan GE, de Chadarévian JP, Pascasio JM, Punnet HH, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pediatrics, Section of Oncology †Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Drexel University College of Medicine and St. Christopher's 
Hospital for Children, Philadelphia, PA.

Ewing sarcoma is the third most common sarcoma in children and young adults. Its 
characteristic chromosomal rearrangement results in a chimerical EWSR1-ETS
transcription factor. Secondary genetic alterations are very common. Membranous
expression of CD99 is seen in almost all tumors. We report 2 unusual cytogenetic 
findings in a pediatric Ewing sarcoma, an insertion of the MIC2 gene encoding
CD99 from Xp to 10p and a submicroscopic deletion of the well-known tumor
supressor gene KLF6. The latter has not been described previously in pediatric
neoplasms. Molecular pathways in tumorigenesis and genetic complexity in cancer
are discussed.

PMID: 24322504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Histopathology. 2014 Jan;64(1):134-50. doi: 10.1111/his.12269. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

The diversity of soft tissue tumours with EWSR1 gene rearrangements: a review.

Fisher C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.

Many soft tissue sarcomas have chromosomal translocations with resultant
formation of new fusion genes. Among the genes that can be rearranged, the EWSR1 
gene has been identified as a partner in a wide variety of clinically and
pathologically diverse sarcomas as well as some non-mesenchymal tumours. The
former include Ewing sarcoma and similar (Ewing-like) small round cell sarcomas, 
desmoplastic small round cell tumour, myxoid liposarcoma, extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma, angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, clear cell sarcoma of soft
tissue and clear cell sarcoma-like tumours of the gastrointestinal tract, primary
pulmonary myxoid sarcoma, extrasalivary myoepithelial tumours and sporadic
examples of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma, sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma
and mesothelioma. EWSR1 is a 'promiscuous' gene that can fuse with many different
partner genes, but sometimes this results in phenotypically identical tumours.
EWSR1 can, conversely, partner with the same genes in morphologically and
behaviourally different neoplasms. This paper reviews the diversity of the
several soft tissue tumour types that are associated with rearrangement of the
EWSR1 gene.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24320889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2014 Jan;33(1):11-5. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31828309e6.

Juvenile granulosa cell tumors: immunoreactivity for CD99 and Fli-1 and EWSR1
translocation status: a study of 11 cases.

Jarboe EA(1), Hirschowitz SL, Geiersbach KB, Wallander ML, Tripp SR, Layfield LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology (E.A.J., K.B.G., L.J.L.), University of Utah School
of Medicine ARUP Laboratories (E.A.J., K.B.G., M.L.W., S.R.T., L.J.L.), Salt Lake
City, Utah The David Geffen School of Medicine (S.L.H.), Los Angeles, California.

The accurate diagnosis of a juvenile granulosa cell tumor (JGCT) can be
challenging, as these neoplasms often exhibit morphologic features that overlap
other ovarian neoplasms. In addition, the immunohistochemical profile exhibited
by JGCT is fairly nonspecific and typically includes reactivity for CD99.
Recently, we noted that JGCTs can show immunohistochemical expression of Fli-1, a
transcription factor expressed by Ewing sarcoma, a neoplasm that is occasionally 
in the differential diagnosis of JGCT. We evaluated a series of JGCTs to
determine whether Fli-1 is commonly expressed by these tumors and whether they
demonstrate chromosomal arrangements in EWSR1. Cases diagnosed as JGCT (n=11)
were immunohistochemically evaluated for expression of Fli-1 and CD99.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed on all cases to search for
chromosomal rearrangements in EWSR1. All 11 of our cases exhibited positive
immunohistochemical staining for Fli-1 and CD99. None of the cases demonstrated
rearrangement in EWSR1 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. In cases of JGCT
that cannot be reliably distinguished from Ewing sarcoma based on morphology and 
immunohistochemistry alone, fluorescence in situ hybridization testing for EWSR1 
rearrangements seems to be a useful diagnostic adjunct for their separation.

PMID: 24300529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Pathol Oncol Res. 2014 Jul;20(3):503-16. doi: 10.1007/s12253-013-9721-2. Epub
2013 Nov 30.

Clinicopathological and molecular spectrum of ewing sarcomas/PNETs, including
validation of EWSR1 rearrangement by conventional and array FISH technique in
certain cases.

Rekhi B(1), Vogel U, Basak R, Desai SB, Jambhekar NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, India,
rekhi.bharat@gmail.com.

Over the years, a wide clinicopathological spectrum has been identified within
Ewing family of tumors (EFTs). As these tumors are chemosensitive, their correct 
and timely identification is necessary. The aims of this study were (1) to
present the diverse clinicopathological and molecular profile of EFTs in our
settings, (2) to identify a pragmatic approach for diagnosing EFTs, especially
for application of ancillary techniques, namely RT-PCR for specific transcripts
(EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG) and FISH for EWSR1 gene rearrangement, in certain cases and
(3) to show the utility of tissue microarray in establishing a new FISH test.
Fifty-eight EFTs were identified in 38 males and 20 females within an age-range
of 1-65 years (median, 16), mostly in lower extremities (14) (24.1 %).
Therapeutically, most patients underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy with subsequent
surgery. Histopathologically, diagnosis of EFTs was initially offered in 41/58
(70.6 %) tumors. On review, 59 % tumors showed diffuse pattern, while 41 %
displayed rosettes. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were mostly diffusely
positive for CD99 (48/52) (92.3 %); FLI-1 (17/18) (94.4 %); variably for BCL2
(16/18) (88.8 %), synaptophysin (6/20) (35 %), S100-P (2/7) (28.5 %), CD56 (2/5) 
(40 %), NSE (2/5) (40 %), calponin (3/4) (75 %), EMA (5/24) (20.8 %) and CK
(3/24) (12.5 %), the latter two mostly focally. Fifty five tumors were EWS-FLI1
positive, while a single tumor was EWS-ERG positive. Sensitivity for PCR was 61
%. EWSR1 rearrangement was detected by FISH in 12/13 Ewing sarcomas/PNETs.
Sensitivity for EWSR1 test was 92.3 % and specificity was 100 %. Thirty-eight
tumors, including 14 molecular confirmed EFTs and 21 other tumors were tested for
EWSR1 rearrangement. Among 21 unrelated tumors, EWSR1 rearrangement was detected 
in few myoepithelial tumors, occasional desmoplastic small round cell tumor and
an extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Further, a tissue microarray with a
separate set of 8 EFTs, confirmed at another laboratory was analysed for
validation of EWSR1 rearrangement test. 23/28 (82.1 %) tissue cores of the tissue
microarray, stained by FISH were interpretable, including EWSR1 rearrangement,
detected in 20/28 tissue cores; not detected in 3 liver cores and uninterpretable
in 5 (17.8 %) cores. Classical EFTs can be diagnosed with diffuse, membranous
CD99 positivity, intranuclear FLI1 positivity and LCA negativity in malignant
round cells. In unconventional cases, it is indispensable to reveal the
concomitant fusion m-RNA by RT-PCR. In case of negative molecular results, it is 
necessary to prove EWSR1 rearrangement by FISH. These tests should be interpreted
with clinicopathological correlation. Tissue microarrays for FISH are useful
during validation of a new test, especially when sarcomas like EFTs show less
genetic heterogeneity within tumor cells.

PMID: 24293381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;20(5):1190-203. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0901.
Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Dual targeting of EWS-FLI1 activity and the associated DNA damage response with
trabectedin and SN38 synergistically inhibits Ewing sarcoma cell growth.

Grohar PJ(1), Segars LE, Yeung C, Pommier Y, D'Incalci M, Mendoza A, Helman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Monroe Carrell Jr. Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt
and the Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee; Molecular Oncology
Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch; Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Center 
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; and Istituto 
di Ricerche Farmacologiche "Mario Negri" -IRCCS, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;20(5):1064-6.

PURPOSE: The goal of this study is to optimize the activity of trabectedin for
Ewing sarcoma by developing a molecularly targeted combination therapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We have recently shown that trabectedin interferes with the 
activity of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma cells. In this report, we build on this
work to develop a trabectedin-based combination therapy with improved EWS-FLI1
suppression that also targets the drug-associated DNA damage to Ewing sarcoma
cells.
RESULTS: We demonstrate by siRNA experiments that EWS-FLI1 drives the expression 
of the Werner syndrome protein (WRN) in Ewing sarcoma cells. Because
WRN-deficient cells are known to be hypersensitive to camptothecins, we utilize
trabectedin to block EWS-FLI1 activity, suppress WRN expression, and selectively 
sensitize Ewing sarcoma cells to the DNA-damaging effects of SN38. We show that
trabectedin and SN38 are synergistic, demonstrate an increase in DNA
double-strand breaks, an accumulation of cells in S-phase and a low picomolar
IC50. In addition, SN38 cooperates with trabectedin to augment the suppression of
EWS-FLI1 downstream targets, leading to an improved therapeutic index in vivo.
These effects translate into the marked regression of two Ewing sarcoma
xenografts at a fraction of the dose of camptothecin used in other xenograft
studies.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide the basis and rationale for translating this
drug combination to the clinic. In addition, the study highlights an approach
that utilizes a targeted agent to interfere with an oncogenic transcription
factor and then exploits the resulting changes in gene expression to develop a
molecularly targeted combination therapy.

©2013 AACR

PMID: 24277455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 May;22(3):197-201. doi: 10.1177/1066896913510029. Epub
2013 Nov 25.

Small cell tumors of the thyroid gland: a review.

Eloy C(1), Cameselle-Teijeiro JM, Rousseau E, Sobrinho-Simões M.

Author information: 
(1)1IPATIMUP (Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University
of Porto), Porto, Portugal.

The small cell group of thyroid tumors that includes lymphoma, poorly
differentiated carcinoma, medullary carcinoma, secondary neoplasms, as well as
tumors with uncertain histogenesis, remains as a valid diagnostic cul-de-sac due 
to its heterogeneous constitution. The existence of small cell thyroid tumors
with EWSR1-FLI1 rearrangement together with neuroendocrine and/or carcinomatous
differentiation raises not only differential diagnostic problems but also a very 
interesting therapeutic dilemma. This review explores the classification of small
cell tumors of the thyroid taking into account the immunophenotype and molecular 
profile of such tumors.

PMID: 24275884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cell. 2013 Nov 21;155(5):1049-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.033.

Phosphorylation-regulated binding of RNA polymerase II to fibrous polymers of
low-complexity domains.

Kwon I(1), Kato M, Xiang S, Wu L, Theodoropoulos P, Mirzaei H, Han T, Xie S,
Corden JL, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9152, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2014 Jan 16;156(1-2):374.

The low-complexity (LC) domains of the products of the fused in sarcoma (FUS),
Ewings sarcoma (EWS), and TAF15 genes are translocated onto a variety of
different DNA-binding domains and thereby assist in driving the formation of
cancerous cells. In the context of the translocated fusion proteins, these LC
sequences function as transcriptional activation domains. Here, we show that
polymeric fibers formed from these LC domains directly bind the C-terminal domain
(CTD) of RNA polymerase II in a manner reversible by phosphorylation of the
iterated, heptad repeats of the CTD. Mutational analysis indicates that the
degree of binding between the CTD and the LC domain polymers correlates with the 
strength of transcriptional activation. These studies offer a simple means of
conceptualizing how RNA polymerase II is recruited to active genes in its
unphosphorylated state and released for elongation following phosphorylation of
the CTD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4010232
PMID: 24267890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Histopathology. 2014 Jan;64(1):26-37. doi: 10.1111/his.12281. Epub 2013 Nov 12.

Round cell sarcomas beyond Ewing: emerging entities.

Antonescu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.

Primitive small blue round cell tumours (SBRCT) of childhood and young adults
have been problematic to diagnose and classify. Diagnosis is also complicated in 
cases with atypical morphology, aberrant immunoprofiles and unusual clinical
presentations. Even with the increased use of ancillary techniques in archival
material, such as immunohistochemistry and molecular/genetic methods, a
proportion of these tumours cannot be subclassified into specific histological
types. A subset of tumours resembling microscopically the Ewing sarcoma family of
tumours (EFT), being composed of primitive small round cells and occurring in
paediatric or young adult age groups, remain unclassified, being negative for
EWSR1, SS18(SYT), DDIT3(CHOP) and FOXO1(FKHR) gene rearrangements by FISH/RT-PCR.
A small number of cases sharing the undifferentiated EFT appearance have been
characterized recently carrying BCOR-CCNB3 or CIC-DUX4 fusions. However, based on
the somewhat limited number of cases, it remains unclear if these newly defined
genetic entities belong to any of the pre-existing clinicopathological disorders 
or represent altogether novel conditions. This review presents the latest
molecular findings related to these SBRCTs, beyond the common EWSR1-ETS fusions. 
Specific attention has been paid to morphological features not associated
typically with classic EFT, and the value of ancillary tests that can be applied 
when dealing with EWSR1-negative SBRCTs is discussed.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24215322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Virchows Arch. 2013 Dec;463(6):837-42. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1499-9. Epub 2013 
Nov 10.

Superficial EWSR1-negative undifferentiated small round cell sarcoma with
CIC/DUX4 gene fusion: a new variant of Ewing-like tumors with locoregional lymph 
node metastasis.

Machado I(1), Cruz J, Lavernia J, Rubio L, Campos J, Barrios M, Grison C, Chene
V, Pierron G, Delattre O, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Instituto Valenciano de Oncología, Valencia, Spain,
isidro.machado@uv.es.

The present study describes a new case of EWSR1-negative undifferentiated sarcoma
with CIC/DUX4 gene fusion. This case is similar to tumors described as primitive 
undifferentiated round cell sarcomas that occur mainly in the trunk and display
an aggressive behavior. To our knowledge, this is the first report of such a
tumor presenting locoregional lymph node metastasis. In view of previous studies 
that prove the existence of a particular variant of undifferentiated sarcoma with
Ewing-like morphology and CIC/DUX-4 gene fusion, a search for this gene fusion in
all undifferentiated round cell sarcomas should be considered if a conclusive
diagnosis cannot be reached following other conventional studies. Although
additional cases with more extensive follow-up studies are needed, we believe
that EWSR1-negative undifferentiated small round cell sarcoma with CIC/DUX4 gene 
fusion should be added to the list of new sarcoma variants with the possibility
of lymph node metastasis.

PMID: 24213312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Jan;21(1):136-45. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.144. Epub 2013
Nov 1.

A multifunctional protein EWS regulates the expression of Drosha and microRNAs.

Kim KY(1), Hwang YJ, Jung MK, Choe J, Kim Y, Kim S, Lee CJ, Ahn H, Lee J, Kowall 
NW, Kim YK, Kim JI, Lee SB, Ryu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University Graduate School, 
Seoul, South Korea.

EWS (Ewing's Sarcoma) gene encodes an RNA/DNA-binding protein that is
ubiquitously expressed and involved in various cellular processes. EWS deficiency
leads to impaired development and early senescence through unknown mechanisms. We
found that EWS regulates the expression of Drosha and microRNAs (miRNAs). EWS
deficiency resulted in increased expression of Drosha, a well-known
microprocessor, and increased levels of miR-29b and miR-18b. Importantly, miR-29b
and miR-18b were directly involved in the post-transcriptional regulation of
collagen IV alpha 1 (Col4a1) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in EWS
knock-out (KO) mouse embryonic fibroblast cells. The upregulation of Drosha,
miR-29b and miR-18b and the sequential downregulation of Col4a1 and CTGF
contributed to the deregulation of dermal development in EWS KO mice. Otherwise, 
knockdown of Drosha rescued miRNA-dependent downregulation of Col4a1 and CTGF
proteins. Taken together, our data indicate that EWS is involved in
post-transcriptional regulation of Col4a1 and CTGF via a Drosha-miRNA-dependent
pathway. This finding suggests that EWS has a novel role in dermal morphogenesis 
through the modulation of miRNA biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3857629
PMID: 24185621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Aug;22(7):537-42. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e31829852e7.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma of the vulva with PLAG1 gene activation:
molecular genetic characterization of 2 cases.

Dotlic S(1), Gatalica Z, Wen W, Ghazalpour A, Mangham C, Babic D, Zekan J, Vranic
S.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology and Cytology <U+2225>Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University Hospital Center Zagreb §Department of Pathology,
University of Zagreb Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia †Caris Life Sciences,
Phoenix, AZ ‡Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Orthopaedic and District Hospital,
Oswestry and Royal Orthopaedic Hospital, Birmingham, UK ¶Department of Pathology,
Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is a rare mesenchymal neoplasm, rarely 
reported in the genitourinary tract with only 5 cases reported in the vulva. We
investigated 2 cases of vulvar sarcomas whose morphologic appearance and
immunohistochemical profiles were consistent with EMC using fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH), reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, and a
whole genome expression array. FISH and reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction assays showed no EWSR1 and NR4A3 loci rearrangements. Microarray-based
analysis also revealed no changes in NR4A3 and EWSR1 gene transcription levels.
Microarray data showed a significant downregulation of the muscle-related genes
(eg, myosin heavy chain family, actins, myoglobin, desmin, creatine kinase,
troponins) and cytokeratins (KRT6A, 6B, 13, 14, and 78), upregulation of several 
neuron-specific genes [neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM-1/CD56),
neurofilament (NEFH)], along with some well-characterized tumor biomarkers
[carbonic anhydrase IX (CA-9), topoisomerase IIa (TOP2A), matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP-7, MMP-9), CDKN2 gene (p16-INK4a), checkpoint homolog 2
(CHEK2)]. Notably, both tumors showed upregulation of the pleomorphic adenoma
gene 1 (PLAG1), and in 1 case PLAG1 gene rearrangement was detected by
break-apart FISH. Some vulvar tumors with morphologic and immunohistochemical
characteristics of EMC may represent a molecular genetic entity separate from
EMCs arising in other locations. PLAG1 gene activation appears to be involved in 
the development of these neoplasms.

PMID: 24185117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2013 Nov;137(11):1680-3. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2012-0467-CR.

Primary clear cell sarcoma of the tongue.

Kraft S(1), Antonescu CR, Rosenberg AE, Deschler DG, Nielsen GP.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston (Drs Kraft, Rosenberg, and Nielsen); the Department of
Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York (Dr
Antonescu); and the Division of Head and Neck Surgery, Massachusetts Eye and Ear 
Infirmary and Harvard Medical School, Boston (Dr Deschler).

Clear cell sarcoma shares features with melanoma, but frequently shows EWSR1
rearrangements. It is an aggressive tumor typically occurring in the soft tissues
of the extremities, with a gastrointestinal variant with less consistent
melanocytic differentiation. It is extremely rare in the head and neck region,
with no reported cases in the oral cavity. We report a case of an 82-year-old
woman with a clear cell sarcoma arising in the tongue, with cervical lymph node
metastases. Histologically, the tumor showed some features of gastrointestinal
clear cell sarcoma. No osteoclast-type giant cells were present. The tumor cells 
were positive for S100 protein and negative for other melanocytic markers.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed rearrangements of EWSR1 and ATF1. This 
case expands the spectrum of clear cell sarcoma with a gastrointestinal-like
variant in a novel site, emphasizing the need to consider it as a differential
diagnosis to melanoma in mucosal sites.

PMID: 24168510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 1;74(1):224-34. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2100. Epub
2013 Oct 24.

3'-UTR poly(T/U) tract deletions and altered expression of EWSR1 are a hallmark
of mismatch repair-deficient cancers.

Kishore S(1), Piscuoglio S, Kovac MB, Gylling A, Wenzel F, Trapani F, Altermatt
HJ, Mele V, Marra G, Peltomäki P, Terracciano L, Zavolan M, Heinimann K.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Biozentrum, University of Basel; Research Group Human
Genetics, Dept of Biomedicine, University of Basel, and Division of Medical
Genetics, University Hospital Basel; Institute for Surgical Research and Hospital
Management and Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel; Institute of
Pathology, University Hospital of Basel, Basel; Pathologie Laenggasse Bern, Bern;
Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland; Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; and Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

The genome-wide accumulation of DNA replication errors known as microsatellite
instability (MSI) is the hallmark lesion of DNA mismatch repair (MMR)-deficient
cancers. Although testing for MSI is widely used to guide clinical management,
the contribution of MSI at distinct genic loci to the phenotype remains largely
unexplored. Here, we report that a mononucleotide (T/U)16 tract located in the 3'
untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1)
gene is a novel MSI target locus that shows perfect sensitivity and specificity
in detecting mismatch repair-deficient cancers in two independent populations. We
further found a striking relocalization of the EWSR1 protein from nucleus to
cytoplasm in MMR-deficient cancers and that the nonprotein-coding MSI target
locus itself has a modulatory effect on EWSR1 gene expression through alternative
3' end processing of the EWSR1 gene. Our results point to a MSI target
gene-specific effect in MMR-deficient cancers.

PMID: 24158095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Tumori. 2013 May-Jun;99(3):e104-6. doi: 10.1700/1334.14815.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor arising from the adrenal gland: a
case report and literature review.

Sasaki T, Onishi T, Yabana T, Hoshina A.

We report a rare case of Ewing's sarcoma (ES)/primitive neuroectodermal tumor
(PNET) arising from the adrenal gland. A 17-year-old Japanese woman presented
with left upper abdominal pain and high fever. Computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging revealed a 15 × 10 cm tumor replacing the adrenal gland.
Preoperative diagnosis was an adrenocortical carcinoma. Resection of the tumor
was performed. We obtained the final diagnosis of ES/PNET by immunohistochemical 
molecular study with positive staining for the MIC2 gene product (CD99) and a
Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) gene rearrangement. Local recurrence
was observed one month after the surgery. The patient was then treated with
systemic chemotherapy and localized radiotherapy.

PMID: 24158076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 Aug;22(5):427-33. doi: 10.1177/1066896913502227. Epub
2013 Oct 17.

PNET with neuroendocrine differentiation of the lung: Report of an unusual
entity.

Barroca H(1), Souto Moura C(2), Lopes JM(3), Lisboa S(4), Teixeira MR(4),
Damasceno M(2), Bastos P(5), Sobrinho-Simões M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Hospitalar S João, Porto, Portugal Departamento de Patologia e
Oncologia Médica da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal hbarroca@gmail.com. (2)Centro Hospitalar S João, Porto, Portugal
Departamento de Patologia e Oncologia Médica da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (3)Centro Hospitalar S João, Porto,
Portugal Departamento de Patologia e Oncologia Médica da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia
Molecular da Universidade do Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal. (4)Instituto
Português de Oncologia do Porto e Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar
(ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (5)Centro Hospitalar S João,
Porto, Portugal.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) has been the subject of
recent reports describing morphologic variants (adamantinoma-like, large cell,
spindle cell, sclerosing, clear cell, and vascular-like) of the most classic
form, as well as cases displaying unusual morphologic differentiation and
atypical immunohistochemical features. We report a case of an uncommon lung tumor
in a 20-year-old female, morphologically and molecularly consistent with an
Ewing's sarcoma/PNET tumor with foci of squamous differentiation, and peculiar
expression of vimentin, high-molecular-weight keratins, p63, synaptophysin, and
chromogranin. This case raises a challenging differential diagnostic problem with
therapeutic implications: Should the patient be treated following the protocols
for Ewing's sarcoma/PNET tumors or as for lung carcinoma with neuroendocrine
features? The patient we report here was treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy
for Ewing's sarcoma/PNET according to Euro Ewing 99 study protocol followed by
surgery and has no evidence of disease 15 months after the initial diagnosis.
This highlights the importance of achieving the correct diagnosis of these
atypical tumors using all clinical, morphological, and ancillary methods
available to allow for their correct and timely treatment.

© The Author(s) 2013.

PMID: 24141023  [PubMed - in process]


233. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 4;8(10):e77416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077416. eCollection
2013.

Ewing sarcoma cells secrete EWS/Fli-1 fusion mRNA via microvesicles.

Tsugita M(1), Yamada N, Noguchi S, Yamada K, Moritake H, Shimizu K, Akao Y, Ohno 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Gifu, Gifu, Japan ; United Graduate School of Drug Discovery and
Medical Information Sciences, Gifu, Gifu, Japan.

Tumours defined as Ewing sarcoma (ES) constitute a group of highly malignant
neoplasms that most often affect children and young adults in the first 2 decades
of life. The EWS/Fli-1 fusion gene, a product of the translocation t(11;22) (q24;
12), is detected in 95% of ES patients. Recently, it was validated that cells
emit a heterogeneous mixture of vesicular, organelle-like structures
(microvesicles, MVs) into their surroundings including blood and body fluids, and
that these MVs contain a selected set of tumor-related proteins and high levels
of mRNAs and miRNAs. In this present study, we detected the Ewing
sarcoma-specific EWS/Fli-1 mRNA in MVs from the culture medium of ES cell lines
carrying t(11;22) (q24; 12). Also, we detected this fusion gene in approximately 
40% of the blood samples from mice inoculated with xenografts of TC135 or A673
cells. These findings indicate the EWS/Fli-1 mRNA in MVs might be a new
non-invasive diagnostic marker for specific cases of Ewing sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3790721
PMID: 24124617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Adv Anat Pathol. 2013 Nov;20(6):398-406. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e3182a92e42.

GI tract tumors with melanocytic differentiation.

Karamchandani DM(1), Patil DT, Goldblum JR.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Division of Anatomic Pathology, Penn State Milton S.
Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA †Department of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, OH.

Gastrointestinal (GI) tract tumors with melanocytic differentiation may present
significant diagnostic challenges both for the pathologist and the clinician.
This comprehensive review discusses the relatively common as well as rare
entities that have melanocytic differentiation in the GI tract. Clinical,
histologic, immunohistochemical and molecular features are discussed along with
prognosis and differential diagnosis.

PMID: 24113310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Adv Anat Pathol. 2013 Nov;20(6):367-77. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e3182a92cc3.

Translocation-associated salivary gland tumors: a review and update.

Weinreb I(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, University Health Network †Department of
Pathobiology and Laboratory medicine, University of Toronto, ON, Canada.

In recent years the discovery of translocations and the fusion oncogenes that
they result in has changed the way diagnoses are made in the salivary gland.
These genetic aberrations are recurrent and reproducible and at the very least
serve as powerful diagnostic tools in salivary gland diagnosis and salivary gland
classification. They also show promise as prognostic markers and hopefully as
targets of therapy. Many of these fusions have been found in other tumor types
that show little to no overlap with their salivary gland counterparts, but
effectively they are specific within the salivary gland. In this review the 5
tumors currently known to harbor translocations will be discussed, namely
pleomorphic adenoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, mammary 
analog secretory carcinoma, and hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma. The discovery
and implications of each fusion will be highlighted and how they have helped
reshape the current classification of salivary gland tumors.

PMID: 24113307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Diagn Cytopathol. 2014 Nov;42(11):1002-5. doi: 10.1002/dc.23040. Epub 2013 Sep
18.

Extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma arising in the perineal region (Rectovaginal
Septum): a case report with respect to the usefulness of cytological examination.

Ishida M(1), Iwai M, Yoshida K, Kagotani A, Okabe H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shiga University of Medical
Science, Shiga, Japan; Division of Diagnostic Pathology, Shiga University of
Medical Science, Shiga, Japan.

PMID: 24106051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Neurol. 2013 Nov;260(11):2917-27. doi: 10.1007/s00415-013-7112-y. Epub 2013 Oct
2.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: an update on recent genetic insights.

Iguchi Y(1), Katsuno M, Ikenaka K, Ishigaki S, Sobue G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease
affecting both upper and lower motor neurons. The prognosis for ALS is extremely 
poor, but there is a limited course of treatment with only one approved
medication. A most striking recent discovery is that TDP-43 is identified as a
key molecule that is associated with both sporadic and familial forms of ALS.
TDP-43 is not only a pathological hallmark, but also a genetic cause for ALS.
Subsequently, a number of ALS-causative genes have been found. Above all, the
RNA-binding protein, such as FUS, TAF15, EWSR1 and hnRNPA1, have structural and
functional similarities to TDP-43, and physiological functions of some molecules,
including VCP, UBQLN2, OPTN, FIG4 and SQSTM1, are involved in a protein
degradation system. These discoveries provide valuable insight into the
pathogenesis of ALS, and open doors for developing an effective disease-modifying
therapy.

PMID: 24085347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Int J Cell Biol. 2013;2013:642853. doi: 10.1155/2013/642853. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Ewing sarcoma protein: a key player in human cancer.

Paronetto MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Rome "Foro Italico", 00135 Rome, 
Italy ; Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology, Fondazione Santa Lucia
IRCSS, 00143 Rome, Italy.

The Ewing sarcoma protein (EWS) is a well-known player in cancer biology for the 
specific translocations occurring in sarcomas. The EWS-FLI1 gene fusion is the
prototypical translocation that encodes the aberrant, chimeric transcription
factor, which is a landmark of Ewing tumors. In all described Ewing sarcoma
oncogenes, the EWS RNA binding domains are completely missing; thus RNA binding
properties are not retained in the hybrid proteins. However, it is currently
unknown whether the absence of EWS function in RNA metabolism plays a role in
oncogenic transformation or if EWS plays a role by itself in cancer development
besides its contribution to the translocation. In this regard, recent reports
have highlighted an essential role for EWS in the regulation of DNA damage
response (DDR), a process that counteracts genome stability and is often
deregulated in cancer cells. The first part of this review will describe the
structural features of EWS and its multiple roles in the regulation of gene
expression, which are exerted by coordinating different steps in the synthesis
and processing of pre-mRNAs. The second part will examine the role of EWS in the 
regulation of DDR- and cancer-related genes, with potential implications in
cancer therapies. Finally, recent advances on the involvement of EWS in
neuromuscular disorders will be discussed. Collectively, the information reviewed
herein highlights the broad role of EWS in bridging different cellular processes 
and underlines the contribution of EWS to genome stability and proper cell-cycle 
progression in higher eukaryotic cells.

PMCID: PMC3776376
PMID: 24082883  [PubMed]


239. Genes Cancer. 2013 May;4(5-6):213-23. doi: 10.1177/1947601913489569.

EWS and RE1-Silencing Transcription Factor Inhibit Neuronal Phenotype Development
and Oncogenic Transformation in Ewing Sarcoma.

Sankar S(1), Gomez NC, Bell R, Patel M, Davis IJ, Lessnick SL, Luo W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

The gene encoding EWS (EWSR1) is involved in various chromosomal translocations
that cause the production of oncoproteins responsible for multiple cancers
including Ewing sarcoma, myxoid liposarcoma, soft tissue clear cell sarcoma, and 
desmoplastic small round cell sarcoma. It is well known that EWS fuses to FLI to 
create EWS/FLI, which is the abnormal transcription factor that drives tumor
development in Ewing sarcoma. However, the role of wild-type EWS in Ewing sarcoma
pathogenesis remains unclear. In the current study, we identified EWS-regulated
genes and cellular processes through RNA interference combined with RNA
sequencing and functional annotation analyses. Interestingly, we found that EWS
and EWS/FLI co-regulate a significant cluster of genes, indicating an interplay
between the 2 proteins in regulating cellular functions. We found that among the 
EWS-down-regulated genes are a subset of neuronal genes that contain binding
sites for the RE1-silencing transcription factor (REST or neuron-restrictive
silencer factor [NRSF]), neuron-restrictive silencer element (NRSE), suggesting a
cooperative interaction between REST and EWS in gene regulation.
Co-immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that EWS interacts directly with
REST. Genome-wide binding analysis showed that EWS binds chromatin at or near
NRSE. Furthermore, functional studies revealed that both EWS and REST inhibit
neuronal phenotype development and oncogenic transformation in Ewing sarcoma
cells. Our data implicate an important role of EWS in the development of Ewing
sarcoma phenotype and highlight a potential value in modulating EWS function in
the treatment of Ewing sarcoma and other EWS translocation-based cancers.

PMCID: PMC3782006
PMID: 24069508  [PubMed]


240. J Clin Pathol. 2014 Mar;67(3):210-5. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2013-201857. Epub
2013 Sep 16.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: clinicopathological and molecular
characterisation with emphasis on variant histomorphology.

Kao YC(1), Lan J, Tai HC, Li CF, Liu KW, Tsai JW, Fang FM, Yu SC, Huang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, ,
Taipei, Taiwan.

AIMS: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is histologically typified by
nodules of histiocytoid spindle cells with pseudoangiomatoid spaces, fibrous
pseudocapsules and lymphocytic cuffs. The principal goal was to expand the
spectrum of AFHs through clinicopathological and molecular characterisation.
METHODS: Thirteen AFHs, including 11 with confirmed hallmark translocation, were 
reappraised for classic features, reactive osteoclasts, mitoses and stromal,
architectural and cytomorphological variations, with CD99, desmin and EMA stained
in available cases.
RESULTS: Seven male and six female patients ranged in age from 4 to 63 years
(median, 13), including 4 older than 20 years. Tumours were located on the
extremities (n=6), trunk (n=4) and scalp (n=3). Although fibrous pseudocapsules
were observed in all cases, four showed solid histology without pseudoangiomatoid
spaces and another one lacked peripheral lymphoid infiltrates. Nuclear
pleomorphism was striking in two cases, moderate in seven and absent in four,
with osteoclasts seen in two cases. In three AFHs with sclerotic matrix, one
exhibited perivascular hyalinisation and nuclear palisading, reminiscent of a
schwannoma. In three varyingly myxoid tumours, one closely resembled a
myoepithelioma with prominent reticular arrangement of spindle cells in an
abundant myxoid stroma. Besides EWSR1 gene rearrangement detected in four cases
by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), EWSR1-CREB1 fusion was confirmed in
nine cases, including a schwannoma-like AFH, and EWSR1-ATF1 fusion detected in a 
myoepithelioma-like AFH. Immunohistochemically, 56% of AFHs were positive for
EMA, 78% for desmin and 100% for CD99.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular testing is diagnostic of variant AFHs displaying diverse
histomorphological alterations in the architectural patterns, cytomorphology and 
extracellular matrix.

PMID: 24043718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;33(22):4448-60. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00241-13. Epub 2013 Sep 
16.

A novel role for keratin 17 in coordinating oncogenic transformation and cellular
adhesion in Ewing sarcoma.

Sankar S(1), Tanner JM, Bell R, Chaturvedi A, Randall RL, Beckerle MC, Lessnick
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of
Medicine, University of Utah.

Oncogenic transformation in Ewing sarcoma is caused by EWS/FLI, an aberrant
transcription factor fusion oncogene. Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1)
is a critical target gene activated by EWS/FLI, but the mechanism by which GLI1
contributes to the transformed phenotype of Ewing sarcoma was unknown. In this
work, we identify keratin 17 (KRT17) as a direct downstream target gene
upregulated by GLI1. We demonstrate that KRT17 regulates cellular adhesion by
activating AKT/PKB (protein kinase B) signaling. In addition, KRT17 is necessary 
for oncogenic transformation in Ewing sarcoma and accounts for much of the
GLI1-mediated transformation function but via a mechanism independent of AKT
signaling. Taken together, our data reveal previously unknown molecular functions
for a cytoplasmic intermediate filament protein, KRT17, in coordinating EWS/FLI- 
and GLI1-mediated oncogenic transformation and cellular adhesion in Ewing
sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3838177
PMID: 24043308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Oct;37(10):1630-1. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182a05a6b.

EWSR1 rearrangements in sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma.

Doyle LA(1), Hornick JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology Brigham and Women's Hospital Harvard Medical School
Boston, MA.

Comment on
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 May;37(5):734-8.

PMID: 24025527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Clin Pathol. 2014 Jan;67(1):90-2. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2013-201792. Epub 2013
Sep 11.

Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm with EWSR1 gene rearrangement.

Cao Q(1), Liu F, Niu G, Xue L, Han A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, , Guangzhou, China.

PMID: 24025453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2013 Oct;169(10):793-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2013.07.019.
Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: molecular
similarities and differences.

Neumann M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Tübingen, Calwerstr 3, 72076
Tübingen, Germany; DZNE, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases,
Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 15-17, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address:
Manuela.Neumann@dzne.de.

In the last years, new disease proteins and genes have been identified in
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
leading to a dramatic shift in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms
underlying both conditions. The vast majority of FTLD and ALS are characterized
by the abnormal accumulation of TDP-43, including genetic forms associated with
mutations in the genes C9ORF72, GRN, TARDBP and VCP. The overlap in pathology and
of genetic factors, particularly C9ORF72 as common cause of ALS and FTLD,
provides molecular evidence that both conditions represent a spectrum of diseases
sharing similar pathomechanisms. Accumulation of the protein FUS defines another 
subset of FTLD and ALS. However, here some striking differences have been
identified. All members of the FET family (FUS, EWS, TAF15) are co-accumulating
with their nuclear import receptor Transportin in FTLD-FUS which is usually not
associated with FUS mutations, whilst ALS-FUS is almost always associated with
FUS mutations and reveals only FUS aggregates. Together with recent data
demonstrating differences in the arginine methylation status of FUS in FTLD-FUS
and ALS-FUS, these findings strongly imply at least partially distinct underlying
disease mechanisms in these molecular subtypes of ALS and FTLD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24011641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 24;33(30):3927-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.361. Epub 2013 Sep 2.

Suppression of FOXO1 is responsible for a growth regulatory repressive
transcriptional sub-signature of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma.

Niedan S(1), Kauer M(1), Aryee DN(2), Kofler R(3), Schwentner R(1), Meier A(4),
Pötschger U(1), Kontny U(4), Kovar H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria. (2)1] Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna
Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna, Austria [2] Department of Pediatrics, Medical
University, Vienna, Austria. (3)Division of Molecular Pathophysiology, Biocenter,
Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. (4)Division of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany.

The Ewing sarcoma (ES) EWS-FLI1 chimeric oncoprotein is a prototypic aberrant ETS
transcription factor with activating and repressive regulatory functions. We
report that EWS-FLI1-repressed promoters are enriched in forkhead box (FOX)
recognition motifs, and identify FOXO1 as a EWS-FLI1-suppressed regulator
orchestrating a major subset of EWS-FLI1-repressed genes. In addition to FOXO1
regulation by direct promoter binding of EWS-FLI1, its subcellular localization
and activity is regulated by cyclin-dependent kinase 2- and AKT-mediated
phosphorylation downstream of EWS-FLI1. Restoration of nuclear FOXO1 expression
in ES cells impaired proliferation and significantly reduced clonogenicity.
Gene-expression profiling revealed a significant overlap between
EWS-FLI1-repressed and FOXO1-activated genes. As a proof of principle for a
potential therapeutic application of our findings, the treatment of ES cell lines
with methylseleninic acid (MSA) reactivated endogenous FOXO1 in the presence of
EWS-FLI1 in a dose- and time-dependent manner and induced massive cell death
dependent on FOXO1. In an orthotopic xenograft mouse model, MSA increased FOXO1
expression in the tumor paralleled by a significant decrease in ES tumor growth. 
FOXO1 reactivation by small molecules may therefore serve as a promising strategy
for a future ES-specific therapy.

PMCID: PMC4114138
PMID: 23995784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Dev Cell. 2013 Aug 26;26(4):393-404. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.07.002.

A multifunctional protein, EWS, is essential for early brown fat lineage
determination.

Park JH(1), Kang HJ, Kang SI, Lee JE, Hur J, Ge K, Mueller E, Li H, Lee BC, Lee
SB.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The recent surge in obesity has provided an impetus to better understand the
mechanisms of adipogenesis, particularly in brown adipose tissue (BAT) because of
its potential utilization for antiobesity therapy. Postnatal brown adipocytes
arise from early muscle progenitors, but how brown fat lineage is determined is
not completely understood. Here, we show that a multifunctional protein, Ewing
Sarcoma (EWS), is essential for determining brown fat lineage during development.
BATs from Ews null embryos and newborns are developmentally arrested. Ews mutant 
brown preadipocytes fail to differentiate due to loss of Bmp7 expression, a
critical early brown adipogenic factor. We demonstrate that EWS, along with its
binding partner Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1), activates Bmp7 transcription.
Depletion of either Ews or Ybx1 leads to loss of Bmp7 expression and brown
adipogenesis. Remarkably, Ews null BATs and brown preadipocytes ectopically
express myogenic genes. These results demonstrate that EWS is essential for early
brown fat lineage determination.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3817832
PMID: 23987512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Cutan Pathol. 2013 Nov;40(11):950-4. doi: 10.1111/cup.12197. Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Compound clear cell sarcoma misdiagnosed as a Spitz nevus.

Kiuru M(1), Hameed M, Busam KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine (Dermatology Service), Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY, USA.

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) typically presents as a tumor in the deep soft tissue of
extremities, but when centered in the dermis it may be confused with a
melanocytic nevus, primary nodular or metastatic melanoma. Compound variants of
CCS, i.e. tumor cells present in both the epidermis and underlying soft tissue
have not yet been described. Herein we report such a case, which initially
presented as a nodule on the left wrist of a young woman at 19 years of age. The 
lesion was then interpreted as 'Spitz nevus, compound type'. Twelve years later
the patient noticed an enlarged lymph node in the right axilla. The excised lymph
node was nearly completely replaced by malignant tumor cells, which were
immunoreactive for S100 protein. They resembled the tumor cells of the wrist
lesion. Cytogenetic analysis of the metastatic tumor revealed a t(12;22)
translocation. Fluorescence in situ hybridization confirmed Ewing's sarcoma
breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) rearrangement in 70% of the tumor cells, thereby
supporting the diagnosis of metastatic CCS. Our case is of interest because it
documents that CCS can involve the epidermis. This observation expands the
morphological spectrum associated with this tumor.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23980901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. FASEB J. 2013 Dec;27(12):4965-74. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-234435. Epub 2013 Aug 23.

A conserved N-terminal motif is required for complex formation between FUS,
EWSR1, TAF15 and their oncogenic fusion proteins.

Thomsen C(1), Grundevik P, Elias P, Ståhlberg A, Aman P.

Author information: 
(1)1Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Pathology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Box 425, 40530, Gothenburg,
Sweden. pierre.aman@llcr.med.gu.se.

The three FET (FUS, EWSR1, and TAF15) family RNA binding proteins are expressed
in all tissues and almost all cell types. The disordered N-terminal parts are
always present in FET fusion oncoproteins of sarcomas and leukemia. Mutations in 
FUS and TAF15 cause aggregation of FET proteins in neurological disorders. Here
we used recombinant proteins in pulldown experiments and mass spectrometry to
identify major interaction partners of the FET N-terminal parts. We report that
FUS, EWSR1, and TAF15 form homo- and heterocomplexes as major binding partners
and identify an evolutionarily conserved N-terminal motif (FETBM1) that is
required for this interaction. The binding is RNA and DNA independent and robust 
up to 1 M of NaCl. The localization of FETBM1 and its target sequences supports a
simple model for FET protein aggregation as reported in neurological disorders
such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia, and essential
tremor. The FETBM1 localization also explains the binding of normal full-length
FET proteins to their oncogenic fusion proteins.

PMID: 23975937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Mol Med (Berl). 2013 Dec;91(12):1343-54. doi: 10.1007/s00109-013-1077-2. Epub
2013 Aug 24.

FUS-mediated alternative splicing in the nervous system: consequences for ALS and
FTLD.

Orozco D(1), Edbauer D.

Author information: 
(1)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany.

Mutations in fused in sarcoma (FUS) in a subset of patients with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) linked this DNA/RNA-binding protein to neurodegeneration.
Most of the mutations disrupt the nuclear localization signal which strongly
suggests a loss-of-function pathomechanism, supported by cytoplasmic inclusions. 
FUS-positive neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions are also found in a subset of
patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Here, we discuss recent
data on the role of alternative splicing in FUS-mediated pathology in the central
nervous system. Several groups have shown that FUS binds broadly to many
transcripts in the brain and have also identified a plethora of putative splice
targets; however, only ABLIM1, BRAF, Ewing sarcoma protein R1 (EWSR1),
microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), NgCAM cell adhesion molecule (NRCAM), 
and netrin G1 (NTNG1) have been identified in at least three of four studies.
Gene ontology analysis of all putative targets unanimously suggests a role in
axon growth and cytoskeletal organization, consistent with the altered morphology
of dendritic spines and axonal growth cones reported upon loss of FUS. Among the 
axonal targets, MAPT/tau and NTNG1 have been further validated in biochemical
studies. The next challenge will be to confirm changes of FUS-mediated
alternative splicing in patients and define their precise role in the
pathophysiology of ALS and FTLD.

PMID: 23974990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Nov;12(11):2591-600. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0338.
Epub 2013 Aug 21.

Combining PARP-1 inhibition and radiation in Ewing sarcoma results in lethal DNA 
damage.

Lee HJ(1), Yoon C, Schmidt B, Park do J, Zhang AY, Erkizan HV, Toretsky JA,
Kirsch DG, Yoon SS.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Sam S. Yoon, Department of Surgery, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, H-1209, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065.
yoons@mskcc.org.

Ewing sarcomas (ES) harbor a chromosomal translocation that fuses the EWS gene to
an ETS transcription factor, most commonly Friend leukemia integration 1 (FLI1). 
The EWS-FLI1 fusion protein acts in a positive feedback loop to maintain the
expression of PARP-1, which is involved in repair of DNA damage. Here, we examine
the effects of PARP-1 inhibition and radiation therapy on Ewing sarcomas. In
proliferation assays, the Ewing sarcoma cell lines RD-ES and SK-N-MC were much
more sensitive than non-Ewing sarcoma cell lines to the PARP-1 inhibitor olaparib
(Ola; IC50 0.5-1 µmol/L vs. >5 µmol/L) and to radiation (IC50 2-4 Gy vs. >6 Gy). 
PARP-1 inhibition with short hairpin RNA (shRNA) or Ola sensitized Ewing sarcoma 
cells, but not non-Ewing sarcoma cells, to radiation therapy in both
proliferation and colony formation assays. Using the Comet assay, radiation of
Ewing sarcoma cells with Ola, compared to without Ola, resulted in more DNA
damage at 1 hour (mean tail moment 36-54 vs. 26-28) and sustained DNA damage at
24 hours (24-29 vs. 6-8). This DNA damage led to a 2.9- to 4.0-fold increase in
apoptosis and a 1.6- to 2.4-fold increase in cell death. The effect of PARP-1
inhibition and radiation therapy on Ewing sarcoma cells was lost when EWS-FLI1
was silenced by shRNA. A small dose of radiation therapy (4 Gy), when combined
with PARP-1 inhibition, stopped the growth of SK-N-MC flank tumors xenografts. In
conclusion, PARP-1 inhibition in Ewing sarcomas amplifies the level and duration 
of DNA damage caused by radiation therapy, leading to synergistic increases in
apoptosis and cell death in a EWS-FLI1-dependent manner.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3823674
PMID: 23966622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Aug;23(7):538-40. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e31829804f7.

Novel Clonal t(2;4) (q23;p14) Secondary Cytogenetic Abnormality in a Primary
Myxoid Liposarcoma.

Kiyani A(1), Heerema NA, Mayerson JL, Scharschmidt TJ, Iwenofu OH.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Anesthesiology and Oral
Pathology, College of Dentistry Departments of †Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
‡Orthopaedics, Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.

Myxoid liposarcomas are malignant lipomatous tumors with a predilection for young
adults. They are characterized by the presence of reciprocal translocation
between the CHOP (DDIT3) gene on chromosome 12 and the FUS gene on chromosome 16,
t(12;16)(q13;p11.2) in >95% of cases, or less commonly, a translocation between
the DDIT3 and EWSR1 genes, t(12;22)(q13;q12). Secondary aberrations involving
trisomy 8 and chromosomes 1 and 16 have been reported. Herein, we report for the 
first time a novel secondary clonal translocation, t(2;4) (q23;p14) in addition
to t(12;16)(q13; p11.2) in a 30-year-old woman with myxoid liposarcoma on the
left posterior thigh region without any prior chemoradiation therapy. The
significance of this translocation remains to be established.

PMID: 23958553  [PubMed - in process]


252. Pathol Res Pract. 2013 Dec;209(12):803-7. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2013.07.001. Epub
2013 Jul 26.

A rare case of clear cell sarcoma with 4 types of EWSR1-ATF1 fusions detected not
in primary site but in metastatic site.

Tsukamoto Y(1), Nakata Y, Futani H, Fukunaga S, Kajimoto K, Hirota S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan. Electronic address: tsuka-y@hyo-med.ac.jp.

Clear cell sarcoma is a unique tumor which has EWSR1-ATF1 or EWSR1-CREB1 fusion. 
Several patterns of EWSR1-ATF1 fusion are observed in clear cell sarcoma. Since
type 5-7 fusions were reported recently, they are classified as type 1-7. We
examined EWSR1-ATF1 and EWSR1-CREB1 fusions in a single case of clear cell
sarcoma with lung metastasis in a 36-year-old Japanese man. As a result, we found
only type 1 EWSR1-ATF1 fusion in the primary site, but 4 types of EWS-ATF1 fusion
(type 1, 2, 5, 6) were detected in the metastatic site. These 4 types of fusion
were completely identical to the recent report, but the case had the same fusion 
patterns in both primary and metastatic sites. In our case, increased splicing
activity in the EWSR1-ATF1 fusion might be acquired at the metastatic site. There
is another possibility that metastasis might develop through the increased
splicing activity in the fusion.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23953591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Genome Res. 2013 Nov;23(11):1797-809. doi: 10.1101/gr.151340.112. Epub 2013 Aug
12.

Oncogenic ETS fusions deregulate E2F3 target genes in Ewing sarcoma and prostate 
cancer.

Bilke S(1), Schwentner R, Yang F, Kauer M, Jug G, Walker RL, Davis S, Zhu YJ,
Pineda M, Meltzer PS, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA;

Deregulated E2F transcription factor activity occurs in the vast majority of
human tumors and has been solidly implicated in disturbances of cell cycle
control, proliferation, and apoptosis. Aberrant E2F regulatory activity is often 
caused by impairment of control through pRB function, but little is known about
the interplay of other oncoproteins with E2F. Here we show that ETS transcription
factor fusions resulting from disease driving rearrangements in Ewing sarcoma
(ES) and prostate cancer (PC) are one such class of oncoproteins. We performed an
integrative study of genome-wide DNA-binding and transcription data in EWSR1/FLI1
expressing ES and TMPRSS2/ERG containing PC cells. Supported by promoter activity
and mutation analyses, we demonstrate that a large fraction of E2F3 target genes 
are synergistically coregulated by these aberrant ETS proteins. We propose that
the oncogenic effect of ETS fusion oncoproteins is in part mediated by the
disruptive effect of the E2F-ETS interaction on cell cycle control. Additionally,
a detailed analysis of the regulatory targets of the characteristic EWSR1/FLI1
fusion in ES identifies two functionally distinct gene sets. While synergistic
regulation in concert with E2F in the promoter of target genes has a generally
activating effect, EWSR1/FLI1 binding independent of E2F3 is predominantly
associated with repressed differentiation genes. Thus, EWSR1/FLI1 appears to
promote oncogenesis by simultaneously promoting cell proliferation and perturbing
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3814880
PMID: 23940108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Oct;41(19):8853-71. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt678. Epub 2013
Aug 8.

Systems biology of Ewing sarcoma: a network model of EWS-FLI1 effect on
proliferation and apoptosis.

Stoll G(1), Surdez D, Tirode F, Laud K, Barillot E, Zinovyev A, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris cedex 05, France, INSERM U900,
Bioinformatique, biostatistique et épidémiologie d'un système complexe, Paris,
France, Mines ParisTech, Fontainebleau, France, INSERM U830, Unité de Génétique
et Biologie des Cancers, Paris, France and Institut Curie, Unité de génétique
somatique, Paris, France.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most frequent pediatric bone tumor. In most of the
patients, a chromosomal translocation leads to the expression of the EWS-FLI1
chimeric transcription factor that is the major oncogene in this pathology.
Relative genetic simplicity of Ewing sarcoma makes it particularly attractive for
studying cancer in a systemic manner. Silencing EWS-FLI1 induces cell cycle
alteration and ultimately leads to apoptosis, but the exact molecular mechanisms 
underlying this phenotype are unclear. In this study, a network linking EWS-FLI1 
to cell cycle and apoptosis phenotypes was constructed through an original method
of network reconstruction. Transcriptome time-series after EWS-FLI1 silencing
were used to identify core modulated genes by an original scoring method based on
fitting expression profile dynamics curves. Literature data mining was then used 
to connect these modulated genes into a network. The validity of a subpart of
this network was assessed by siRNA/RT-QPCR experiments on four additional Ewing
cell lines and confirmed most of the links. Based on the network and the
transcriptome data, CUL1 was identified as a new potential target of EWS-FLI1.
Altogether, using an original methodology of data integration, we provide the
first version of EWS-FLI1 network model of cell cycle and apoptosis regulation.

PMCID: PMC3799442
PMID: 23935076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 29;8(7):e68985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068985. Print 2013.

Morphoproteomic profiling of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling
pathway in desmoplastic small round cell tumor (EWS/WT1), Ewing's sarcoma
(EWS/FLI1) and Wilms' tumor(WT1).

Subbiah V(1), Brown RE, Jiang Y, Buryanek J, Hayes-Jordan A, Kurzrock R, Anderson
PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, Division of Cancer
Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
vsubbiah@mdanderson.org

BACKGROUND: Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a rare sarcoma in
adolescents and young adults. The hallmark of this disease is a EWS-WT1
translocation resulting from apposition of the Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) gene with
the Wilms' tumor (WT1) gene. We performed morphoproteomic profiling of DSRCT
(EWS-WT1), Ewing's sarcoma (EWS-FLI1) and Wilms' tumor (WT1) to better understand
the signaling pathways for selecting future targeted therapies.
METHODOLOGY: This pilot study assessed patients with DSRCT, Wilms' tumor and
Ewing's sarcoma. Morphoproteomics and immunohistochemical probes were applied to 
detect: p-mTOR (Ser2448); p-Akt (Ser473); p-ERK1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204); p-STAT3 (Tyr 
705); and cell cycle-related analytes along with their negative controls.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In DSRCT the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway is constitutively
activated by p-Akt (Ser 473) expression in the nuclear compartment of the tumor
cells and p-mTOR phosphorylated on Ser 2448, suggesting mTORC2 (rictor+mTOR) as
the dominant form. Ewing's sarcoma had upregulated p-Akt and p-mTOR,
predominantly mTORC2. In Wilm's tumor, the mTOR pathway is also activated with
most tumor cells moderately expressing p-mTOR (Ser 2448) in plasmalemmal and
cytoplasmic compartments. This coincides with the constitutive activation of one 
of the downstream effectors of the mTORC1 signaling pathway, namely p-p70S6K (Thr
389). There was constitutive activation of the Ras/Raf/ERK pathway p-ERK 1/2
(Thr202/Tyr204) expression in the Wilms tumor and metastatic Ewing's sarcoma, but
not in the DSRCT.
CONCLUSION: MORPHOPROTEOMIC TUMOR ANALYSES REVEALED CONSTITUTIVE ACTIVATION OF
THE MTOR PATHWAY AS EVIDENCED BY: (a) expression of phosphorylated (p)-mTOR,
p-p70S6K; (b) mTORC 2 in EWS and DSRCT; (c) ERK signaling was seen in the
advanced setting indicating these as resistance pathways to IGF1R related
therapies. This is the first morphoproteomic study of such pathways in these rare
malignancies and may have potential therapeutic implications. Further study using
morphoproteomic assessments of these tumors are warranted.

PMCID: PMC3726753
PMID: 23922674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Immunol. 2013 Dec;56(4):637-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.05.238. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

Yeast one-hybrid screen of a thymus epithelial library identifies ZBTB7A as a
regulator of thymic insulin expression.

St-Jean JR(1), Ounissi-Benkalha H, Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrine Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The McGill
University Health Center, 4060 Ste-Catherine West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3Z
2Z3.

Insulin self-tolerance is, to a large extent, assured by the expression of small 
quantities of insulin by medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). Regulation of
thymic insulin expression differs from that in pancreas and its therapeutic
manipulation could play an important role in the prevention of type 1 diabetes
(T1D). Knowledge of the transcriptional regulators involved in the mTEC nuclear
environment is essential for the development of such therapeutics. The yeast
one-hybrid (Y1H) approach was used in order to identify such mTEC-specific
nuclear proteins. We used a target composed of the human insulin gene promoter
joined to the upstream class III VNTR allele, which is associated with both
protection from T1D and higher thymic insulin expression, and a cDNA library from
our insulin-producing mouse mTEC line. The Y1H screening allowed the
identification of eleven proteins. An in vitro assay was used to confirm and
quantify protein-DNA binding to the human insulin gene promoter alone or joined
to a class I or class III VNTR allele, and identified the transcription factors
ZBTB7A, JUN and EWSR1 as strong interacting partners. All three proteins could
induce insulin expression in transfected HEK-293 cells, but ZBTB7A provided the
most robust results especially in the presence of AIRE, with an additional
11-fold increase of the insulin mRNA levels from a co-transfected reporter driven
by the class III VNTR allele. Thus, ZBTB7A is identified as a strong candidate
for regulation of thymic insulin expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3783542
PMID: 23911422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 22;8(7):e69714. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069714. Print 2013.

Differential disruption of EWS-FLI1 binding by DNA-binding agents.

Chen C(1), Wonsey DR, Lemieux ME, Kung AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Boston
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Fusion of the EWS gene to FLI1 produces a fusion oncoprotein that drives an
aberrant gene expression program responsible for the development of Ewing
sarcoma. We used a homogenous proximity assay to screen for compounds that
disrupt the binding of EWS-FLI1 to its cognate DNA targets. A number of
DNA-binding chemotherapeutic agents were found to non-specifically disrupt
protein binding to DNA. In contrast, actinomycin D was found to preferentially
disrupt EWS-FLI1 binding by comparison to p53 binding to their respective cognate
DNA targets in vitro. In cell-based assays, low concentrations of actinomycin D
preferentially blocked EWS-FLI1 binding to chromatin, and disrupted
EWS-FLI1-mediated gene expression. Higher concentrations of actinomycin D
globally repressed transcription. These results demonstrate that actinomycin D
preferentially disrupts EWS-FLI1 binding to DNA at selected concentrations.
Although the window between this preferential effect and global suppression is
too narrow to exploit in a therapeutic manner, these results suggest that
base-preferences may be exploited to find DNA-binding compounds that
preferentially disrupt subclasses of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3718762
PMID: 23894528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Gastrointest Surg. 2014 Mar;18(3):635-7. doi: 10.1007/s11605-013-2284-4. Epub
2013 Jul 20.

Primary hepatic Ewing's sarcoma with cytogenetic confirmation.

McGrann PF(1), Pooleman IJ, Wilson CH, Haugk B, Scott J, Charnley RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatopancreaticobiliary Surgery, The Freeman Hospital, Freeman 
Road, High Heaton, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, NE7 7DN.

INTRODUCTION: Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma is reported in the medical
literature, but none has been described as presenting with a resectable liver
mass.
METHODS: A case of a 29-year-old male patient who presented with a large
symptomatic mass in the right lobe of the liver which, following resection,
demonstrated the characteristic histopathology and fusion protein (EWSR1-Fli1)
found in Ewing's sarcoma was reported.
DISCUSSION: Complete surgical resection offers the best long-term outlook. Cure
rates with appropriate surgical and chemotherapeutic management range between 30 
and 60 %.

PMID: 23877327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Int J Oncol. 2013 Sep;43(3):803-12. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2016. Epub 2013 Jul 12.

The dual inhibitory effect of thiostrepton on FoxM1 and EWS/FLI1 provides a novel
therapeutic option for Ewing's sarcoma.

Sengupta A(1), Rahman M, Mateo-Lozano S, Tirado OM, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Molecular Oncology Program, Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC
20057, USA.

The poor prognosis of Ewing's sarcoma (EWS), together with its high lethal
recurrence rate and the side-effects of current treatments, call for novel
targeted therapies with greater curative effectiveness and substantially reduced 
side-effects. The oncogenic chimeric protein EWS/FLI1 is the key malignancy
driver in most EWSs, regulating numerous target genes, many of which influence
cell cycle progression. It has often been argued that targeting proteins
regulated directly or indirectly by EWS/FLI1 may provide improved therapeutic
options for EWS. In this context, our study examined FoxM1, a key cell cycle
regulating transcription factor, reported to be expressed in EWS and influenced
by EWS/FLI1. Thiostrepton, a naturally occurring small molecule, has been shown
to selectively inhibit FoxM1 expression in cancer cells. We demonstrate that in
EWS, in addition to inhibiting FoxM1 expression, thiostrepton downregulates the
expression of EWS/FLI1, both at the mRNA and protein levels, leading to cell
cycle arrest and, ultimately, to apoptotic cell death. We also show that
thiostrepton treatment reduces the tumorigenicity of EWS cells, significantly
delaying the growth of nude mouse xenograft tumors. Results from this study
demonstrate a novel action of thiostrepton as inhibitor of the expression of the 
EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein in vitro and in vivo, and that it shows greater efficacy
against EWS than against other tumor types, as it is active on EWS cells and
tumors at concentrations lower than those reported to have effective inhibitory
activity on tumor cells derived from other cancers. Owing to the dual action of
this small molecule, our findings suggest that thiostrepton may be particularly
effective as a novel agent for the treatment of EWS patients.

PMCID: PMC3787886
PMID: 23857410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Pathology. 2013 Aug;45(5):506-8. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e3283634025.

Endotracheal angiomatoid 'malignant' fibrous histiocytoma: EWSR1 gene
rearrangement.

Chen W, Shi H, Liu Y, Ke Z, Han A.

PMID: 23856841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Oncogene. 2014 Jun 5;33(23):2995-3003. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.255. Epub 2013 Jul
8.

EWS represses cofilin 1 expression by inducing nuclear retention of cofilin 1
mRNA.

Huang L(1), Kuwahara I(2), Matsumoto K(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular Entomology Laboratory, RIKEN, Wako, Japan [2] Department of
Pathophysiology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. (2)Molecular
Entomology Laboratory, RIKEN, Wako, Japan. (3)1] Molecular Entomology Laboratory,
RIKEN, Wako, Japan [2] PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi,
Japan.

In Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs), the proto-oncogene EWS that encodes an 
RNA-binding protein is fused by chromosomal translocation to the gene encoding
one of the E-twenty six (ETS) family of transcription factors, most commonly
friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI-1). Although EWS/FLI-1 chimeric proteins
are necessary for carcinogenesis, additional events seem to be required for
transformation to occur. We have previously reported that a protein product of an
EWS mRNA target, whose expression is negatively regulated by EWS but not by
EWS/FLI-1, contributes to ESFT development. However, the mechanism by which EWS
represses protein expression remains to be elucidated. Here, we report that
overexpression of full-length EWS repressed protein expression and induced
nuclear retention of reporter mRNAs in a tethering assay. In contrast, when a
mutant lacking the EWS C-terminal nuclear localization signal (classified as a
PY-NLS) was expressed, reporter protein expression was upregulated, and the
number of cells exporting reporter mRNA to the cytoplasm increased. EWS binds to 
the 3'-untranslated region in another mRNA target, cofilin 1 (CFL1), and
negatively regulates the expression of CFL1. Overexpression of EWS induced
nuclear retention of CFL1 mRNA. Furthermore, ESFT cell proliferation and
metastatic potential were suppressed by small interfering RNA-mediated CFL1
knockdown. Together, our findings suggest that EWS induces nuclear retention of
CFL1 mRNA, thereby suppressing expression of CFL1, and that CFL1 promotes
development of ESFT. Targeting CFL1 might therefore provide another novel
approach for treatment of this aggressive disease.

PMID: 23831569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Head Neck Pathol. 2013 Jul;7 Suppl 1:S20-9. doi: 10.1007/s12105-013-0466-8. Epub 
2013 Jul 3.

Hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma of salivary gland: a review and update.

Weinreb I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rm. 11E403, University Health Network, 200 Elizabeth 
Street, Toronto, ON M5G 2C4, Canada. weinrebi@yahoo.ca

Hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma (HCCC) is a rare minor salivary gland tumor made
up of clear cells and forming cords and nests in a hyalinized stroma. The overall
outcome is excellent with only occasional metastatic spread. HCCC has a wide
differential diagnosis including other clear cell-containing tumors, such as
epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma, and myoepithelial
carcinoma. HCCC is currently classified as a "clear cell adenocarcinoma" by the
AFIP and as "clear cell carcinoma, not otherwise specified (NOS)" by the World
Health Organization (WHO). It is considered by the WHO to be a diagnosis of
exclusion. Since the original description in 1994, there have been few new
insights into HCCC, until recently. Dardick re-examined the features of HCCC,
including the original electron microscopic images, and concluded that HCCC is a 
squamous lesion, at odds with the above nomenclature. Bilodeau et al. recently
showed that this tumor essentially cannot be separated reliably from clear cell
odontogenic carcinoma (CCOC) except by location. Antonescu et al. recently
identified a consistent EWSR1-ATF1 fusion in HCCC. Bilodeau et al. subsequently
argued a link between these two entities, with evidence of similar EWSR1 and ATF1
rearrangements in CCOC. This molecular signature is not present in other clear
cell mimics. Cases with recurrence, metastasis, high-grade features and other
alternative morphologies or presentations have also been seen and proven by
molecular analysis to be HCCC. In the molecular era, HCCC can no longer be seen
as a diagnosis of exclusion. It is neither an adenocarcinoma nor a "not otherwise
specified" tumor, as the AFIP and WHO currently classify it. This review provides
an in-depth look at the current state of knowledge of HCCC from morphology to
molecular features. New developments and personal insights are provided that help
identify and properly classify this lesion.

PMCID: PMC3712091
PMID: 23821218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Br J Dermatol. 2013 Dec;169(6):1346-52. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12480.

Two cases of clear cell sarcoma with different clinical and genetic features:
cutaneous type with BRAF mutation and subcutaneous type with KIT mutation.

Park BM(1), Jin SA, Choi YD, Shin SH, Jung ST, Lee JB, Lee SC, Yun SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Chonnam National University Medical School, 5
Hak-Dong, Dong-Gu, Gwangju, 501-746, Korea.

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS), also known as malignant melanoma of soft parts, is a
rare malignancy constituting approximately 1% of all soft-tissue sarcomas. It
occurs predominantly in the lower extremities of young adults, manifesting as a
deep, painless, slow-growing mass. CCS is sometimes confused with other types of 
melanoma because of its melanocytic differentiation. Although BRAF and KIT
mutations are well-known melanocytic tumour-promoting mutations frequently found 
in cutaneous melanoma, they are rare or absent in CCS. We present two cases of
CCS with different clinical and genetic features. Both female patients, aged 25
and 20 years, presented with a palpable nodule on a lower extremity. Biopsies of 
both tumours revealed features diagnostic of CCS. Each tumour cell was positive
for S100 protein and HMB-45. However, one patient's tumour was localized to the
dermis, with many multinucleated giant cells, whereas the other was located in
the deep subcutaneous fat layer near bone. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
demonstrated the presence of a characteristic Ewing sarcoma RNA-binding protein
(EWSR)1 gene rearrangement in both cases. Reverse-transcription polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) and sequencing of the PCR product revealed an EWSR1-activating
transcription factor 1 type 1 fusion transcript in both cases. In addition, we
detected BRAF mutation in the dermal type and KIT mutation in the subcutaneous
type. It is of interest that the BRAF and KIT mutations are known to be very rare
in CCS. On the basis of our observations, we suggest that mutation inhibitors may
be useful in selected patients with mutated CCS lineages.

© 2013 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 23796270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Mar;42(3):163-7. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2013.03.005.

[Small cell malignant tumors of bone: comparison between diagnosis using core
needle biopsies and surgical specimens].

[Article in Chinese]

Ding Y(1), Xi Y, Sun XQ, Meng SQ, Liu WF, Huang XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jishuitan Hospital, Beijing, China. bootman@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To compare the pathologic diagnosis and immunohistochemistry of small 
cell malignant tumors (SCMT) of bone using both core needle biopsy and surgical
specimen.
METHODS: Seventy-seven cases of SCMT with core needle biopsies and surgical
specimens available were respectively analyzed by histologic examination and
immunohistochemical study, with literature review.
RESULTS: The male-to-female ratio was 48:29. The age of the patients ranged from 
6 to 73 years. The tumors studied included Ewing sarcoma/PNET (n = 38), myeloma
(n = 23), lymphoma (n = 10), small cell osteosarcoma (n = 2), small cell
carcinoma (n = 2) and mesenchymal chondrosarcoma (n = 2). The tumors involved
limbs, axial skeleton and flat bones. Microscopically, the tumors shared similar 
histology, with small round cells and spindly cells arranged in diffuse sheets.
The pathologic diagnosis by core needle biopsies correlated with that by surgical
specimens in 84.4% (65/77) of the cases.
CONCLUSIONS: SCMT represents a heterogeneous group of malignancy. Correlations
with clinicoradiologic findings and application of ancillary investigations
including immunohistochemistry and molecular study are important for definitive
diagnosis. Pathologic diagnosis using core needle biopsies shows good results and
provides useful information for surgical planning.

PMID: 23769434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 4;8(6):e66281. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066281. Print 2013.

Lysyl oxidase is downregulated by the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and its propeptide
domain displays tumor supressor activities in Ewing sarcoma cells.

Agra N(1), Cidre F, García-García L, de la Parra J, Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Área de Genética Humana, Instituto de
Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, 
Madrid, Spain.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most common bone malignancy in children and young
adults. It is driven by oncogenic fusion proteins (i.e. EWS/FLI1) acting as
aberrant transcription factors that upregulate and downregulate target genes,
leading to cellular transformation. Thus, identificating these target genes and
understanding their contribution to Ewing sarcoma tumorigenesis are key for the
development of new therapeutic strategies. In this study we show that lysyl
oxidase (LOX), an enzyme involved in maintaining structural integrity of the
extracellular matrix, is downregulated by the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and in
consequence it is not expressed in Ewing sarcoma cells and primary tumors. Using 
a doxycycline inducible system to restore LOX expression in an Ewing sarcoma
derived cell line, we showed that LOX displays tumor suppressor activities.
Interestingly, we showed that the tumor suppressor activity resides in the
propeptide domain of LOX (LOX-PP), an N-terminal domain produced by proteolytic
cleavage during the physiological processing of LOX. Expression of LOX-PP reduced
cell proliferation, cell migration, anchorage-independent growth in soft agar and
formation of tumors in immunodeficient mice. By contrast, the C-terminal domain
of LOX, which contains the enzymatic activity, had the opposite effects,
corroborating that the tumor suppressor activity of LOX is mediated exclusively
by its propeptide domain. Finally, we showed that LOX-PP inhibits ERK/MAPK
signalling pathway, and that many pathways involved in cell cycle progression
were significantly deregulated by LOX-PP, providing a mechanistic explanation to 
the cell proliferation inhibition observed upon LOX-PP expression. In summary,
our observations indicate that deregulation of the LOX gene participates in Ewing
sarcoma development and identify LOX-PP as a new therapeutic target for one of
the most aggressive paediatric malignancies. These findings suggest that
therapeutic strategies based on the administration of LOX propeptide or
functional analogues could be useful for the treatment of this devastating
paediatric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3672102
PMID: 23750284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Jul;37(7):1001-5. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31828a6727.

Clear cell odontogenic carcinomas show EWSR1 rearrangements: a novel finding and 
a biological link to salivary clear cell carcinomas.

Bilodeau EA(1), Weinreb I, Antonescu CR, Zhang L, Dacic S, Muller S, Barker B,
Seethala RR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261,
USA. elizabeth.bilodeau@dental.pitt.edu

Clear cell odontogenic carcinomas (CCOCs) are a rare tumor of the jaws, which
have considerable morphologic and immunophenotypic overlap with (hyalinizing)
clear cell carcinomas (CCCs) of salivary origin. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization for EWSR1 was performed on 12 CCOCs, 14 CCCs, and a control set of 
other miscellaneous clear cell tumors of the head and neck region. EWSR1 was
rearranged in 12/13 (92.3%) CCCs and 5/8 (62.5%) CCOCs. EWSR1 testing failed in 1
CCC and 4 CCOCs. Two cases initially diagnosed as CCOCs that were negative for
the EWSR1 translocation, were reclassified as clear cell calcifying epithelial
odontogenic tumors. ATF1 involvement was confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis in 1 CCOC. In this study, we demonstrate for the first
time the EWSR1-ATF1 translocation in a CCOC and demonstrate a concrete link
between CCCs and at least a subset of CCOCs.

PMID: 23715163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Feb;42(2):134-7. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2013.02.017.

[Fibrohistiocytic tumor of skin].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J.

PMID: 23710926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Hum Pathol. 2013 Oct;44(10):2010-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.03.003. Epub 2013
May 22.

Integrated multimodal genetic testing of Ewing sarcoma--a single-institution
experience.

Warren M(1), Weindel M, Ringrose J, Venable C, Reyes A, Terashima K, Rao P,
Chintagumpala M, Hicks MJ, Lopez-Terrada D, Lu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas
Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is an aggressive malignant small round cell tumor that arises 
in bone or soft tissue of adolescents and young adults. A characteristic
molecular finding in ES is EWSR1 gene fusion with ETS (erythroblast
transformation-specific) family genes including FLI1 (~90%) and ERG (>5%). Here
we report our experience using integrated clinicopathologic, cytogenetic,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses of 32 pediatric patients with ES diagnosed in a 
single institution between 2005 and 2011. Diagnostic EWSR1 rearrangements were
detected in 30 (93.8%) of 32 patients. Cytogenetics detected t(11;22) (n = 14)
and t(21;22) (n = 1) in 15 (46.9%) patients. FISH detected EWSR1 rearrangements
in 27 (96.4%) of 28 patients tested. RT-PCR was positive in 27 (84.4%) of 32
patients, including 24 EWSR1-FLI1 and 3 EWSR1-ERG. RT-PCR defined breakpoints and
fusion partners in 7 cases with EWSR1 rearrangements detected by FISH. Sanger
sequencing further delineated breakpoints in 21 (77.8%) of 27 RT-PCR positive
cases. In summary, conventional cytogenetic analysis provided a global view but
had a lower detection rate and longer turnaround time than other methods. FISH is
a rapid method and theoretically can detect all EWSR1 rearrangements, but it
cannot identify all partners and is not completely specific for ES. RT-PCR and
sequencing are more sensitive and useful in identifying fusion partners and
refining breakpoints; however, these methods can be compromised by poor RNA
preservation and primer design. In conclusion, an integrated approach that uses
all methods capable of detecting EWSR1 rearrangements has value in the workup of 
suspected cases of ES.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23706910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Am J Clin Pathol. 2013 Jun;139(6):771-9. doi: 10.1309/AJCPN4L1BMRQPEIT.

Usefulness of a monoclonal ERG/FLI1 antibody for immunohistochemical
discrimination of Ewing family tumors.

Tomlins SA(1), Palanisamy N, Brenner JC, Stall JN, Siddiqui J, Thomas DG, Lucas
DR, Chinnaiyan AM, Kunju LP.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of
Pathology,University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48104-5054, USA.

Ewing family tumors (EFTs) and prostate carcinomas are characterized by
rearrangement of ETS genes, most commonly FLI1 (EFTs) and ERG (prostate
carcinomas). Previously, we characterized an antibody against ERG (EPR3864) for
detecting ERG-rearranged prostate carcinoma. Because EPR3864 also cross-reacts
with FLI1, we evaluated the usefulness of EPR3864 for discriminating EFTs from
other small round blue cell tumors (SRBCTs) with immunohistochemistry. Of 57
evaluable EFTs, 47 (82%) demonstrated at least moderate, diffuse, nuclear
ERG/FLI1 staining (including 89% and 100% of cases with confirmed EWSR1:FLI1 and 
EWSR1:ERG fusions, respectively), of which 1, 3, and 43 showed negative,
cytoplasmic, or membranous CD99 staining, respectively. Among other SRBCTs (61
cases, 7 types), at least moderate, diffuse, nuclear EPR3864 staining was seen in
all precursor B-lymphoblastic lymphomas/leukemias and subsets of Burkitt
lymphomas (10%) and synovial sarcomas (45%). In summary, EPR3864 may be useful in
detecting EWSR1:FLI1 and EWSR1:ERG rearranged EFTs in addition to prostate
carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3662488
PMID: 23690120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Jul;37(7):960-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182858a0e.

Primary myoepithelioma of bone: a report of 8 cases.

Kurzawa P(1), Kattapuram S, Hornicek FJ, Antonescu CR, Rosenberg AE, Nielsen GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Poznan, Poland.

The clinical and pathologic features of 8 primary myoepitheliomas of bone were
analyzed. There were 5 female and 3 male patients who ranged in age from 16 to 49
(mean, 33.5) years. Three tumors arose in the ilium, 2 in the tibia, and 1 each
in the maxilla, sacrum, and L1 vertebral body. Microscopically, the tumors had a 
solid, lobulated, reticular, or storiform growth pattern and were predominantly
composed of spindle-shaped cells arranged in intersecting fascicles with
eosinophilic cytoplasm. The round to polygonal epithelioid cells were arranged
randomly or formed small clusters and contained variable amounts of eosinophilic 
or clear cytoplasm. Immunohistochemically, all the tumors were positive for
vimentin and S100 protein, and 7 were positive for epithelial membrane antigen.
No tumors were positive for keratin (AE1.3/CAM5.2). Smooth muscle actin was
positive in 3 tumors and negative in 4, whereas desmin was negative in all 7
tumors tested. Nuclear staining for p63 was negative in 3 tested tumors. Staining
for GFAP and CD34 was performed on 4 and 5 tumors, respectively, and all showed
no expression. Fluorescence in situ hybridization for EWSR1 rearrangement was
performed in 7 tumors. Five tumors (71%) showed the presence of EWSR1 gene
rearrangement, and 2 were negative. Cytogenetic studies conducted on 1 tumor
showed 46,XY,t(1;22)(q21;q12) associated with EWSR1-PBX1 fusion. Surgical
procedures included curettage in 3 patients, resection in 3 patients, and 2
patients only had an open biopsy. Follow-up information was available for 4
patients; all remain free of disease with no recurrence. Although experience with
primary myoepithelioma of bone is limited, histologically, banal tumors appear to
behave in a benign manner, and conservative surgery appears to be sufficient
treatment. Immunohistochemical and molecular analyses are helpful in their
accurate identification.

PMID: 23681076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. PLoS Genet. 2013 Apr;9(4):e1003464. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003464. Epub 2013 
Apr 25.

Breakpoint analysis of transcriptional and genomic profiles uncovers novel gene
fusions spanning multiple human cancer types.

Giacomini CP(1), Sun S, Varma S, Shain AH, Giacomini MM, Balagtas J, Sweeney RT, 
Lai E, Del Vecchio CA, Forster AD, Clarke N, Montgomery KD, Zhu S, Wong AJ, van
de Rijn M, West RB, Pollack JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Gene fusions, like BCR/ABL1 in chronic myelogenous leukemia, have long been
recognized in hematologic and mesenchymal malignancies. The recent finding of
gene fusions in prostate and lung cancers has motivated the search for pathogenic
gene fusions in other malignancies. Here, we developed a "breakpoint analysis"
pipeline to discover candidate gene fusions by tell-tale transcript level or
genomic DNA copy number transitions occurring within genes. Mining data from 974 
diverse cancer samples, we identified 198 candidate fusions involving annotated
cancer genes. From these, we validated and further characterized novel gene
fusions involving ROS1 tyrosine kinase in angiosarcoma (CEP85L/ROS1), SLC1A2
glutamate transporter in colon cancer (APIP/SLC1A2), RAF1 kinase in pancreatic
cancer (ATG7/RAF1) and anaplastic astrocytoma (BCL6/RAF1), EWSR1 in melanoma
(EWSR1/CREM), CDK6 kinase in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (FAM133B/CDK6), 
and CLTC in breast cancer (CLTC/VMP1). Notably, while these fusions involved
known cancer genes, all occurred with novel fusion partners and in previously
unreported cancer types. Moreover, several constituted druggable targets
(including kinases), with therapeutic implications for their respective
malignancies. Lastly, breakpoint analysis identified new cell line models for
known rearrangements, including EGFRvIII and FIP1L1/PDGFRA. Taken together, we
provide a robust approach for gene fusion discovery, and our results highlight a 
more widespread role of fusion genes in cancer pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3636093
PMID: 23637631  [PubMed - in process]


272. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 May;22(3):260-5. doi: 10.1177/1066896913486696. Epub 2013
May 1.

Carcinoma of the thyroid with ewing family tumor elements and favorable
prognosis: report of a second case.

Eloy C(1), Oliveira M, Vieira J, Teixeira MR, Cruz J, Sobrinho-Simões M.

Author information: 
(1)1Centro Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal.

Comment in
    Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 Sep;22(6):579-81.

The rare reports of primary, nonneuroendocrine small cell carcinomas of the
thyroid have not provided enough evidence to support the recognition of these
tumors as an entity or to understand their etiopathogenesis. We report the second
case of a primary, nonneuroendocrine small cell carcinoma of the thyroid
displaying diffuse expression of cytokeratins, CD99, and p63, in the absence of
vimentin expression, in a 24-year-old male who is alive without any signs of
disease 13 years after total thyroidectomy and radioactive iodine. The tumor
disclosed the EWSR1-FLI1 rearrangement, and we propose to designate it as a
carcinoma of the thyroid with Ewing family tumor elements.

PMID: 23637256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Aug;52(8):733-40. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22068. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

RNA sequencing identifies fusion of the EWSR1 and YY1 genes in mesothelioma with 
t(14;22)(q32;q12).

Panagopoulos I(1), Thorsen J, Gorunova L, Micci F, Haugom L, Davidson B, Heim S.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Medical Informatics, The
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
ioannis.panagopoulos@rr-research.no

Mesothelioma is a rare but very aggressive tumor derived from mesothelial cells. 
A number of often complex but nonrandom cytogenetic abnormalities have been found
in these tumors, resulting in loss of chromosome bands 14q32 and 22q12 in more
than 35% of the cases. In this study, we used RNA sequencing to search for fusion
transcripts in a mesothelioma carrying a t(14;22)(q32;q12) as the sole
chromosomal aberration and found an EWSR1-YY1 and its reciprocal YY1-EWSR1 fusion
transcript. Screening 15 additional cases of mesothelioma from which we had RNA
but no cytogenetic information, we identified one more tumor carrying an
EWSR1-YY1 fusion gene but not the reciprocal YY1-EWSR1 transcript. RT-polymerase 
chain reaction and sequencing showed that in both cases exon 8 of EWSR1
(nucleotide 1,139, accession number NM_013986 version 3, former exon 7 in
sequence with accession number X66899) was fused to exon 2 of YY1 (nucleotide
1,160, accession number NM_003403 version 3). The EWSR1 breakpoint in exon 8 in
the EWSR1-YY1 chimeric transcript is similar to what is found in other fusions
involving EWSR1 such as EWSR1-FLI1, EWSR1-DDIT3, and EWSR1-ATF1. The
EWSR1-YY1-encoded protein is an abnormal transcription factor with the
transactivation domain of EWSR1 and the DNA-binding domain of YY1. This is the
first study to detect a specific fusion gene in mesothelioma (the reason how
frequent the EWSR1-YY1 fusion is remains uncertain) and also the first time that 
direct involvement of YY1 in oncogenesis has been demonstrated.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23630070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Jul;52(7):675-82. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22063. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

Frequent PLAG1 gene rearrangements in skin and soft tissue myoepithelioma with
ductal differentiation.

Antonescu CR(1), Zhang L, Shao SY, Mosquera JM, Weinreb I, Katabi N, Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. antonesc@mskcc.org

A subset of cutaneous and superficial soft tissue myoepithelial (ME) tumors
displays a distinct ductal component and closely resembles mixed
tumors/pleomorphic adenomas of salivary gland. As PLAG1 and HMGA2 rearrangements 
are the most common genetic events in pleomorphic adenomas, we sought to
investigate if these abnormalities are also present in the skin/soft tissue ME
lesions. In contrast, half of the deep-seated soft tissue ME tumors lacking
ductal differentiation are known to be genetically unrelated, showing EWSR1
rearrangements. FISH analysis to detect PLAG1 and HMGA2 abnormalities was
performed in 35 ME tumors, nine skin and 26 soft tissue, lacking EWSR1 and FUS
rearrangements. For the PLAG1-rearranged tumors, FISH and RACE were performed to 
identify potential fusion partners, including CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) on 3p21 and
LIFR (leukemia inhibitory factor receptor) on 5p13. Recurrent PLAG1 rearrangement
by FISH was detected in 13 (37%) lesions, including three (33%) in the skin and
10 (38%) in the soft tissue. All were classified as benign and all except one
showed abundant tubulo-ductal differentiation (comprising 12/24 [50%] of all
tumors with ductal structures). A LIFR-PLAG1 fusion was detected by RACE and then
confirmed by FISH in one soft tissue ME tumor with tubular formation. No CTNNB1
or LIFR abnormalities were detected in any of the remaining PLAG1-rearranged
tumors. No structural HMGA2 abnormalities were detected in any of the 22 ME
lesions tested. A subset of cutaneous and soft tissue ME tumors appears
genetically linked to their salivary gland counterparts, displaying frequent
PLAG1 gene rearrangements and occasionally LIFR-PLAG1 fusion.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4041540
PMID: 23630011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 May;37(5):752-62. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182796e46.

Osseous myxochondroid sarcoma: a detailed study of 5 cases of extraskeletal
myxoid chondrosarcoma of the bone.

Demicco EG(1), Wang WL, Madewell JE, Huang D, Bui MM, Bridge JA, Meis JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is a rare mesenchymal neoplasm with a
characteristic translocation usually involving NR4A3 and EWSR1. EMC has rarely
been reported in the bone and may be confused with conventional chondrosarcoma
with myxoid features or various small round cell sarcomas. We present 5 cases of 
molecularly confirmed EMC arising primarily in the bone. Patients included 4 men 
and 1 woman, aged 38 to 77 years (median 54 y). Tumors arose in the ilium (2
cases), manubrium, rib, and humerus. Four tumors extensively infiltrated and
destroyed preexisting bone with cortical breakthrough and associated soft tissue 
extension; 1 case demonstrated only focal cortical breakthrough. Microscopically,
2 cases had small round cell features; 1 of these was hypercellular, whereas the 
other was hypocellular with abundant myxochondroid matrix. Three cases were
composed of eosinophilic spindled cells with variable fascicular to corded or
wreath-like growth patterns. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was positive for 
both EWSR1 and NR4A3 translocation in 3 cases; rearrangement for EWSR1 or NR4A3, 
but not both, was seen in 2 tumors. After definitive therapy, 1 patient
experienced multiple local recurrences at 36 months and died of disease at 61
months. Two patients developed lung metastases at 26 and 74 months and are alive 
with disease at 44 and 74 months, respectively. Two patients are disease free at 
5 and 24 months. EMC of the bone is a diagnostic dilemma and requires molecular
confirmation. We propose to classify tumors with the appropriate phenotype and
molecularly confirmed NR4A3/EWSR1 rearrangements as myxochondroid sarcoma, either
osseous or extraskeletal variants.

PMID: 23588370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 May;37(5):734-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31827560f8.

EWSR1-CREB3L1 gene fusion: a novel alternative molecular aberration of low-grade 
fibromyxoid sarcoma.

Lau PP(1), Lui PC, Lau GT, Yau DT, Cheung ET, Chan JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong, SAR China.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Oct;37(10):1630-1.

Low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (LGFMS) is an uncommon sarcoma with a deceptively
bland-looking morphology that disguises its malignant clinical behavior. It shows
distinctive chromosomal translocations resulting in fusion of FUS with the
CREB3L2 gene in most cases and CREB3L1 in rare cases. Thus molecular studies are 
particularly helpful in the diagnosis of this bland-looking sarcoma. We report 2 
cases of LGFMS serendipitously found to harbor a novel alternative EWSR1-CREB3L1 
gene fusion, as confirmed by DNA sequencing of reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction products and fluorescence in situ hybridization. One patient was a
child who presented with a subcutaneous nodule on the lower leg, and the other
was a middle-aged woman who had a mass lesion over the proximal thigh.
Morphologically, one case showed a spindle cell tumor with hyalinization and
giant rosettes, whereas the other showed classical histology of LGFMS with focal 
metaplastic bone formation. Immunostaining for MUC4 showed extensive positive
staining. Our findings therefore expand the spectrum of gene fusions that
characterize LGFMS and suggest that the EWSR1 gene may substitute for the
function of FUS in gene fusions of sarcoma.

PMID: 23588368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 May;37(5):710-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182772bba.

Cutaneous syncytial myoepithelioma: clinicopathologic characterization in a
series of 38 cases.

Jo VY(1), Antonescu CR, Zhang L, Dal Cin P, Hornick JL, Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Cutaneous myoepithelial tumors demonstrate heterogenous morphologic and
immunophenotypic features. We previously described, in brief, 7 cases of
cutaneous myoepithelioma showing solid syncytial growth of ovoid, spindled, or
histiocytoid cells. We now present the clinicopathologic features in a series of 
38 cases of this distinctive syncytial variant, which were diagnosed between 1997
and 2012 (mostly seen in consultation). There were 27 men and 11 women, with a
median age of 39 years (range, 2 mo to 74 y). Primary anatomic sites were the
upper extremity (11, including 2 on the hand), upper limb girdle (3), lower
extremity (14; 3 on the foot), back (6), face (2), chest (1), and buttock (1);
the typical presentation was as either a polypoid or papular lesion. Tumors were 
well circumscribed and centered in the dermis and ranged in size from 0.3 to 2.7 
cm (median 0.8 cm). Microscopically all tumors showed a solid sheet-like growth
of uniformly sized ovoid to spindled or histiocytoid cells with palely
eosinophilic syncytial cytoplasm. Nuclei were vesicular with fine chromatin and
small or inconspicuous nucleoli and exhibited minimal to no atypia. Mitoses
ranged from 0 to 4 per 10 HPF; 28 tumors showed no mitoses. Necrosis and
lymphovascular invasion were consistently absent. Adipocytic metaplasia,
appearing as superficial fat entrapped within the tumor, was seen in 12 cases.
Chondro-osseous differentiation was seen in 1 tumor. All tumors examined were
diffusely positive for EMA, and the majority showed diffuse staining for S-100
protein (5 showing focal staining). Keratin staining was focal in 1 of 33 tumors 
and seen in rare cells in 3 other cases. There was also positivity for GFAP
(14/33), SMA (9/13), and p63 (6/11). Most lesions were treated by local excision.
The majority of tumors tested (14/17; 82%) were positive by fluorescence in situ 
hybridization for EWSR1 gene rearrangement; testing for potential fusion partners
(PBX1, ZNF444, POU5F1, DUX4, ATF1, CREB1, NR4A3, DDIT3, and NFATc2) was negative 
in all EWSR1-rearranged tumors. No FUS gene rearrangement was detected in 2
tumors lacking EWSR1 rearrangement. Follow-up information is available for 21
patients (mean follow-up 15 mo). One patient with a positive deep margin
developed a local recurrence 51 months after initial biopsy. All other patients
with available follow-up information, including 11 who had positive deep margins,
are alive with no evidence of disease and no reported metastases. In summary,
cutaneous syncytial myoepithelioma is a morphologically distinct variant that
more frequently affects men, occurs over a wide age range, and usually presents
on the extremities. Tumors are positive for S-100 protein and EMA, and, unlike
most myoepithelial neoplasms, keratin staining is infrequent. EWSR1 gene
rearrangement is present in nearly all tumors tested and likely involves a novel 
fusion partner. Prior reports describe some risk of recurrence and metastasis for
cutaneous myoepithelial tumors; however, the syncytial variant appears to behave 
in a benign manner and only rarely recurs locally.

PMCID: PMC3628558
PMID: 23588365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Genome Res. 2013 Jul;23(7):1182-93. doi: 10.1101/gr.147314.112. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Cancer translocations in human cells induced by zinc finger and TALE nucleases.

Piganeau M(1), Ghezraoui H, De Cian A, Guittat L, Tomishima M, Perrouault L, René
O, Katibah GE, Zhang L, Holmes MC, Doyon Y, Concordet JP, Giovannangeli C, Jasin 
M, Brunet E.

Author information: 
(1)Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, CNRS UMR7196, Inserm U565, 75005 Paris, 
France.

Chromosomal translocations are signatures of numerous cancers and lead to
expression of fusion genes that act as oncogenes. The wealth of genomic
aberrations found in cancer, however, makes it challenging to assign a specific
phenotypic change to a specific aberration. In this study, we set out to use
genome editing with zinc finger (ZFN) and transcription activator-like effector
(TALEN) nucleases to engineer, de novo, translocation-associated oncogenes at
cognate endogenous loci in human cells. Using ZFNs and TALENs designed to cut
precisely at relevant translocation breakpoints, we induced cancer-relevant
t(11;22)(q24;q12) and t(2;5)(p23;q35) translocations found in Ewing sarcoma and
anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), respectively. We recovered both
translocations with high efficiency, resulting in the expression of the
EWSR1-FLI1 and NPM1-ALK fusions. Breakpoint junctions recovered after ZFN
cleavage in human embryonic stem (ES) cell-derived mesenchymal precursor cells
fully recapitulated the genomic characteristics found in tumor cells from Ewing
sarcoma patients. This approach with tailored nucleases demonstrates that
expression of fusion genes found in cancer cells can be induced from the native
promoter, allowing interrogation of both the underlying mechanisms and oncogenic 
consequences of tumor-related translocations in human cells. With an analogous
strategy, the ALCL translocation was reverted in a patient cell line to restore
the integrity of the two participating chromosomes, further expanding the
repertoire of genomic rearrangements that can be engineered by tailored
nucleases.

PMCID: PMC3698511
PMID: 23568838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jun;43(6):676-80. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyt047. Epub 2013 Apr 
5.

Unusual presentation of Ewing sarcoma in the adrenal gland: a secondary
malignancy from a survivor of Burkitt lymphoma.

Lim SH(1), Lee JY, Lee JY, Kim JH, Choi KH, Hyun JY, Ko YH, Lee J, Kim SJ, Kim
WS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong Gangnam-gu,
Seoul 135-710, Korea.

The occurrence of Ewing sarcoma as a secondary malignancy is an extremely rare
event in long-term cancer survivors. In addition, the occurrence of Ewing sarcoma
in the adrenal gland is highly unusual. In this case report, we treated a
20-year-old male patient with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine,
dexamethasone, and methotrexate and cytarabine chemotherapy following a diagnosis
of Stage IV Burkitt lymphoma. Following complete remission, he had been
maintained for 2 years without evidence of disease. However, a regular follow-up 
computed tomography scan found a left adrenal gland mass and a biopsy revealed
positive membrane-localized mic-2 expression (CD99) and the presence of the
translocation of the EWSR1 gene. To our knowledge, this is the first case report 
of Ewing sarcoma occurring in the adrenal gland of a patient who was treated with
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, dexamethasone/methotrexate and
cytarabine chemotherapy for Burkitt lymphoma.

PMID: 23564674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Clin Neuropathol. 2013 May-Jun;32(3):176-82. doi: 10.5414/NP300596.

Myoepithelioma of the cerebellopontine angle: a previously not documented benign 
salivary gland-type neoplasm within the cranium.

Vajtai I(1), Hewer E, Neuenschwander M, Schäfer SC, Kappeler A, Lukes A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, 
Switzerland. istavanvajtai@yahoo.com

Myoepithelioma is a dimorphic neoplasm with contractile-epithelial phenotype,
originally interpreted as deriving from, but not actually restricted to the
salivary glands. As a novel addition to the list of exquisitely rare intracranial
salivary gland-type tumors and tumor-like lesions, we report on an example of
myoepithelioma encountered in the left cerebellopontine angle of a 32-year-old
male. Clinically presenting with ataxia and dizziness, this extraaxial mass of 4 
× 3.5 × 3 cm was surgically resected, and the patient is alive 6 years
postoperatively. Histologically, the tumor exhibited a continuum ranging from
compact fascicles of spindle cells to epithelial nests and trabeculae partitioned
by hyalinized septa, while lacking tubular differentiation. Regardless of
architectural variations, there was robust immunoexpression of S100 protein,
smooth muscle actin, GFAP, cytokeratin, and vimentin. Cytologic atypia tended to 
be modest throughout, and the MIB1 labeling index averaged less than 1%.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization indicated no rearrangement of the EWSR1 locus. 
We interpret these results to suggest that myoepithelioma of the posterior fossa 
- along with related salivary epithelial tumors in this ostensibly incongruous
locale - may possibly represent analogous neoplasms to their orthotopic
counterparts, ones arising within aberrant salivary anlagen. The presence of the 
latter lends itself to being mechanistically accounted for by either postulating 
placodal remnants in the wake of branchial arch development, or linking them to
exocrine glandular nests within endodermal cysts. Alternatively, myoepithelioma
at this site could be regarded as a non tissue-specific lesion similar to its
relatives ubiquitously occurring in the soft parts.

PMID: 23557904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(12):6625-34. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01006-12. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

EWSR1 binds the hepatitis C virus cis-acting replication element and is required 
for efficient viral replication.

Oakland TE(1), Haselton KJ, Randall G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) genome contains numerous RNA elements that are
required for its replication. Most of the identified RNA structures are located
within the 5' and 3' untranslated regions (UTRs). One prominent RNA structure,
termed the cis-acting replication element (CRE), is located within the NS5B
coding region. Mutation of part of the CRE, the 5BSL3.2 stem-loop, impairs HCV
RNA replication. This loop has been implicated in a kissing interaction with a
complementary stem-loop structure in the 3' UTR. Although it is clear that this
interaction is required for viral replication, the function of the interaction,
and its regulation are unknown. In order to gain insight into the CRE function,
we isolated cellular proteins that preferentially bind the CRE and identified
them using mass spectrometry. This approach identified EWSR1 as a CRE-binding
protein. Silencing EWSR1 expression impairs HCV replication and infectious virus 
production but not translation. While EWRS1 is a shuttling protein that is
extensively nuclear in hepatocytes, substantial amounts of EWSR1 localize to the 
cytosol in HCV-infected cells and colocalize with sites of HCV replication. A
subset of EWRS1 translocates into detergent-resistant membrane fractions, which
contain the viral replicase proteins, in cells with replicating HCV. EWSR1
directly binds the CRE, and this is dependent on the intact CRE structure.
Finally, EWSR1 preferentially interacts with the CRE in the absence of the
kissing interaction. This study implicates EWSR1 as a novel modulator of CRE
function in HCV replication.

PMCID: PMC3676111
PMID: 23552423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 May;37(5):772-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31828e5168.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing family tumor of soft tissue associated with the vagus
nerve: a case report and review of the literature.

Kikuchi Y(1), Kishimoto T, Ota S, Kambe M, Yonemori Y, Chazono H, Yamasaki K,
Ochiai H, Hiroshima K, Tanaka M, Tanaka Y, Horie H, Nakatani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine,1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing family tumor (EFT) is a rare subset of EFTs showing mixed
features of Ewing sarcoma and adamantinoma of the long bones. All currently
reported cases of the adamantinoma-like type have been associated with bone.
Recently, a unique type of EFT was reported showing complex epithelial
differentiation associated with the vagus nerve. Here we describe another unique 
type of EFT arising in the soft tissue of the neck associated with the vagus
nerve. An 11-year-old girl presented to our hospital with a neck tumor on her
right side. Surgical resection was performed, and histopathologic examination
demonstrated a high-grade malignant neoplasm. The tumor was composed of sheets of
small round proliferating cells, basaloid tumor nests with marked squamous
differentiation, biphasic growth pattern with epithelioid tumor nests, and
spindle cell proliferation. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed diffuse
expression of CD99 and FLI-1. In addition, small round cells and
basaloid/squamoid components were immunoreactive for AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, cytokeratin
5/6, high-molecular weight keratin, p63, and p40 (<U+0394>Np63). Reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing analysis revealed that the tumor 
harbored a t(11;22) translocation, involving EWSR1 and FLI-1, which are
characteristic of EFTs. According to these findings, our case has characteristics
of both a subset of adamantinoma-like EFT and EFT with complex epithelial
differentiation. We suggest that EFT with complex epithelial differentiation is
in a common spectrum with the adamantinoma-like type and that adamantinoma-like
EFTs can arise in soft tissue, leading to difficulty in differential diagnosis
with malignant epithelial tumors.

PMID: 23552387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59369. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059369. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

BCL11B is up-regulated by EWS/FLI and contributes to the transformed phenotype in
Ewing sarcoma.

Wiles ET(1), Lui-Sargent B, Bell R, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, 
United States of America.

The EWS/FLI translocation product is the causative oncogene in Ewing sarcoma and 
acts as an aberrant transcription factor. EWS/FLI dysregulates gene expression
during tumorigenesis by abnormally activating or repressing genes. The expression
levels of thousands of genes are affected in Ewing sarcoma, however, it is
unknown which of these genes contribute to the transformed phenotype. Here we
characterize BCL11B as an up-regulated EWS/FLI target that is necessary for the
maintenance of transformation in patient derived Ewing sarcoma cells lines.
BCL11B, a zinc finger transcription factor, acts as a transcriptional repressor
in Ewing's sarcoma and contributes to the EWS/FLI repressed gene signature.
BCL11B repressive activity is mediated by the NuRD co-repressor complex. We
further demonstrate that re-expression of SPRY1, a repressed target of BCL11B,
limits the transformation capacity of Ewing sarcoma cells. These data define a
new pathway downstream of EWS/FLI required for oncogenic maintenance in Ewing
sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3601955
PMID: 23527175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Biol Cell. 2013 Jul;105(7):289-303. doi: 10.1111/boc.201200086. Epub 2013 May 4.

First identification of Ewing's sarcoma-derived extracellular vesicles and
exploration of their biological and potential diagnostic implications.

Miller IV(1), Raposo G, Welsch U, Prazeres da Costa O, Thiel U, Lebar M, Maurer
M, Bender HU, von Luettichau I, Richter GH, Burdach S, Grunewald TG.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum rechts
der Isar, Technische Universität München, 80804 Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: Exosomes are small RNA- and protein-containing
extracellular vesicles (EVs) that are thought to mediate hetero- and homotypic
intercellular communication between normal and malignant cells.Tumour-derived
exosomes are believed to promote re-programming of the tumour-associated stroma
to favour tumour growth and metastasis. Currently, exosomes have been intensively
studied in carcinomas. However, little is known about their existence and
possible role in sarcomas.
RESULTS: Here, we report on the identification of vesicles with exosomal features
derived from Ewing's sarcoma(ES), the second most common soft-tissue or bone
cancer in children and adolescents. ES cell line-derived EV shave been isolated
by ultracentrifugation and analysed by flow-cytometric assessment of the
exosome-associated proteins CD63 and CD81 as well as by electron microscopy. They
proved to contain ES-specific transcripts including EWS-FLI1, which were suitable
for the sensitive detection of ES cell line-derived exosomes by qRT-PCRin a
pre-clinical model for patient plasma. Microarray analysis of ES cell
line-derived exosomes revealed that they share a common transcriptional signature
potentially involved in G-protein-coupled signalling, neurotransmitter signalling
and stemness.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our results imply that ES-derived exosomes could
eventually serve as biomarkers for minimal residual disease diagnostics in
peripheral blood and prompt further investigation of their potential biological
role in modification of the ES-associated microenvironment

© 2013 Société Française des Microscopies and Société de Biologie Cellulaire de
France. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23521563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013 Sep;60(9):1437-46. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24526. Epub 2013
Mar 18.

Pharmacologic inhibition of epigenetic modification reveals targets of aberrant
promoter methylation in Ewing sarcoma.

Nestheide S(1), Bridge JA, Barnes M, Frayer R, Sumegi J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune
Deficiency, Blood and Cancer Research Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma (ES), a highly aggressive tumor of children and young
adults, is characterized most commonly by an 11;22 chromosomal translocation that
fuses EWSR1 located at 22q12 with FLI1, coding for a member of the ETS family of 
transcription factors. Although genetic changes in ES have been extensively
researched, our understanding of the role of epigenetic modifications in this
neoplasm is limited.
PROCEDURE: In an effort to improve our knowledge in the role of epigenetic
changes in ES we evaluated the in vitro antineoplastic effect of the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) and identified
epigenetically silenced genes by pharmacologic unmasking of DNA methylation
coupled with genome-wide expression profiling.
RESULTS: Comparisons between untreated and 5-Aza-dC treated ES cell lines (n = 5)
identified 208 probe sets with at least twofold difference in expression (P =
0.05). The 208 probe sets represented 145 upregulated and 31 down-regulated
genes. Of the 145 genes upregulated after 5-Aza-dC treatment, four: were further 
characterized. ACRC, CLU, MEST, and NNAT were found to be hypermethylated and
transcriptionally down-regulated in ES cell lines. Further studies revealed that 
ACRC, CLU, MEST, and NNAT were often hypermethylated in primary ES tumors.
Transfection-mediated reexpression of ACRC, CLU, MEST, and NNAT in ES cell lines 
resulted in decreased growth in culture.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated epigenetically modified genes in ES cell
lines and primary tumors and suggested that epigenetic dysregulation may
contribute to disease pathogenesis in ES.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23508900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2013 Jun;36(3):191-200. doi: 10.1007/s13402-013-0126-8. Epub 
2013 Mar 14.

Multiple splice variants of EWSR1-ETS fusion transcripts co-existing in the Ewing
sarcoma family of tumors.

Patócs B(1), Németh K, Garami M, Arató G, Kovalszky I, Szendroi M, Fekete G.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University, Tuzoltó u. 7-9,
Budapest, 1094, Hungary. barbarapatocs@gmail.com

PURPOSE: The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) is characterized by fusions of 
the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22q12 with either one of the genes encoding members 
of the ETS family of transcription factors, in the majority of cases FLI1 or ERG.
Many alternative EWSR1-ETS gene fusions have been encountered, due to variations 
in the locations of the EWSR1 and ETS genomic breakpoints. The resulting
heterogeneity in EWSR1-ETS fusion transcripts may further be increased by the
occurrence of multiple splice variants within the same tumor. Here we present a
retrospective study designed to detect all of the EWSR1-FLI1 and EWSR1-ERG fusion
transcripts in a series of 23 fresh frozen EFT tissues.
METHODS: RT-PCR and nested fluorescent multiplex PCR were used to amplify
EWSR1-FLI1 and EWSR1-ERG transcripts from EFT tissues. Fusion transcripts were
identified by laser-induced fluorescent capillary electrophoresis and confirmed
by sequence analysis.
RESULTS: Nine different EWSR1-FLI1 fusion transcripts and one EWSR1-ERG fusion
transcript were identified in 21 out of 23 fresh frozen EFT tissue samples. In
five cases multiple fusion transcripts were found to coexist in the same tumor
sample. We additionally reviewed previous reports on twelve cases with multiple
EWSR1-ETS fusion transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: Alternative splicing may frequently affect the process of
EFT-associated fusion gene transcription and, as such, may significantly
contribute to the pathogenic role of EFT-associated chromosome translocations. In
a considerable number of cases this may result in multiple splice variants within
the same tumor.

PMID: 23494411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Korean J Pathol. 2013 Feb;47(1):77-81. doi: 10.4132/KoreanJPathol.2013.47.1.77.
Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor with osseous component of the small
bowel mesentery: a case study.

Kim JM(1), Chu YC, Choi CH, Kim L, Choi SJ, Park IS, Han JY, Kim KR, Choi YL, Kim
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Inha University Hospital, Inha University School of
Medicine, Incheon, Korea.

A case of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the small bowel mesentery
with osseous component is reported. A 23-year-old man was admitted to our
hospital because of acute severe abdominal pain. Abdominal computed tomography
revealed a large solid and cystic, oval shaped mass, measuring 11.0×6.0 cm in the
pelvic cavity. Histologically the resected lesion consisted of sheets of
undifferentiated small round cells forming Homer-Wright rosettes and perivascular
pseudorosettes, and showed areas of osteoid and bone formation.
Immunohistochemical studies revealed that tumor cells expressed positivity
against CD99 (MIC2), CD57, neuron-specific enolase, and vimentin. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization study revealed Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) gene 
rearrangement on chromosome 22q12. To the authors' knowledge this is the first
documentation of a peripheral neuroectodermal tumor with osteoid and bone
formation of the small bowel mesentery.

PMCID: PMC3589613
PMID: 23482293  [PubMed]


288. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Apr;37(4):613-6. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31827ae13b.

A benign vascular tumor with a new fusion gene: EWSR1-NFATC1 in hemangioma of the
bone.

Arbajian E(1), Magnusson L, Brosjö O, Wejde J, Folpe AL, Nord KH, Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
arbajian@med.lu.se

The EWSR1 gene in chromosome band 22q12 is a promiscuous fusion partner involved 
in a vast array of tumors characterized by gene fusions. In this study, we report
the finding of a new fusion gene, EWSR1-NFATC1, in a hemangioma of the bone;
genetic rearrangements have not previously been described in this tumor type.
Chromosome banding analysis showed a t(18;22)(q23;q12) translocation as the sole 
change. Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping suggested the involvement of
each of the 2 partner genes, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction 
revealed an in-frame EWSR1-NFATC1 transcript. NFATC1 has not previously been
shown to be involved in a fusion chimera. However, NFATC2, encoding another
member of the same protein family, is known to be a fusion partner for EWSR1 in a
subgroup of Ewing sarcoma. Thus, our findings further broaden the spectrum of
neoplasms associated with EWSR1 fusion genes, add a new partner to the growing
list of EWSR1 chimeras, and suggest that chromosomal rearrangements of
pathogenetic, and possibly also diagnostic, significance can be present in benign
vascular bone tumors.

PMID: 23480895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Head Neck Pathol. 2013 Mar;7(1):28-34. doi: 10.1007/s12105-013-0427-2. Epub 2013 
Mar 5.

What the EWSR1-ATF1 fusion has taught us about hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma.

Tanguay J(1), Weinreb I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network, 200 Elizabeth Street,
Toronto, ON M5G 2C4, Canada.

Hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma (HCCC) is a unique low-grade tumor composed of
cords and nests of clear cells in a hyalinized stroma that was first reported by 
Milchgrub et al. It was recognized as a separate entity from clear cell variants 
of epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma, myoepithelial carcinoma and mucoepidermoid
carcinoma. HCCC is included in a long list of clear cell-containing tumors of
salivary gland, as well as odontogenic tumors and metastases (renal cell
carcinoma). Up until now, it has been considered a diagnosis of exclusion,
despite its very distinctive appearance, and labeled as "not otherwise specified"
by the World Health Organization. The emergence of molecular data in salivary
gland tumors, including HCCC now allow for a more rigorous appraisal of its
spectrum. The EWSR1-ATF1 fusion has proven the concept of a "mucinous HCCC" and
removes mucin as an exclusion criterion for this tumor. It has also proven a
genetic link between clear cell odontogenic carcinoma and HCCC.
Molecularly-proven cases have also highlighted variant morphologies and shown
that cases with overt squamous differentiation are true HCCC. This gives further 
weight to the classification of this tumor as squamous or adenosquamous in
differentiation and as a specific entity rather than an "NOS" tumor.

PMCID: PMC3597151
PMID: 23459838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Eur J Cancer. 2013 May;49(8):1932-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.01.032. Epub 2013
Feb 26.

Ovarian tissue cryopreserved for fertility preservation from patients with Ewing 
or other sarcomas appear to have no tumour cell contamination.

Greve T(1), Wielenga VT, Grauslund M, Sørensen N, Christiansen DB, Rosendahl M,
Yding Andersen C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Rigshospitalet - Copenhagen University
Hospital, Denmark. tinegreve@gmail.com

AIM: The chemotherapy required to treat patients with sarcoma may as a
side-effect induce infertility in girls and young women. If these patients have
ovarian cortical tissue cryopreserved prior to chemotherapy, they may, if
necessary, have the tissue transplanted and restore their fertility. The aim of
this study was to evaluate the risk of residual cancer cells in the ovarian
cortex intended for transplantation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Ovarian tissue stored for fertility preservation from 16
surviving patients diagnosed with sarcoma (nine with Ewing sarcomas, four with
osteosarcomas, two with synovial sarcomas and one with chondrosarcoma) was
evaluated for the presence of malignant cells by histology and by transplantation
to immunodeficient mice for 20 weeks. A fraction of the tissue from patients with
Ewing sarcoma was also evaluated for the presence of the molecular marker
EWS-FLI1 by reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(RT-qPCR). The transplant itself and selected murine organs were analysed for the
presence of malignant cells by histology.
RESULTS: All the mice accommodated the human tissue for 20 weeks of
transplantation period with none of the mice developing any sign of cancer. In no
instance were any cancer cells detected by histology or RT-qPCR.
CONCLUSION: Ovarian tissue from patients with sarcoma appears to be without
metastatic malignant cells in numbers that allow detection. Although the actual
pieces of ovarian tissue used for transplantation remain unchecked, the current
data indicate that the procedure is safe at least in patients that survive the
sarcoma disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23452988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056408. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Genomic EWS-FLI1 fusion sequences in Ewing sarcoma resemble breakpoint
characteristics of immature lymphoid malignancies.

Berger M(1), Dirksen U, Braeuninger A, Koehler G, Juergens H, Krumbholz M,
Metzler M.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Erlangen, Department of Pediatrics, Erlangen, Germany.

Chromosomal translocations between the EWS gene and members of the ETS gene
family are characteristic molecular features of the Ewing sarcoma. The most
common translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) fuses the EWS gene to FLI1, and is present
in 85-90% of Ewing sarcomas. In the present study, a specifically designed
multiplex long-range PCR assay was applied to amplify genomic EWS-FLI1 fusion
sites from as little as 100 ng template DNA. Characterization of the EWS-FLI1
fusion sites of 42 pediatric and young adult Ewing sarcoma patients and seven
cell lines revealed a clustering in the 5' region of the EWS-breakpoint cluster
region (BCR), in contrast to random distribution of breakpoints in the FLI1-BCR. 
No association of breakpoints with various recombination-inducing sequence motifs
was identified. The occurrence of small deletions and duplications at the genomic
junction is characteristic of involvement of the non-homologous end-joining
(NHEJ) repair system, similar to findings at chromosomal breakpoints in pediatric
leukemia and lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3575406
PMID: 23441188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Clin Pathol. 2013 May;66(5):452-4. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201433. Epub
2013 Feb 20.

Angiosarcoma of the parotid gland with a t(12;22) translocation creating a
EWSR1-ATF1 fusion: a diagnostic dilemma.

Gru AA, Becker N, Pfeifer JD.

PMID: 23426715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Apr;37(4):571-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182772a15.

EWSR1 genetic rearrangements in salivary gland tumors: a specific and very common
feature of hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma.

Shah AA(1), LeGallo RD, van Zante A, Frierson HF Jr, Mills SE, Berean KW,
Mentrikoski MJ, Stelow EB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA.

The Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) is translocated in many sarcomas.
Recently, its rearrangement has been described in salivary gland hyalinizing
clear cell carcinomas (HCCCs) and in a subset of soft tissue myoepitheliomas.
This study examines the presence of the EWSR1 rearrangement in a variety of
salivary gland lesions including classic myoepitheliomas and HCCCs. Using a
tissue microarray and whole-mount sections, fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) was performed on a variety of salivary gland lesions including HCCCs. The 
EWSR1 rearrangement was detected in 87% of HCCCs (13 of 15); all other salivary
gland lesions including classic myoepitheliomas had intact EWSR1. Patients with
HCCCs with rearranged EWSR1 included 1 man, 10 women, and 2 of unknown sex. Ages 
ranged from 35 to 83 years; the tumor size ranged from 0.8 to 5.5 cm, and the
involved locations included: palate (2), base of the tongue (2), mandible (2),
submandibular gland (2), lip (1), floor of the mouth (1), sublingual gland (1),
inner cheek (1), and nasopharynx (1). All HCCCs were composed of sheets and nests
of monotonous cells with clear cytoplasm within a hyalinized stroma. All tested
cases were immunoreactive with antibodies to p63 and were nonreactive with
antibodies to more conventional myoepithelial antigens (e.g., smooth muscle actin
and S100 protein). These findings show that the EWSR1 rearrangement is almost a
defining feature of HCCCs and also confirm that classic salivary gland
myoepitheliomas are distinct from these tumors and do not share a pathogenetic
relationship with their soft tissue counterparts.

PMID: 23426124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Adv Anat Pathol. 2013 Mar;20(2):75-85. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e31828625bf.

Cutaneous neoplasms showing EWSR1 rearrangement.

Boland JM(1), Folpe AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Rearrangements of the EWSR1 gene are found in an increasing number of human
neoplasms, including several tumors that can involve the skin: Ewing
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor, angiomatoid (malignant) fibrous
histiocytoma, myoepithelioma of soft tissue, and clear cell sarcoma. Although
these tumors share this common genetic link, they have very different clinical
features, morphology, immunophenotype, and sometimes fusion gene partners; these 
will be the subjects of this review.

PMID: 23399793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054556. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

FOXM1 is an oncogenic mediator in Ewing Sarcoma.

Christensen L(1), Joo J, Lee S, Wai D, Triche TJ, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Saban Research
Institute, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Ewing Family Tumors (Ewing Sarcoma and peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal
Tumor) are common bone and soft tissue malignancies of childhood, adolescence and
young adulthood. Chromosomal translocation in these tumors produces fusion
oncogenes of the EWS/ETS class, with EWS/FLI1 being by far the most common.
EWS/ETS chimera are the only well established driver mutations in these tumors
and they function as aberrant transcription factors. Understanding the downstream
genes whose expression is modified has been a central approach to the study of
these tumors. FOXM1 is a proliferation associated transcription factor which has 
increasingly been found to play a role in the pathogenesis of a wide range of
human cancers. Here we demonstrate that FOXM1 is expressed in Ewing primary
tumors and cell lines. Reduction in FOXM1 expression in Ewing cell lines results 
in diminished potential for anchorage independent growth. FOXM1 expression is
enhanced by EWS/FLI1, though, unlike other tumor systems, it is not driven by
expression of the EWS/FLI1 target GLI1. Thiostrepton is a compound known to
inhibit FOXM1 by direct binding. We show that Thiostrepton diminishes FOXM1
expression in Ewing cell lines and this reduction reduces cell viability through 
an apoptotic mechanism. FOXM1 is involved in Ewing tumor pathogenesis and may
prove to be a useful therapeutic target in Ewing tumors.

PMCID: PMC3554707
PMID: 23365673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. World J Surg Oncol. 2013 Jan 25;11:17. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-11-17.

Clear cell sarcoma of the jejunum: a case report.

Lasithiotakis K(1), Protonotarios A, Lazarou V, Tzardi M, Chalkiadakis G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, University Hospital of Heraklion, Medical
School of Heraklion, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
kwstaslasith@yahoo.gr

BACKGROUND: Clear cell sarcoma (CCS), also known as malignant melanoma of soft
parts, is a rare type of soft tissue sarcoma which exhibits morphological,
immunohistochemical and ultrastructural similarity with malignant melanoma. It is
rarely localized in the intestine and the natural history of this tumor is not
yet clear.
CASE REPORT: A 49-year-old woman presented with diffuse abdominal colicky pain
and vomitus over the previous seven days. An X-ray of the abdomen revealed
obstruction of the small intestine. The patient underwent contrast enhanced
abdominal computerized tomography (CT), which confirmed the obstruction at the
jejunum and an associated circumferential wall thickening extending about 3 cm in
length, causing concentric narrowing of the lumen. At laparotomy, a mass was
recognized at the level of the jejunum in the small intestine, which caused
almost complete obstruction of the lumen. At the point of obstruction, adhered
loops of small intestine were found. A segmental small bowel resection was
performed with 5 cm clear margins and its respective mesenteric lymph nodes.
RESULTS: Histological examination of the specimen revealed a tumor (3×3×2 cm)
with epithelioid cell characteristics and eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm and
focal translucent nuclei. Immunohistochemistry was positive for S100, epithelial 
membrane antigen (EMA) and synaptophysin. The tumor was pankeratin AE1/AE2, GFAP,
HMB45 and MART-1/Melan-A negative. Twelve lymph nodes were retrieved and were
free of neoplastic infiltration. Cytogenetic examination revealed translocation
of the EWSR1 gene. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and left
the hospital seven days after her admission in good general condition. After 20
months of follow-up the patient remains asymptomatic without any clinical or
radiological evidence of recurrence.
CONCLUSION: CCS sarcoma can be rarely localized in the jejunum. Due to its
morphological similarity to malignant melanoma, cytogenetic examination is
necessary for its diagnosis. Wide resection of the tumor and its respective lymph
nodes was associated with a 20-month disease free survival in this patient.

PMCID: PMC3598680
PMID: 23351137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Med Oncol. 2013 Mar;30(1):412. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0412-8. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

Molecular detection and targeting of EWSR1 fusion transcripts in soft tissue
tumors.

Cantile M(1), Marra L, Franco R, Ascierto P, Liguori G, De Chiara A, Botti G.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Unit, National Cancer Institute "Fondazione G. Pascale", Via Mariano
Semmola, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Soft tissue tumors are a heterogeneous group of tumors, traditionally classified 
according to morphology and histogenesis. Molecular classification divides
sarcomas into two main categories: (a) sarcomas with specific genetic alterations
and (b) sarcomas showing multiple complex karyotypic abnormalities without any
specific pattern. Most chromosomal alterations are represented by translocations 
which are increasingly detected. The identification of fusion transcripts, in
fact, not only support the diagnosis but also provides the basis for the
development of new therapeutic strategies aimed at blocking aberrant activity of 
the chimeric proteins. One of the genes most susceptible to
breakage/translocation in soft tissue tumors is represented by Ewing sarcoma
breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1). This gene has a large number of fusion partners,
mainly associated with the pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma but with other soft
tissue tumors too. In this review, we illustrate the characteristics of this
gene/protein, both in normal cellular physiology and in carcinogenesis. We
describe the different fusion partners of EWSR1, the molecular pathways in which 
is involved and the main molecular biology techniques for the identification of
fusion transcripts and for their inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3586390
PMID: 23329308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Case Rep Pathol. 2012;2012:291623. doi: 10.1155/2012/291623. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Subcutaneous angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma mimicking metastatic melanoma.

Sparreboom E(1), Wetzels C, Verdijk M, Mulder S, Blokx W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, P.O. Box 
9100, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is an uncommon soft-tissue tumor of intermediate
malignancy that is often misdiagnosed initially. As there is not one
immunohistochemical marker that consequently stains positive or negative for
angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, molecular diagnostics are becoming more widely 
used. So far three translocations have been reported to arise in angiomatoid
fibrous histiocytoma: FUS-ATF1, EWSR1-CREB1, or EWSR1-ATF1. We present a case of 
angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma on the upper arm of a 40-year-old female, which 
was initially misdiagnosed as metastatic melanoma in a lymph node. Revision of
the pathology revealed an angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, which was later
confirmed by a EWSR1-CREB1 translocation with molecular diagnostics. Furthermore,
we review the relevant literature and provide an overview of all available case
reports in the past ten years. This case report illustrates the importance for
pathologists of knowing the typical pathology features of AFH and integrating
immunohistochemical and molecular findings in order to prevent overdiagnosis of
lymph node metastasis of a malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3539338
PMID: 23320232  [PubMed]


299. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Apr;1832(4):553-64. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.01.001.
Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Loss of connexin43 expression in Ewing's sarcoma cells favors the development of 
the primary tumor and the associated bone osteolysis.

Talbot J(1), Brion R, Picarda G, Amiaud J, Chesneau J, Bougras G, Stresing V,
Tirode F, Heymann D, Redini F, Verrecchia F.

Author information: 
(1)LUNAM Université, France.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is a primary bone tumor characterized by a chromosomic
translocation between the EWS gene and a member of the ETS gene family, mainly
FLI1, which leads to an aberrant transcription factor EWS-FLI1 that promotes
tumorigenicity. Gap junctions are intercellular channels composed of
transmembrane proteins (connexin: Cx), that allow direct intercellular
communication between adjacent cells. Numerous studies have shown that
tumorigenesis may be associated with a loss of gap junctional intercellular
communication (GJIC). Loss of Cx43 expression was observed at the protein and
mRNA levels in ES cell lines compared to those measured in human mesenchymal stem
cells. A673 ES cells stably transfected with an shRNA targeting EWS-FLI1 showed
an increase in Cx43 expression (at the mRNA, protein and transcriptional levels) 
and GJIC. In an osteolytic murine model of ES, the overexpression of Cx43 in ES
cells dramatically reduced tumor growth, leading to a significant increase in
animal survival. In vitro assays showed that Cx43 overexpression increases the
p27 level with an associated marked decrease of Rb phosphorylation, consistent
with the observed blockade of the cell cycle in G0/G1 phase. In addition, the
bone microarchitectural parameters, assessed by micro-CT analysis, showed an
increased bone volume when Cx43 expression was enhanced. Histological analysis
demonstrated that the overexpression of Cx43 in ES tumor cells inhibits
osteoclast activity and therefore bone resorption. Our study demonstrated that
the loss of Cx43 expression in ES cells plays a crucial role in the development
of the primary tumor and the associated bone osteolysis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23313578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;41(11):729-32. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2012.11.004.

[Primitive neuroectodermal tumor in female genital tract: a clinicopathologic
study].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang X(1), Wang P, He Y, Yang F, Li L, Wang H, Wang QL, Yao XY, Yang KX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features of primitive neuroectodermal
tumor (PNET) in female genital tract.
METHODS: Six cases of PNET arising in female genital tract were retrospectively
reviewed. The clinicopathologic features, immunohistochemical findings and EWS
gene translocation study results were analyzed.
RESULTS: The age of patients ranged from 10 to 27 years (mean = 20 years). The
sites of involvement included ovary (1 case), uterus (1 case), vulva (2 cases)
and vagina (2 cases). The greatest diameter of the tumor ranged from 2 to 10 cm
(mean = 5.4 cm). The tumor had nodular appearance and showed grayish-pink fleshy 
cut surface, accompanied by foci of hemorrhage and necrosis. Histologically, the 
tumor was composed of malignant small round cells with indistinct cell borders,
hyperchromatic nuclei, dense chromatin, tiny nucleoli and scanty cytoplasm. The
tumor cells were arranged in sheets or lobules. Homer-Wright rosettes were
identified in 1 case. Immunohistochemical study showed that the tumor cells were 
positive for CD99, FLI-1 and CD56 (6/6). Focal expression of vimentin (5/6), NSE 
(5/6), nestin (4/6), synaptophysin (4/6), S-100 protein (2/6) and chromogranin A 
(1/6) was also demonstrated. EWS gene translocation was detected in 5 cases
studied. Follow-up information was available in 2 patients (7 and 17 months of
follow up, respectively). One of them died of tumor metastasis 17 months after
diagnosis. The other patient was still alive.
CONCLUSIONS: PNET arising in female genital tract is rare. It mainly involves
ovary, uterus, vulva and vagina. Immunohistochemical study using a panel of
antibodies and fluorescence in-situ hybridization play an important role in
definitive diagnosis of this rare malignancy.

PMID: 23302331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 Mar;14(3):254-61. doi: 10.4161/cbt.23298. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Characterization of Ewing sarcoma associated cancer/testis antigens.

Mahlendorf DE(1), Staege MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle,
Germany.

The prognosis of patients suffering from tumors of the Ewing family (EFT) is
still poor. Immunotherapy strategies are pursued and EFT-specific antigens have
to be identified as targets for cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTL). Due to the lack of
expression of cancer/testis antigens (CTA) in normal tissues, these antigens are 
partially able to induce immune responses in cancer patients. Therefore, they are
promising targets for immunotherapy. EFT are characterized by chromosomal
rearrangements involving members of the TET (translocated in liposarcoma, Ewing
sarcoma breakpoint region 1, TATA box binding protein-associated factor 15)
family of RNA binding proteins and members of the E-26 (ETS) family of
transcription factors. The resulting onco-fusion proteins are highly specific for
EFT and downstream targets of TET-ETS represent candidate tumor specific
antigens. In order to identify new EFT-associated CTA, we analyzed
microarray-data sets from EFT and normal tissues from the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) database. The impact of TET-ETS on expression of CTA was analyzed using GEO
data sets from transgenic mesenchymal stem cells. One CTA with high specificity
for EFT is lipase I (LIPI, membrane-associated phospholipase A1-ß). CTL specific 
for LIPI-derived peptides LDYTDAKFV and NLLKHGASL were able to lyse HLA-A2
positive EFT cells in vitro which confirms the possible role of LIPI and other
CTA for EFT-immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3595308
PMID: 23291981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;35(11):814-8.

[Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of trachea: a case report and review 
of literatures].

[Article in Chinese]

Zheng GY(1), Xie BS, Yue WX, Li RH, Chen XY, He YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To improve the understanding of tracheal peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (PNET).
METHODS: A case of tracheal PNET diagnosed in July 2010 was reported and the
related literatures were reviewed. The literature review was carried out
respectively with "primitive neuroectodermal tumor", "peripheral" as the search
terms in Wanfang med online and PubMed database by September 2011.
RESULTS: A case of 63 year-old female patient, who had been misdiagnosed as
having chronic pharyngitis, chronic bronchitis and bronchial asthma, was admitted
to the hospital because of cough and sputum production for 50 days, and
anhelation for 1 month. After admission, the chest computerized tomography showed
a space-occupying lesion in the middle of the trachea. Bronchoscopy showed a
pedicle neoplasm 4 cm under the subglottic, with integral capsule, smooth surface
and rich vascellum. Subsequently, tumor resection under bronchoscope was
performed. Pathology report after operation showed infiltration of flake small
round malignant cells under bronchial mucosa. Immunohistochemistry showed
CD(99)(+), Syn(+) and S-100(+). EWS-FLI-1 fusion transcript was detected by
RT-PCR. Accordingly, it was diagnosed as PNET. The symptoms of cough and
anhelation were disappeared after operation. So far, there was no local
recurrence and distant metastasis with 14 months follow-up. A total of 111
literatures were received in Pubmed, including one of prospective study, one of
review, 22 of retrospective study and 87 of case report. Forty literatures and
187 cases in all were received in Wanfang Med Online, including 24 of
retrospective study and 16 of case report. But, there were no reports about
tracheal PNET.
CONCLUSIONS: PNET can occur in the trachea and is easy to be misdiagnosed. To
make a definite diagnosis, histopathology and immunohistochemistry are needed and
detection of EWS-FLI-1 fusion transcript is a reliable marker for molecular
diagnosis. The tracheal pPNET may be different with the pPNETs in other parts,
and has a lower-grade invasion and less distant metastasis.

PMID: 23290035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Clin Invest. 2013 Feb;123(2):600-10. doi: 10.1172/JCI63572. Epub 2013 Jan 2.

EWS/ATF1 expression induces sarcomas from neural crest-derived cells in mice.

Yamada K(1), Ohno T, Aoki H, Semi K, Watanabe A, Moritake H, Shiozawa S, Kunisada
T, Kobayashi Y, Toguchida J, Shimizu K, Hara A, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Regeneration and Advanced Medical Science,
Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) is an aggressive soft tissue malignant tumor
characterized by a unique t(12;22) translocation that leads to the expression of 
a chimeric EWS/ATF1 fusion gene. However, little is known about the mechanisms
underlying the involvement of EWS/ATF1 in CCS development. In addition, the
cellular origins of CCS have not been determined. Here, we generated
EWS/ATF1-inducible mice and examined the effects of EWS/ATF1 expression in adult 
somatic cells. We found that forced expression of EWS/ATF1 resulted in the
development of EWS/ATF1-dependent sarcomas in mice. The histology of
EWS/ATF1-induced sarcomas resembled that of CCS, and EWS/ATF1-induced tumor cells
expressed CCS markers, including S100, SOX10, and MITF. Lineage-tracing
experiments indicated that neural crest-derived cells were subject to
EWS/ATF1-driven transformation. EWS/ATF1 directly induced Fos in an
ERK-independent manner. Treatment of human and EWS/ATF1-induced CCS tumor cells
with FOS-targeted siRNA attenuated proliferation. These findings demonstrated
that FOS mediates the growth of EWS/ATF1-associated sarcomas and suggest that FOS
is a potential therapeutic target in human CCS.

PMCID: PMC3561811
PMID: 23281395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Orthopedics. 2013 Jan;36(1):e113-6. doi: 10.3928/01477447-20121217-29.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the proximal humeral
epiphysis.

Morris P(1), Dickman PS, Seidel MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Arizona, Tucson, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) of bone is a rare
childhood tumor most commonly located in the metadiaphysis. In skeletally
immature patients, lesions of the epiphysis are rarely malignant, with the most
common diagnosis being chondroblastoma. This article presents a case of ES/PNET
of the proximal humeral epiphysis in a 12-year-old boy. To the authors'
knowledge, this is the first reported case of epiphyseal ES/PNET confirmed with
molecular testing. Radiographs of the patient's painful shoulder showed a
well-defined lytic lesion within the humeral epiphysis. Magnetic resonance
imaging suggested a chondroid tumor with surrounding edema. Based on the imaging 
characteristics, the patient's age, and the lesion's location, a preliminary
diagnosis of chondroblastoma was made. A trochar biopsy of the lesion
demonstrated a small, round, blue cell tumor on frozen section. Subsequently,
immunohistochemical staining was uniformly positive in a membrane pattern for
CD99, and molecular diagnostic testing demonstrated a EWSR1/FLI1 fusion
transcript, confirming the pathologic diagnosis of ES/PNET. Although
metadiaphyseal locations for ES/PNET are most common, this case adds to
previously reported cases of epiphyseal ES/PNET, suggesting that the diagnosis be
considered for pediatric epiphyseal tumors. This case also demonstrates why
following rigorous oncologic treatment algorithms by obtaining a limited trochar 
biopsy, even in the case of a confident radiographic diagnosis, is critically
important; the biopsy results can lead to a major change in treatment and avoid
contamination of a larger area of soft tissue and bone.

Copyright 2013, SLACK Incorporated.

PMID: 23276342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Diagn Pathol. 2012 Dec 31;7:183. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-183.

Perivascular epithelioid cell neoplasm of the urinary bladder in an adolescent: a
case report and review of the literature.

Yin L(1), Bu H, Chen M, Yu J, Zhuang H, Chen J, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Guoxuexiang 
37, 610041 Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Perivascular epithelioid cell neoplasms (PEComas) of the urinary bladder are
extremely rare and the published cases were comprised predominantly of
middle-aged patients. Herein, the authors present the first urinary bladder
PEComa occurring in an adolescent. This 16-year-old Chinese girl present with a
3-year history of abdominal discomfort and a solid mass was documented in the
urinary bladder by ultrasonography. Two years later, at the age of 18, the
patient underwent transurethral resection of the bladder tumor. Microscopically, 
the tumor was composed of spindled cells mixed with epithelioid cells.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor were strongly positive for HMB45, smooth muscle 
actin, muscle-specific actin, and H-caldesmon. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
analysis revealed no evidence of EWSR1 gene rearrangement. The patient had been
in a good status without evidence of recurrence 13 months after surgery. Urinary 
bladder PEComa is an extremely rare neoplasm and seems occur predominantly in
middle-aged patients. However, this peculiar lesion can develop in pediatric
population and therefore it should be rigorously distinguished from their
mimickers.VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found
here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1870004378817301.

PMCID: PMC3542191
PMID: 23276164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Med Case Rep. 2012 Dec 19;6:424. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-6-424.

Trabectedin as second-line treatment in metastatic myxoid liposarcoma: a case
report.

Pedrinaci IZ(1), Jurado JM, Carrillo J, Molina MC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clínico San Cecilio de Granada, Granada,
Spain. irenezarcos@hotmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Soft tissue sarcomas are heterogeneous tumors that are difficult to
treat. Up to 50 percent of patients develop metastatic disease and require
systemic chemotherapy. Ifosfamide and doxorubicin are the two most active agents.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 33-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our facility with a
metastatic myxoid liposarcoma. Our patient was initially treated with surgery and
radiation therapy, but experienced three recurrences during a six-year period,
the first and the last occurring while our patient was pregnant. The first
recurrence, which occurred two years after diagnosis and was localized in the
left cervical and right axillary region, was treated with surgery followed by
chemotherapy. Molecular analysis of this tumor showed a t(12,16)<U+2009>+<U+2009>translocation 
resulting in a FUS-DDIT3 or EWSR1-DDIT3 fusion. Three years later our patient
experienced a second recurrence in the left supraclavicular fossa, upper thoracic
and anterior mediastinum, which was treated with surgery alone. Eight months
later, during the second pregnancy, our patient experienced a third recurrence as
a large cervical mass that was treated, upon pregnancy, with trabectedin
(1.5mg/m2/24-hour continuous infusion) for a total of 12 cycles. At that time a
computed tomography scan showed long-term partial response with excellent
treatment tolerability.
CONCLUSIONS: This case report illustrates the potential therapeutic activity of
trabectedin in patients with myxoid liposarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3570336
PMID: 23253485  [PubMed]


307. Pathol Int. 2012 Dec;62(12):817-22. doi: 10.1111/pin.12014.

Primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma with EWSR1-CREB1 fusion, resembling
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma: Case report with a review of Literature.

Matsukuma S(1), Hisaoka M, Obara K, Kono T, Takeo H, Sato K, Hata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Japan Self Defense Forces Central Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan. skuma@cocoa.plala.or.jp

Reported herein is an extremely rare case of primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma
(PPMS). A 31-year-old man presented with a 2.7<U+2009>cm-sized pulmonary tumor
surrounded by capsule-like fibrosis. The patient has been free of disease for 5.8
years after surgery. This tumor focally showed endobronchial features, and
consisted of reticular cords of oval, short spindle, or polygonal cells with
swollen vesicular nuclei accompanied by an abundant myxoid stroma, closely
resembling extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Tumor cells were diffusely
positive for vimentin and focally positive for epithelial membrane antigen, but
were negative for cytokeratin, TTF-1, Napsin A, S-100 protein, CD34, desmin,
smooth-muscle actin, CD10, p63, calponin, h-caldesmon, c-kit, HMB-45,
synaptophysin, or glial fibrillary acid protein. Our reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction using the formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues detected EWSR1-CREB1 fusion transcript, but could
not demonstrate EWSR1-ATF1 fusion or EWSR1/TAF15/TFG-NR4A3 fusion. These findings
indicate that the current tumor is an additional case of PPMS with EESR1-CREB1
fusion, recently reported by Thway et<U+2009>al. Some cases of PPMS can behave in an
indolent manner.

© 2012 The Authors. Pathology International © 2012 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23252871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Cutan Pathol. 2013 Feb;40(2):265-8. doi: 10.1111/cup.12058. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

Superficial paramucosal clear cell sarcoma of the soft parts resembling melanoma 
in a 13-year-old boy.

Sidiropoulos M(1), Busam K, Guitart J, Laskin WB, Wagner AM, Gerami P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) of tendons and aponeuroses, also known as melanoma of
soft parts, represents an aggressive rare malignancy that is characterized by a
nested or fascicular pattern of spindled cells and a pathognomonic reciprocal
translocation, t(12;22)(q13;q12), that results in the fusion of EWSR1 and ATF1
genes. Numerous recent studies have recognized the importance of a cutaneous CCS 
variant that can mimic a broad spectrum of entities, including spindle cell
melanoma, spindle cell squamous carcinoma, cutaneous leiomyosarcoma and atypical 
fibroxanthoma. We report a case of a 13-year-old boy with cutaneous CCS who
presented with a few months history of an asymptomatic papule on the lower lip
that was suggestive of a mucocele. Biopsy of the lesion showed a wedge shaped
neoplasm arranged in nests and fascicles of epithelioid- to oval-shaped cells
with pale cytoplasm, open chromatin and prominent nucleolus. The superficial
component was closely opposed to the basal epithelium resembling the junctional
nests of a melanocytic neoplasm. The process extended into and involved the
striated muscle of the lip. The cells expressed S-100, CD99 and synaptophysin by 
immunohistochemistry, and there was focal HMB-45 and microphthalmia transcription
factor (MiTF) positivity as well. Fluorescence in situ hybridization confirmed
the presence of the t(12;22) (ESWR1-ATF1) translocation.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23228147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Hum Pathol. 2013 Feb;44(2):289-93. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.08.008. Epub 2012 
Nov 27.

Metastatic angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma of the scalp, with EWSR1-CREB1 gene
fusions in primary tumor and nodal metastasis.

Thway K(1), Stefanaki K, Papadakis V, Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden Hospital, SW3 6JJ London, UK.
khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is a rare soft tissue tumor of intermediate
biologic potential, predominantly arising in superficial extremities of children 
and young adults. Less than 5% metastasize. We describe a case of angiomatoid
fibrous histiocytoma in the scalp of an 8-year-old boy, which metastasized to a
postauricular lymph node 3 years after primary tumor excision. Histologically,
primary and metastasis comprised nodules of bland ovoid cells, with primary
additionally showing hemorrhagic cavities, fibrous capsule, and lymphoplasmacytic
inflammation. Both strongly expressed desmin, with focal epithelial membrane
antigen. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction showed EWSR1-CREB1
fusion transcripts in both primary and metastasis. This is, to our knowledge, the
first description of genetically proven metastatic angiomatoid fibrous
histiocytoma. Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma can mimic both benign and
malignant lesions, and although most behave indolently, it is important to
recognize their metastatic potential.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23199525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049819. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Potential downstream target genes of aberrant ETS transcription factors are
differentially affected in Ewing's sarcoma and prostate carcinoma.

Camões MJ(1), Paulo P, Ribeiro FR, Barros-Silva JD, Almeida M, Costa VL, Cerveira
N, Skotheim RI, Lothe RA, Henrique R, Jerónimo C, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal.

FLI1 and ERG, the major ETS transcription factors involved in rearrangements in
the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) and in prostate carcinomas (PCa),
respectively, belong to the same subfamily, having 98% sequence identity in the
DNA binding domain. We therefore decided to investigate whether the aberrant
transcription factors in both malignancies have some common downstream targets.
We crossed a publicly available list of all putative EWSR1-FLI1 target genes in
ESFT with our microarray expression data on 24 PCa and 6 non-malignant prostate
tissues (NPT) and choose four genes among the top-most differentially expressed
between PCa with (PCa ERG+) and without (PCa ETS-) ETS fusion genes (HIST1H4L,
KCNN2, ECRG4 and LDOC1), as well as four well-validated direct targets of the
EWSR1-FLI1 chimeric protein in ESFT (NR0B1, CAV1, IGFBP3 and TGFBR2). Using
quantitative expression analysis in 16 ESFT and seven alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas 
(ARMS), we were able to validate the four genes previously described as direct
targets of the EWSR1-FLI1 oncoprotein, showing overexpression of CAV1 and NR0B1
and underexpression of IGFBP3 and TGFBR2 in ESFT as compared to ARMS. Although
none of these four genes showed significant expression differences between PCa
ERG+ and PCa ETS-, CAV1, IGFBP3 and TGFBR2 were less expressed in PCa in an
independent series of 56 PCa and 15 NPT, as also observed for ECRG4 and LDOC1,
suggesting a role in prostate carcinogenesis in general. On the other hand, we
demonstrate for the first time that both HIST1H4L and KCNN2 are significantly
overexpressed in PCa ERG+ and that ERG binds to the promoter of these genes.
Conversely, KCNN2 was found underexpressed in ESFT relative to ARMS, suggesting
that the EWSR1-ETS oncoprotein may have the opposite effect of ERG rearrangements
in PCa. We conclude that aberrant ETS transcription factors modulate target genes
differently in ESFT and PCa.

PMCID: PMC3501462
PMID: 23185447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Oncogene. 2013 Oct 17;32(42):5089-100. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.525. Epub 2012 Nov
26.

Mechanism and relevance of EWS/FLI-mediated transcriptional repression in Ewing
sarcoma.

Sankar S(1), Bell R, Stephens B, Zhuo R, Sharma S, Bearss DJ, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of
Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing sarcoma provides an important model for transcription-factor-mediated
oncogenic transformation because of its reliance on the ETS-type fusion
oncoprotein EWS/FLI. EWS/FLI functions as a transcriptional activator and
transcriptional activation is required for its oncogenic activity. Here, we
demonstrate that a previously less-well characterized transcriptional repressive 
function of the EWS/FLI fusion is also required for the transformed phenotype of 
Ewing sarcoma. Through comparison of EWS/FLI transcriptional profiling and
genome-wide localization data, we define the complement of EWS/FLI direct
downregulated target genes. We demonstrate that LOX is a previously undescribed
EWS/FLI-repressed target that inhibits the transformed phenotype of Ewing sarcoma
cells. Mechanistic studies demonstrate that the NuRD co-repressor complex
interacts with EWS/FLI, and that its associated histone deacetylase and LSD1
activities contribute to the repressive function. Taken together, these data
reveal a previously unknown molecular function for EWS/FLI, demonstrate a more
highly coordinated oncogenic transcriptional hierarchy mediated by EWS/FLI than
previously suspected, and implicate a new paradigm for therapeutic intervention
aimed at controlling NuRD activity in Ewing sarcoma tumors.

PMCID: PMC3899696
PMID: 23178492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2013 Oct;21(5):379-85. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318273a9e0.

Study of EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement in 18 cases of CK20+/CM2B4+ Merkel cell
carcinoma using FISH and correlation to the differential diagnosis of Ewing
sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor.

Fernandez-Flores A(1), Suarez-Peñaranda JM, Alonso S.

Author information: 
(1)*Service of Cellular Pathology, Clinica Ponferrada, Ponferrada †Service of
Anatomic Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario Santiago de Compostela
‡Department of Medicine, University of Santiago de Compostela, Galicia
§Department of Anatomic Pathology, Hospital Universitario de Guadalajara,
Guadalajara, Spain.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) and primary cutaneous Ewing sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumors (PCES/PNET) pose a challenging morphologic differential
diagnosis. Approximately 90% of Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(PNETs) have a specific translocation, t(11;22) (q24;q12). The EWS-friend
leukemia integration-1 (FLI-1) fusion results in FLI-1 overexpression. EWS/FLI-1 
rearrangement has been suggested as a useful tool in the diagnosis of PCES/PNET. 
In contrast, Merkel cell polyomavirus was found to be an infective agent related 
to the pathogenesis of MCC. Merkel cell polyomavirus can be immunohistochemically
detected with the antibody CM2B4. To the best of our knowledge, there is no case 
of any cytokeratin (CK)20-/CM2B4+ PNET. The goal of our study was to investigate 
whether EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement was present in cases of MCC. We have studied 18
cases of MCC. To make sure that the cases investigated by fluorescent in situ
hybridization were genuine MCC, we considered only CK20+/CM2B4+ cases. Six cases 
met this criterion. EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement was not evidenced in any of the 18
cases (including the 6 "genuine" cases of MCC). Although our findings were
somewhat expected, we think that they fill a gap in the literature: the
confirmation that MCC is devoid of the EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement.

PMID: 23165331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. BMC Cancer. 2012 Nov 12;12:513. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-513.

Junction region of EWS-FLI1 fusion protein has a dominant negative effect in
Ewing's sarcoma in vitro.

Jully B(1), Vijayalakshmi R, Gopal G, Sabitha K, Rajkumar T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute (WIA), 38, Sardar Patel
Road, Chennai, 600036, India.

BACKGROUND: Ewing's sarcoma is a malignancy characterized by a specific 11:22
chromosomal translocation which generates a novel EWS-FLI1 fusion protein
functioning as an aberrant transcription factor. In the present study, we have
further characterized the junction region of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein.
METHODS: In-silico model of EWS-FLI1 fusion protein was analysed for ligand
binding sites, and a putative region (amino acid (aa) 251-343 of the type 1
fusion protein) in the vicinity of the fusion junction was cloned and expressed
using bacterial expression. The recombinant protein was characterized by Circular
Dichroism (CD). We then expressed aa 251-280 ectopically in Ewing's sarcoma
cell-line and its effect on cell proliferation, tumorigenicity and expression of 
EWS-FLI1 target genes were analysed.
RESULTS: Our modelling analysis indicated that Junction region (aa 251-343)
encompasses potential ligand biding sites in the EWS-FLI1 protein and when
expressed in bacteria was present as soluble form. Ectopically expressing this
region in Ewing's sarcoma cells inhibited tumorigenicity, and EWS-FLI1 target
genes indicating a dominant negative biological effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Junction region can be exploited further as target for drug
development in future to specifically target EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's Sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3519708
PMID: 23145994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cancer Genet. 2012 Nov;205(11):603-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.09.006. Epub 
2012 Oct 30.

Renal cell carcinoma and a constitutional t(11;22)(q23;q11.2): case report and
review of the potential link between the constitutional t(11;22) and cancer.

Doyen J(1), Carpentier X, Haudebourg J, Hoch B, Karmous-Benailly H, Ambrosetti D,
Fabas T, Amiel J, Lambert JC, Pedeutour F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Solid Tumors Genetics, Nice University Hospital, Nice, France.

We observed a t(11;22)(q23-24;q11.2-12) and monosomy 3 in renal tumor cells from 
a 72-year-old man. The hypothesis of a primitive peripheral neuroectodermal tumor
(PPNET) located in the kidney was promptly excluded: Histologically, the tumor
was a clear cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and we did not observe an EWSR1 gene 
rearrangement. The constitutional origin of this alteration was established. We
report on the second case of RCC in a patient with a constitutional t(11;22). The
t(11;22)(q23;q11.2) is the main recurrent germline translocation in humans.
Unbalanced translocation can be transmitted to the progeny and can cause Emanuel 
syndrome. Our observation alerts cancer cytogeneticists to the fortuitous
discovery of the constitutional t(11;22) in tumor cells. This translocation
appears grossly similar to the t(11;22)(q24;q12) of PPNET and should be evoked if
present in all cells of a tumor other than PPNET. This is important when
providing appropriate genetic counseling. Moreover, the potential oncogenic role 
of the t(11;22) and its predisposing risk of cancer are under debate. The family 
history of the patient revealed a disabled brother who died at an early age from 
colon cancer and a sister with breast cancer. This observation reopens the issue 
of a link between the constitutional t(11;22) and cancer, and the utility of
cancer prevention workups for t(11;22) carriers.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23117075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 Feb;14(2):75-80. doi: 10.4161/cbt.22635. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

Adult primary pulmonary primitive neuroectodermal tumor: molecular features and
translational opportunities.

Andrei M(1), Cramer SF, Kramer ZB, Zeidan A, Faltas B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Rochester General Hospital, Rochester, NY
USA. mirela.andrei@rochestergeneral.org

Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) arising directly from the lung are very
rare but particularly aggressive neoplasms. We report a case of a 31-y-old man
with primary pulmonary neuroectodermal tumor. We review the clinical as well as
pathological features. As typical for these tumors, the diagnosis was initially
delayed in our patient and prognosis was poor despite aggressive surgical
resection, postoperative chemotherapy and local irradiation. Recent biological
insights have revealed unique chromosomal translocations crucial to the
pathogenesis of these tumors, most notably the EWS-FLI-1 translocation. We
provide an overview of the molecular features of the Ewing Sarcoma Family of
Tumors (ESFT) including PNET and their potential implications for therapeutic
targeting.

PMCID: PMC3572002
PMID: 23114712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Urol Int. 2013;90(2):174-8. doi: 10.1159/000342647. Epub 2012 Oct 26.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney: a single-institute series of six
patients from China.

Huang J(1), Zhang J, Dong B, Chen Y, Kong W, Liu Q, Xue W, Liu D, Huang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Renji Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Renal primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is a rare and highly
malignant neoplasm. Our study aims to present the clinical findings and prognosis
of 6 patients with renal PNET from China.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: From January 2003 to February 2012, 6 patients with renal
PNET confirmed by immunohistochemical staining and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) treated in our institution were reviewed retrospectively and
our data compared with the literature.
RESULTS: There were 4 male and 2 female patients with a mean age of 35.0 years.
The mean diameter was 13.3 cm. Five of the masses had renal vein thrombosis, and 
3 extended into the inferior vena cava. A lymph node metastasis was detected in 1
patient and a liver metastasis in another patient. Radical nephrectomy was
performed in all cases, with 5 patients following chemotherapy and 1 receiving
Sutent treatment. Within a median follow-up of 7.5 months (range 1-71), median
overall survival was 22.1 months.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of renal PNET should be considered in young patients
presenting with renal mass and venous thrombosis. It seems that Asian renal PNET 
patients had a higher rate of venous thrombosis than Caucasian populations. CD99 
positivity on immunohistochemistry and EWS-FL1 chimera gene detected by FISH
support the diagnosis. The prognosis is poor despite multimodal treatment.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23108259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Virchows Arch. 2012 Dec;461(6):687-97. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1335-7. Epub 2012 
Oct 25.

Histopathological, immunohistochemical and molecular spectrum of myoepithelial
tumours of soft tissues.

Rekhi B(1), Sable M, Jambhekar NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, India.
rekhi.bharat@gmail.com

Primary soft tissue myoepithelial tumours (METs) are rare. Recent studies have
shown EWSR1 rearrangement in certain METs. We present clinicopathological,
immunohistochemical and molecular features of 14 primary soft tissue METs.
Fourteen tumours, five benign and nine malignant, occurred in 12 men and two
women, with an age range of 18-60 years (mean, 39.2); in upper extremities, four 
(29 %); chest wall, three (21 %); paraspinal region, three (21 %); pelvis, two
(14 %) and lower extremities, two (14 %). Tumour size varied from 2 to 21.6 cm
(mean, 8.7). Microscopically, most tumours were at least focally circumscribed.
Morphological heterogeneity was noted, commonest patterns being cord-like and
diffuse arrangement of polygonal cells in a myxoid stroma. By
immunohistochemistry, tumours were positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA)
(10/12, 83 %), cytokeratin (CK)/MNF116 (3/12, 25 %), p63 (7/10, 70 %), CD10 (4/6,
67 %), calponin (6/6, 100 %), S-100P (11/13, 85 %), glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) (6/12, 50 %), smooth muscle actin (SMA) (3/9, 33 %), INI1/SMARCB1 
(6/10, 60 %), brachyury (0/11), CD34 (0/5) and vimentin (4/4, 100 %), implying 93
% positivity for at least one epithelial marker. EWSR1 gene rearrangement was
detected in 3/6 (50 %) METs (one benign and two malignant) and in an eccrine
porocarcinoma which was included for reasons of comparison. Outcome details were 
available for six patients all surgically treated; three tumours (two malignant
and one benign) resected with unknown marginal status recurred; two patients died
and a single patient with myoepithelial carcinoma, who underwent a wide excision,
is disease-free. This study illustrates the wide morphological spectrum of soft
tissue METs, including benign and malignant subtypes. EMA and S-100P are optimal 
markers that should be supplemented with broad spectrum keratins, such as
AE1/AE3, along with p63, GFAP and calponin in case of need but the results must
be correlated with morphological features. Brachyury is useful in separating
parachordoma/myoepithelioma from chordoma. EWSR1 rearrangement mostly occurs in
METs that are deep-seated, irrespective of benign or malignant behaviour. Most
malignant METs are INI1 negative.

PMID: 23097005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Hum Pathol. 2013 Apr;44(4):566-77. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.06.020. Epub 2012 
Oct 15.

Primary juxtacortical myoepithelioma/mixed tumor of the bone: a report of 3 cases
with clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, ultrastructural, and molecular
characterization.

Franchi A(1), Palomba A, Roselli G, Gambini C, Beltrami G, Capanna R, Campanacci 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Critical Care Medicine and
Surgery, University of Florence Medical School, 50134, Florence, Italy.
franchi@unifi.it

We describe the clinicopathological, immunohistochemical, and molecular features 
of 3 primary juxtacortical myoepithelioma/mixed tumor of bone. The patients were 
2 males (13 and 23 years of age) and a 15-year-old female. The juxtacortical
lesions were all located in the femur, and were surgically removed, 2 with wide
margins and one with marginal margins. This latter tumor recurred locally 18
months later. The 3 patients were free of disease at 6 to 17 months follow-up.
Histologically, all lesions showed a prominent multinodular architecture, and
were formed by epithelioid and stellate elements, organized in solid sheets, or
embedded in myxoid or chondroid matrix. Areas of osteoid formation were also
observed. One tumor had the appearance of classical mixed tumor, showing aspects 
of duct formation and focal squamous differentiation. Immunohistochemically, all 
cases were positive for cytokeratins, epithelial membrane antigen, and S100
protein. The expression of other myoepithelial markers, including p63, glial
fibrillary acid protein and calponin was more limited. No rearrangement of Ewing 
sarcoma region 1 (EWSR1) and fused in sarcoma (FUS) genes was observed by
fluorescent in situ hybridization. To our knowledge, this is the first report of 
primary myoepitheliomas of bone arising at juxtacortical sites. These lesions
must be distinguished from other benign and malignant bone and cartilage-forming 
surface tumors, including periosteal chondroma and chondrosarcoma, juxtacortical 
chondromyxoid fibroma, and periosteal and paraosteal osteosarcoma. The
clinicoradiologic presentation and their histological and immunohistochemical
features are distinctive enough to allow the separation from these entities.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23079205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Acta Cytol. 2012;56(5):576-80. doi: 10.1159/000338523. Epub 2012 Sep 27.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor: diagnosis by fine-needle aspiration
cytology.

Leça LB(1), Vieira J, Teixeira MR, Monteiro P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Portuguese Oncology Institute of Porto, Porto,
Portugal. luisleca@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a distinctive
clinicopathologic entity with an aggressive clinical course that typically
involves the abdominal and/or pelvic peritoneum of young males. A population of
small round blue cells and a fibroesclerotic stroma are the usual morphologic
features. This tumor is characterized by a typical polyphenotypic profile with
expression of epithelial, mesenchymal and neural markers. Cytogenetically, this
tumor presents a unique abnormality - t(11;22)(p13;q12).
CASE: A 29-year-old male without significant medical history was admitted to our 
institution with gastrointestinal symptomatology. The physical examination and
medical imaging studies revealed an extensive soft tissue mass filling the entire
peritoneal cavity/pelvis. A fine-needle aspiration (FNA) of the abdominal mass
was performed. The FNA smears revealed fragments of collagenous desmoplastic
stroma and clusters of loosely cohesive small round cells that showed positivity 
for epithelial and myogenic markers. Cytogenetic analysis demonstrated
rearrangement of the genes EWSR1 and WT1, resulting from the t(11;22)(p13;q12).
CONCLUSION: DSRCT is an uncommon neoplasm that shares clinical and
cytomorphologic features with other small round cell tumors. Therefore, a primary
definitive diagnosis based on cytology specimens may be difficult but plausible
and can be aided by a typical clinical presentation and ancillary
immunocytochemical/cytogenetic studies.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23075903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2012 Jul-Sep;25(3):799-804.

Co-expression of multiple cytokines and their receptors in primary clear cell
sarcoma of the pubic bone with features of a small round cell tumor.

Nakayama S(1), Yokote T, Iwaki K, Hirata Y, Akioka T, Miyoshi T, Takayama A,
Nishiwaki U, Masuda Y, Tsuji M, Hanafusa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (I), Osaka Medical College, Osaka, Japan.
in1304@poh.osaka-med.ac.jp

We present the case of an 81-year-old man with primary clear cell sarcoma (CCS)
of the pubic bone with an associated aggressive clinical course. The patient's
laboratory tests showed marked leukocytosis, elevated levels of C-reactive
protein and multiple cytokines, including interleukin-6 (IL-6) and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Histological examination showed monomorphic
small cells predominantly arranged as a diffuse sheet with morphological features
of a small round cell tumor (SRCT). Immunohistochemical staining indicated that
the tumor cells were positive for HMB45, S100, Melan A, IL-6, IL-6 receptor,
G-CSF, and G-CSF receptor and negative for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) and epithelial
membrane antigen. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of 
aggressive primary CCS of the pubic bone with features of SRCT showing the
production and co-expression of multiple cytokines and their receptors. Thus, we 
suggest that proliferation through an IL-6- and G-CSF-associated autocrine
mechanism may play an important role in the aggressive clinical course and poor
prognosis of some CCSs showing features of SRCT.

PMID: 23058034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Clin Sarcoma Res. 2012 Oct 11;2(1):22. doi: 10.1186/2045-3329-2-22.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma: tumor response to sunitinib.

Stacchiotti S(1), Dagrada GP, Morosi C, Negri T, Romanini A, Pilotti S, Gronchi
A, Casali PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Medicine, Adult Sarcoma Medical Oncology Unit, Fondazione
IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori Milan, via Venezian 1, 20133, Milan, Italy.
silvia.stacchiotti@istitutotumori.mi.it.

BACKGROUND: Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMCS) is a rare soft tissue
sarcoma of uncertain differentiation, characterized in most cases by a
translocation that results in the fusion protein EWSR1-CHN (the latter even
called NR4A3 or TEC). EMCS is marked by >40% incidence of metastases in spite of 
its indolent behaviour. It is generally resistant to conventional chemotherapy,
and, to the best of our knowledge, no data have been reported to date about the
activity of tirosin-kinase inhibitor (TKI) in this tumor. We report on two
consecutive patients carrying an advanced EMCS treated with sunitinib.
METHODS: Since July 2011, 2 patients with progressive pretreated metastatic EMCS 
(Patient1: woman, 58 years, PS1; Patient2: man, 63 years, PS1) have been treated 
with continuous SM 37.5 mg/day, on an individual use basis. Both patients are
evaluable for response. In both cases diagnosis was confirmed by the presence of 
the typical EWSR1-CHN translocation.
RESULTS: Both patients are still on treatment (11 and 8 months). Patient 1 got a 
RECIST response after 4 months from starting sunitinib, together with a complete 
response by PET. An interval progression was observed after stopping sunitinib
for toxicity (abscess around previous femoral fixation), but response was
restored after restarting sunitinib. Patient 2 had an initial tumor disease
stabilization detected by CT scan at 3 months. Sunitinib was increased to 50
mg/day, with evidence of a dimensional response 3 months later.
CONCLUSIONS: Sunitinib showed antitumor activity in 2 patients with advanced
EMCS. Further studies are needed to confirm these preliminary results.

PMCID: PMC3534218
PMID: 23058004  [PubMed]


322. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046251. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Gene expression responses to FUS, EWS, and TAF15 reduction and stress granule
sequestration analyses identifies FET-protein non-redundant functions.

Blechingberg J(1), Luo Y, Bolund L, Damgaard CK, Nielsen AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

The FET family of proteins is composed of FUS/TLS, EWS/EWSR1, and TAF15 and
possesses RNA- and DNA-binding capacities. The FET-proteins are involved in
transcriptional regulation and RNA processing, and FET-gene deregulation is
associated with development of cancer and protein granule formations in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, and
trinucleotide repeat expansion diseases. We here describe a comparative
characterization of FET-protein localization and gene regulatory functions. We
show that FUS and TAF15 locate to cellular stress granules to a larger extend
than EWS. FET-proteins have no major importance for stress granule formation and 
cellular stress responses, indicating that FET-protein stress granule association
most likely is a downstream response to cellular stress. Gene expression analyses
showed that the cellular response towards FUS and TAF15 reduction is relatively
similar whereas EWS reduction resulted in a more unique response. The presented
data support that FUS and TAF15 are more functionally related to each other, and 
that the FET-proteins have distinct functions in cellular signaling pathways
which could have implications for the neurological disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3457980
PMID: 23049996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Clin Pathol. 2012 Dec;65(12):1112-8. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201154. Epub
2012 Sep 26.

Utilisation of fluorescent multiplex PCR and laser-induced capillary
electrophoresis for the diagnosis of Ewing family of tumours in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissues.

Patócs B(1), Németh K, Garami M, Arató G, Kovalszky I, Szendroi M, Fekete G.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
barbarapatocs@gmail.com

AIMS: The localisation of the translocation breakpoint of the Ewing sarcoma
family of tumours shows significant variability on relatively large regions of
fusion partner genes. As a consequence, many alternative forms of EWSR1-ETS
translocation exist which make the RNA-based molecular diagnostics of Ewing
sarcoma family of tumours complicated. In addition to the heterogeneity of fusion
transcripts, the degradation of RNA also presents a significant difficulty in the
molecular analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. Our aim
was to establish a sensitive method which is able to identify all combinatorially
possible EWSR1-FLI1 and EWSR1-ERG translocation transcripts in FFPE tissue
samples despite significant RNA-degradation.
METHODS: The combination of fluorescent multiplex PCR with laser-induced
capillary electrophoresis was used to detect and identify EWSR1-FLI1 and
EWSR1-ERG chimeric transcripts on the basis of amplicon size, and forward primers
labelled by distinct fluorophores.
RESULTS: Using this method, we processed 60 FFPE samples of Ewing sarcoma family 
of tumours, and identified six types EWSR1-FLI1 and one type EWSR1-ERG chimeric
transcripts acceptable for RT-PCR analysis in 27 out of 45 samples. This result
shows 60% sensitivity for detecting the most frequent Ewing family of tumour
(EFT)-related fusion transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: The utilisation of fluorescent multiplex PCR and laser-induced
fluorescent capillary electrophoresis is effective for the diagnosis of EFT in
FFPE tissue, and after the defined modifications it can offer a sensitive method 
to overcome the diagnostic difficulties connected with heterogeneity of the
variant translocations in EFT.

PMID: 23015660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Virchows Arch. 2012 Nov;461(5):561-70. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1306-z. Epub 2012 
Sep 22.

Malignant fibrous histiocytoma and fibrosarcoma of bone: a re-assessment in the
light of currently employed morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular
approaches.

Romeo S(1), Bovée JV, Kroon HM, Tirabosco R, Natali C, Zanatta L, Sciot R,
Mertens F, Athanasou N, Alberghini M, Szuhai K, Hogendoorn PC, Dei Tos AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Treviso Regional Hospital, Piazza Ospedale 1, 31100
Treviso, Italy.

Malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) and fibrosarcoma (FS) of bone are rare
malignant tumours and contentious entities. Sixty seven cases labelled as bone
MFH (57) and bone FS (10) were retrieved from five bone tumour referral centres
and reviewed to determine whether recent advances allowed for reclassification
and identification of histological subgroups with distinct clinical behaviour. A 
panel of immunostains was applied: smooth muscle actin, desmin, h-caldesmon,
cytokeratin AE1-AE3, CD31, CD34, CD68, CD163, CD45, S100 and epithelial membrane 
antigen. Additional fluorescence in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry
were performed whenever appropriate. All cases were reviewed by six bone and soft
tissue pathologists and a consensus was reached. Follow-up for 43 patients
(median 42 months, range 6-223 months) was available. Initial histological
diagnosis was reformulated in 18 cases (26.8 %). Seven cases were reclassified as
leiomyosarcoma, six as osteosarcoma, three as myxofibrosarcoma and one each as
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma. One case
showed a peculiar biphasic phenotype with epithelioid nests and myofibroblastic
spindle cells. Among the remaining 48 cases, which met the WHO criteria for bone 
FS and bone MFH, we identified five subgroups. Seven cases were reclassified as
undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) and 11 as UPS with incomplete myogenic
differentiation due to positivity for at least one myogenic marker. Six were
reclassified as spindle cell sarcoma not otherwise specified. Among the remaining
24 cases, we identified a further two recurrent morphologic patterns: eight cases
demonstrated a myoepithelioma-like phenotype and 16 cases a myofibroblastic
phenotype. One of the myoepithelioma-like cases harboured a EWSR1-NFATC2 fusion. 
It appears that bone MFH and bone FS represent at best exclusion diagnoses.

PMID: 23001328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 15;32(33):3915-21.

MiR-30a-5p connects EWS-FLI1 and CD99, two major therapeutic targets in Ewing
tumor.

Franzetti GA(1), Laud-Duval K, Bellanger D, Stern MH, Sastre-Garau X, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U830, Génétique et Biologie des cancers, Institut Curie, Centre de
recherche, Paris, France.

Ewing sarcoma is a pediatric bone tumor characterized in 85% of cases by the
fusion between EWS and FLI1 genes that results in the expression of the EWS-FLI1 
aberrant transcription factor. Histologically, the Ewing tumor expresses high
levels of the CD99 membrane glycoprotein. It has been recently described that
CD99 expression contributes to the Ewing tumor oncogenesis by modulating growth
and differentiation of tumor cells. Different studies have also shown that
overexpression of EWS-FLI1 induces CD99 expression in non-Ewing cells. At the
opposite, the knockdown of EWS-FLI1 expression by siRNA approaches has no
significant effect on CD99 mRNA level in Ewing cells. Here, by in vivo and in
vitro studies, we show that while EWS-FLI1 inhibition has only slight effects on 
the amount of CD99 transcript, it induces a dramatic decrease of the CD99 protein
expression level, hence suggesting post-transcriptional regulations, possibly
mediated by microRNAs. To further investigate this issue, we identified a set of 
91 miRNAs that demonstrate EWS-FLI1 modulation, three of them being predicted to 
bind CD99 3' untranslated region (30'UTR). Among these, we show that miR-30a-5p
has the ability to interact with the 30'UTR region of CD99 and to regulate its
expression. Moreover, the re-expression of miRNA-30a-5p in Ewing cell line
induces decreased cell proliferation and invasion. In this study, we therefore
show that miR-30a-5p constitutes a major functional link between EWS-FLI1 and
CD99, two critical biomarkers and therapeutic targets in Ewing sarcoma.

PMID: 22986530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Oct;36(10):1444-51. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182562bf8.

MUC4 is a sensitive and extremely useful marker for sclerosing epithelioid
fibrosarcoma: association with FUS gene rearrangement.

Doyle LA(1), Wang WL, Dal Cin P, Lopez-Terrada D, Mertens F, Lazar AJ, Fletcher
CD, Hornick JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma (SEF) is a rare aggressive fibroblastic
neoplasm composed of cords of epithelioid cells embedded in a dense collagenous
stroma. The reported immunophenotype of SEF is nonspecific. Some SEF cases show
morphologic and molecular overlap with low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (LGFMS),
suggesting a relationship between these tumor types. MUC4 has recently been
identified as a sensitive and specific marker for LGFMS; MUC4 expression was also
observed in 2 tumors with hybrid features of SEF and LGFMS. We investigated MUC4 
expression in SEF and other epithelioid soft tissue tumors to determine (1) the
potential diagnostic utility of MUC4 for SEF and (2) the association between MUC4
expression and FUS rearrangement in SEF. Whole sections of 180 tumors were
evaluated: 41 cases of SEF (including 29 "pure" SEF and 12 hybrid LGFMS-SEF), 20 
epithelioid sarcomas, 11 clear cell sarcomas, 11 metastatic melanomas, 10
perivascular epithelioid cell tumors, 10 alveolar soft part sarcomas, 10
epithelioid angiosarcomas, 10 epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas, 10 epithelioid
gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 10 myoepithelial carcinomas, 17 ossifying
fibromyxoid tumors, 10 leiomyosarcomas, and 10 biphasic synovial sarcomas.
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed after antigen retrieval using a mouse 
anti-MUC4 monoclonal antibody. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was
performed on 33 SEF cases using FUS break-apart probes. A subset of cases was
also evaluated for EWSR1 and CREB3L2/L1 rearrangements by FISH. Strong diffuse
cytoplasmic staining for MUC4 was observed in 32 of 41 (78%) cases of SEF,
including all 12 hybrid tumors. FUS rearrangement was detected in 8 of 21 (38%)
MUC4-positive cases of SEF with successful FISH studies. The prevalence of FUS
rearrangement was similar in hybrid LGFMS-SEF (2 of 6; 33%) and SEF without an
LGFMS component (6 of 15; 40%). FUS rearrangement was not detected in any cases
of MUC4-negative SEF. Two hybrid tumors had both EWSR1 and CREB3L1
rearrangements. MUC4 expression was also seen in 9 of 10 (90%) biphasic synovial 
sarcomas, predominantly in the glandular component. All other tumor types were
negative for MUC4, apart from focal reactivity in 5 ossifying fibromyxoid tumors,
2 epithelioid gastrointestinal stromal tumors, and 1 myoepithelial carcinoma.
MUC4 is a sensitive and relatively specific marker for SEF among epithelioid soft
tissue tumors. MUC4 expression occurs more frequently than FUS rearrangement in
SEF. The finding of EWSR1 and CREB3L1 rearrangements in 2 cases of hybrid
LGFMS-SEF suggests that SEFs are genetically heterogenous. MUC4-positive SEFs
with FUS rearrangement are likely closely related to LGFMS. MUC4-positive SEFs
that lack FUS rearrangement may be related to LGFMS but could have alternate
fusion partners, including EWSR1. SEF without MUC4 expression may represent a
distinct group of tumors. MUC4 expression correlates with glandular epithelial
differentiation in biphasic synovial sarcoma and is very limited in other
epithelioid soft tissue tumors.

PMID: 22982887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Am J Pathol. 2012 Nov;181(5):1782-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.07.023. Epub
2012 Sep 13.

Oncostatin M is a growth factor for Ewing sarcoma.

David E(1), Tirode F, Baud'huin M, Guihard P, Laud K, Delattre O, Heymann MF,
Heymann D, Redini F, Blanchard F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR, Ligue Team 2012, Nantes, France.

Primary bone tumors, osteosarcomas and chondrosarcomas, derive from mesenchymal
stem cells committed into osteoblasts and chondrocytes; in Ewing sarcomas (ESs), 
the oncogenic fusion protein EWS-FLI1 prevents mesenchymal differentiation and
induces neuroectodermic features. Oncostatin M (OSM) is a cytokine from the IL-6 
family that modulates proliferation and differentiation in numerous cells. The
basis for inhibition versus induction of proliferation by this cytokine is
obscure, although MYC was described as a potent molecular switch in OSM
signaling. We show herein that, in contrast to osteosarcomas and chondrosarcomas,
for which OSM was cytostatic, OSM induced proliferation of ES cell lines.
Knockdown experiments demonstrated that growth induction by OSM depends on both
types I [leukemia inhibitory factor receptor (LIFR)] and II [OSM receptor (OSMR)]
receptors, high STAT3 activation, and induction of MYC to a high expression
level. Indeed, ES cell lines, mice xenografts, and patient biopsy specimens
poorly expressed LIF, precluding LIFR lysosomal degradation and OSMR
transcriptional induction, thus leading to a high LIFR/OSMR ratio. Because other 
neuroectodermic tumors (ie, glioma, medulloblastoma, and neuroblastoma) had a
similar expression profile, the main role of EWS-FLI1 could be through
maintenance of stemness and neuroectodermic features, characterized by a low LIF,
a high LIFR/OSMR ratio, and high MYC expression. Thus, this study on rare bone
malignancies gives valuable insights on more common cancer regulatory mechanisms 
and could provide new therapeutic opportunities.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22982441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2013 Aug;17(4):377-82. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2012.08.004. 
Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Small cell osteosarcoma with Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 gene rearrangement
detected by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Dragoescu E(1), Jackson-Cook C, Domson G, Massey D, Foster WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VCU Health System, Richmond, VA 23298-0662, USA.
edragoescu@mcvh-vcu.edu

Because of its characteristic morphologic appearance, small cell osteosarcoma
(SCO) can be confused with other small round cell malignancies of the bone, most 
importantly with Ewing sarcoma, making this distinction difficult. A specific
tool used in separating SCO from Ewing sarcoma has been the detection of Ewing
sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) gene rearrangements in Ewing sarcoma and
their absence in SCO. However, there are rare case reports that have documented
the existence of EWSR1 gene rearrangement in SCO. In this report, we describe
another case of SCO with an EWSR1 gene rearrangement detected by interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Our finding adds support to the existing
evidence that SCO is a tumor that can be characterized by EWSR1 gene
arrangements. Therefore, we caution the pathology community not to rely solely on
molecular studies in distinguishing SCO from Ewing sarcoma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22971270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Case Rep Oncol. 2012 May;5(2):325-31. doi: 10.1159/000339721. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Disseminated Intracranial Ewing's Sarcoma in an Adult: A Rare and Difficult
Diagnosis.

Lou E(1), Sumrall AL, Cummings TJ, Korones DN, Weaver SA, Peters KB.

Author information: 
(1)The Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center at Duke, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, N.C., USA.

The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors comprises a rare class of cancers of
mesenchymal origin. Cases of Ewing's sarcoma in the central nervous system -
specifically, intracranial Ewing's - are extremely rare. Almost all reported
cases have occurred in children. However, this rare presentation can also occur
in the adult population. It is important to distinguish these tumors from
primitive neuroectodermal tumors at the time of diagnosis. Testing for
EWSR1(22q12) gene rearrangement using fluorescence in situ hybridization is a
useful tool for making the distinction between these 2 similar but distinct
entities. We present here the case of a middle-aged male patient with
intracranial Ewing's sarcoma, and discuss diagnostic challenges and potential new
treatment approaches for this rare disease.

PMCID: PMC3398078
PMID: 22933997  [PubMed]


330. Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 1;72(17):4494-503. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Targeting the EWSR1-FLI1 oncogene-induced protein kinase PKC-ß abolishes ewing
sarcoma growth.

Surdez D(1), Benetkiewicz M, Perrin V, Han ZY, Pierron G, Ballet S, Lamoureux F, 
Rédini F, Decouvelaere AV, Daudigeos-Dubus E, Geoerger B, de Pinieux G, Delattre 
O, Tirode F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, INSERM U830, Unité de Génétique et Biologie des Cancers,
Institut Curie, Unité de génétique somatique, Paris, France.

Ewing sarcoma is a rare but aggressive disease most common in young adults. This 
cancer is driven by a unique chimeric fusion oncogene but targeted strategies
have been elusive. Here we report the identification of the protein kinase PKC-ß 
(PRKCB) as a disease-specific druggable target for treatment of Ewing sarcoma. We
found that transcriptional activation of PRKCB was directly regulated by the
chimeric fusion oncogene EWSR1-FLI1 that drives this cancer. PRKCB phosphorylated
histone H3T6 to permit global maintenance of H3K4 trimethylation at a variety of 
gene promoters. PRKCB loss induced apoptosis in vitro and prevented tumor growth 
in vivo. Gene expression profiling revealed a strong overlap between genes
modulated by EWSR1-FLI1 and PRKCB in regulating crucial signaling pathways. Taken
together, our findings offer a preclinical proof-of-concept for PRKCB as a
promising therapeutic target in Ewing sarcoma.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22930730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Gene. 2012 Nov 10;509(2):263-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.012. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

Ewing's sarcoma: analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism in the EWS gene.

Silva DS(1), Sawitzki FR, De Toni EC, Graebin P, Picanco JB, Abujamra AL, de
Farias CB, Roesler R, Brunetto AL, Alho CS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Human Genetics, Faculty of Biosciences, PUCRS,
90619-900, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

We aimed to investigate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the EWS gene
breaking region in order to analyze Ewing's sarcoma susceptibility. The SNPs were
investigated in a healthy subject population and in Ewing's sarcoma patients from
Southern Brazil. Genotyping was performed by TaqMan® assay for allelic
discrimination using Real-Time PCR. The analysis of incidence of SNPs or
different SNP-arrangements revealed a higher presence of homozygote TT-rs4820804 
in Ewing's sarcoma patients (p=0.02; Chi Square Test). About 300 bp from the
rs4820804 SNP lies a palindromic hexamer (5'-GCTAGC-3') and three nucleotides
(GTC), which were previously identified to be in close vicinity of the breakpoint
junction in both EWS and FLI1 genes. This DNA segment surrounding the rs4820804
SNP is likely to indicate a breakpoint region. If the T-rs4820804 allele
predisposes a DNA fragment to breakage, homozygotes (TT-rs4820804) would have
double the chance of having a chromosome break, increasing the chances for a
translocation to occur. In conclusion, the TT-rs4820804 EWS genotype can be
associated with Ewing's sarcoma and the SNP rs4820804 can be a candidate marker
to understand Ewing's sarcoma susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22925827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 14;426(1):89-93. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.041. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Accumulation of pre-let-7g and downregulation of mature let-7g with the depletion
of EWS.

Sohn EJ(1), Park J, Kang SI, Wu YP.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20871,
USA. eunjungs93@gmail.com

EWS functions in RNA splicing and transcription by encoding an RNA binding
protein, which results in the chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) found
in Ewing sarcoma. EWS interacts with the microprocessor complex involving Drosha 
and DGCR8, which play roles as the cofactors of primary microRNA processing.
However, the role of EWS in microRNA biogenesis has not been investigated. Here, 
we show that endogenous EWS interacts with endogenous Drosha by IP-western
blotting. In addition, EWS knockout mouse decreased the expression of Drosha. The
depletion of EWS results in the accumulation of precursor let-7g but
down-regulates mature let-7g in U2OS cells. Consistently, mature let 7g was
suppressed in both Ewing sarcoma cell and primary Ewing sarcoma. Also, expression
levels of Dicer and CCND1 (Cyclin D1), which are known target genes of the let-7 
family were upregulated. Our findings suggest that EWS mediates generation of
mature let-7g from pre-let-7g.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22910415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Eur Spine J. 2013 May;22 Suppl 3:S373-9. doi: 10.1007/s00586-012-2481-y. Epub
2012 Aug 21.

Ewing sarcoma of the thoracic epidural space in a young child.

Kobayashi S(1), Takahashi J, Sakashita K, Fukushima M, Kato H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Shinshu University,
3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano, 390-8621, Japan.

PURPOSE: To report on the clinical course and treatment of Ewing sarcoma of the
thoracic epidural space in a 5-year-old girl.
METHODS: We present the case of a 5-year-old girl who experienced back pain (day 
1); on day 10, the pain had exacerbated and involuntary movements in the lower
limbs occurred, and an MRI performed in her local hospital revealed a tumor
lesion at the upper thoracic level.
RESULTS: On day 13, emergency surgery was performed for partial resection of the 
tumor. Pathological examination of the resected tumor by immunostaining and gene 
testing revealed that it was MIC2 positive and an EWS-FLI 1 chimera,
respectively, and Ewing sarcoma was diagnosed. The involuntary movements resolved
immediately after the surgery. Three weeks after the operation, chemotherapy and 
radiation therapy were commenced. After 5 months, deep tendon reflexes recovered 
to normal. MRI showed that the tumor has not recurred at 29 months after surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of epidural patients undergo emergency surgery only
after symptom exacerbation, which includes the development of neurological
deficits. Thus, preoperative diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma of the epidural space is 
difficult and diagnosis is frequently made by a post-operative gene test. The
resection area is limited to the intralesional margin area because a larger
resection is difficult due to the characteristics of the affected region; thus,
there is a higher possibility of recurrence and careful follow-up of the case is 
necessary.

PMCID: PMC3641242
PMID: 22907727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Virchows Arch. 2012 Sep;461(3):339-43. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1295-y. Epub 2012 
Aug 11.

Clear cell sarcoma expressing a novel chimerical transcript EWSR1 exon 7/ATF1
exon 6.

Gineikiene E(1), Seinin D, Brasiuniene B, Brazaitis A, Griskevicius L,
Jakubauskas A.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Oncology and Transfusion Medicine Center, Vilnius University
Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Santariskiu 2, Vilnius 08661, Lithuania.

Clear cell sarcoma harbours recurrent translocation, resulting in EWSR1/ATF1 or
less commonly EWSR1/CREB1 fusion. To date, six types of EWSR1/ATF1 fusion have
been reported, of which three are in-frame and encode functional proteins. We
present a reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction analysis of a tumour 
near the hallux of the right foot. The sequencing of obtained fragments revealed 
the presence of a novel chimerical transcript-the in-frame fusion between EWSR1
exon 7 and ATF1 exon 6 that represents the fourth in-frame type of EWSR1/ATF1
fusion identified in clear cell sarcomas.

PMID: 22886438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2013 Jul;35(5):402-5. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e3182580d1f.

Clear cell sarcoma of the jaw: a case report and review of the literature.

Inoue S(1), Chepeha DB, Lucas DR, Faisal S, Stewart RC, Mushtaq R, Onwuzurike N, 
McQuillan L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Michigan 
State University College of Human Medicine, East Lansing, MI, USA.
sinoue1@hurleymc.com

Clear cell sarcoma (CSS) is a unique malignant soft tissue tumor that mainly
occurs from the aponeurotic tissue and tendons of extremities. It is rare in the 
pediatric population. The tumor does not respond well to chemotherapy or
irradiation. Complete surgical resection offers the best chance for a cure. Most 
studies have demonstrated poor prognosis of this tumor, if it is >5 cm. The
literature suggests that local recurrence and distant metastasis are not uncommon
even with wide resection and that late recurrence and metastasis commonly occur. 
This case report discusses CSS in the jaw of a pediatric patient. To our
knowledge, this is the only case of CSS of the jaw.

PMID: 22858566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 Nov;124(5):705-16. doi: 10.1007/s00401-012-1020-6. Epub
2012 Jul 28.

Transportin 1 accumulates specifically with FET proteins but no other transportin
cargos in FTLD-FUS and is absent in FUS inclusions in ALS with FUS mutations.

Neumann M(1), Valori CF, Ansorge O, Kretzschmar HA, Munoz DG, Kusaka H, Yokota O,
Ishihara K, Ang LC, Bilbao JM, Mackenzie IR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland.
Manuela.Neumann@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Accumulation of the DNA/RNA binding protein fused in sarcoma (FUS) as inclusions 
in neurons and glia is the pathological hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
patients with mutations in FUS (ALS-FUS) as well as in several subtypes of
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-FUS), which are not associated with FUS
mutations. Despite some overlap in the phenotype and neuropathology of FTLD-FUS
and ALS-FUS, significant differences of potential pathomechanistic relevance were
recently identified in the protein composition of inclusions in these conditions.
While ALS-FUS showed only accumulation of FUS, inclusions in FTLD-FUS revealed
co-accumulation of all members of the FET protein family, that include FUS,
Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) and TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15)
suggesting a more complex disturbance of transportin-mediated nuclear import of
proteins in FTLD-FUS compared to ALS-FUS. To gain more insight into the
mechanisms of inclusion body formation, we investigated the role of Transportin 1
(Trn1) as well as 13 additional cargo proteins of Transportin in the spectrum of 
FUS-opathies by immunohistochemistry and biochemically. FUS-positive inclusions
in six ALS-FUS cases including four different mutations did not label for Trn1.
In sharp contrast, the FET-positive pathology in all FTLD-FUS subtypes was also
strongly labeled for Trn1 and often associated with a reduction in the normal
nuclear staining of Trn1 in inclusion bearing cells, while no biochemical changes
of Trn1 were detectable in FTLD-FUS. Notably, despite the dramatic changes in the
subcellular distribution of Trn1 in FTLD-FUS, alterations of its cargo proteins
were restricted to FET proteins and no changes in the normal physiological
staining of 13 additional Trn1 targets, such as hnRNPA1, PAPBN1 and Sam68, were
observed in FTLD-FUS. These data imply a specific dysfunction in the interaction 
between Trn1 and FET proteins in the inclusion body formation in FTLD-FUS.
Moreover, the absence of Trn1 in ALS-FUS provides further evidence that ALS-FUS
and FTLD-FUS have different underlying pathomechanisms.

PMID: 22842875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Int J Surg Pathol. 2013 Feb;21(1):63-7. doi: 10.1177/1066896912454565. Epub 2012 
Jul 25.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) of the penis: a
report of an extraordinarily unusual site and a literature review of
extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma.

Ma Z(1), Brimo F, Zeizafoun N.

Author information: 
(1)St Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, NY 10019, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/PNETs) arise from a
multipotent progenitor cell and are considered to be of neuroectodermal
derivation. Most tumors commonly arise in the skeletal system, which are the
classic ES/PNET and occasionally occur in the soft tissue of extraskeletal sites,
which are named extraskeletal Ewing's sarcomas (EES/PNET). This study reports a
case of a 28-year-old man with primary EES/PNET of the penis.

PMID: 22832112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Int J Surg Pathol. 2013 Apr;21(2):173-6. doi: 10.1177/1066896912453202. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

Epiphyseal ewing sarcoma: first reported case with molecular confirmation.

Pérez-González Y(1), García-Esparza E, Conde E, Azorín D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Hospital Universitario de Móstoles, Madrid, 
Spain.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most common pediatric malignant bone neoplasm after
osteosarcoma. Ewing sarcoma comprises "small, round, blue-cell" tumors thought to
arise from neural crest cells. The authors report the case of a 14-year-old boy
that presented with a nonpainful circumscribed lesion. The radiographs showed a
lytic lesion at the tibial epiphysis with a large soft tissue mass, best depicted
in the magnetic resonance imaging scan that suggested an aggressive lesion. A
needle biopsy of the lesion was performed. The diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma was
made based on microscopic, immunohistochemical, polymerase chain reaction, and
fluorescence in situ hybridization. This is the third case report about a primary
epiphyseal Ewing sarcoma and the fist one with molecular confirmation.

PMID: 22832109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Cutan Pathol. 2012 Sep;39(9):872-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0560.2012.01943.x. Epub
2012 Jul 16.

Chromosomal translocation-negative cellular extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma
in an adolescent female.

Boyd AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. alan.boyd@Vanderbilt.edu

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is a relatively uncommon soft tissue
sarcoma that typically presents in adults of middle age and affects the proximal 
thigh and limb girdles. Initially believed to be a low-grade malignancy,
long-term patient follow-up has shown a high incidence of local recurrence and
metastatic spread. EMC is uniformly resistant to chemotherapy and radiation
therapy. These tumors characteristically display fibrous septae with large
aggregates of mucin populated by clusters and strands of oval cells exhibiting
minimal mitotic activity. A more aggressive cellular subtype has also been
defined and exhibits basaloid cells showing the immunohistochemical staining
features of neuroendocrine differentiation calling into question their proposed
cartilaginous lineage. Most, although not all, examples of EMC possess a unique
balanced chromosomal translocation [t(9;22)(q22;q12)] between the EWSR1 and NR4A3
(previously termed TEC) genes. Pediatric and adolescent cases of EMC are rare, as
only 15 have been reported and appear to follow a more aggressive clinical
course. Reported herein is a case of an EMC arising in the thigh of a 15-year-old
female and the first to undergo evaluation of chromosomal translocation.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22804337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Lung. 2012 Dec;190(6):677-83. doi: 10.1007/s00408-012-9405-9. Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Primary pulmonary primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET): a clinicopathological
and immunohistochemical study of six cases.

Weissferdt A(1), Moran CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. aweissferdt@doctors.org.uk

BACKGROUND: The clinicopathological and immunohistochemical features of six
primary pulmonary primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) are reported.
METHODS: The patients were four men and two women aged 22-56 years (mean = 32.3
years). The main presenting symptoms included chest pain, shortness of breath,
and cough. The tumor size ranged from 4 to 9.6 cm.
RESULTS: Macroscopically, the tumors were circumscribed, yellow-white in color,
and of soft and friable consistency. Histologically, the lesions were composed of
a monomorphic population of solidly packed round cells with a round-to-ovoid
nucleus, fine chromatin, small nucleoli, and scanty pale cytoplasm.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were uniformly positive for CD99,
neuron-specific enolase, and vimentin, and single cases focally expressed
cytokeratin and S100. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis performed in
two cases showed positive rearrangement for the EWSR1 gene at the 22q12 locus.
Follow-up information available for four patients showed that three had died
24-54 months after diagnosis and one patient is alive 11 months after diagnosis. 
Two patients were lost to follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Primary PNETs of the lung are rare tumors that need to be added to
the differential diagnosis of primary pulmonary neoplasms composed of small
cells. Awareness of this entity as a primary pulmonary neoplasm is required in
order to avoid misdiagnosis and unsuitable treatment of patients.

PMID: 22802134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Gene. 2012 Sep 15;506(2):331-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.06.088. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Domains involved in TAF15 subcellular localisation: dependence on cell type and
ongoing transcription.

Marko M(1), Vlassis A, Guialis A, Leichter M.

Author information: 
(1)RNA Processing Program, Institute of Biological Research and Biotechnology,
National Hellenic Research Foundation, 48 Vas. Constantinou Avenue, 11635 Athens,
Greece.

TAF15 (TBP associated factor 15) is a member of the highly conserved TET (also
known as FET) protein family of RNA binding proteins (RBP), which comprises in
addition FUS (fused in sarcoma, also known as TLS, translocated in liposarcoma)
and EWS (Ewing sarcoma protein). The TET proteins are implied to play important
roles in the onset of specific tumours, certain forms of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). In this study we
identified the domains of TAF15 responsible for its subcellular localisation in
human (HeLa) cells and experimentally confirmed the presence of a
transportin-dependent nuclear localisation signal (NLS) at its carboxy-terminus. 
We demonstrated that additional domains of TAF15 contributed, albeit to a less
prominent extent, to its subcellular localisation. In the carboxy-terminus we
identified an arginine and glycine rich (RGG) domain, capable of being targeted
to stress granules. We, moreover, showed that TAF15 cellular localisation
depended on ongoing transcription and that independent domains of TAF15 engaged
in nucleolar capping upon transcription inhibition. Finally, we demonstrated that
TAF15 localisation was differentially regulated in the HeLa and the neuronal HT22
cell lines and that TAF15 co-localised with a minor subset of RNA granules in the
cytoplasm of HT22 cells, supporting a model whereupon TAF15 plays a role in RNA
transport and/or local RNA translation.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22771914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mod Pathol. 2012 Oct;25(10):1378-83. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.97. Epub 2012
Jul 6.

Expression of ERG, an Ets family transcription factor, identifies ERG-rearranged 
Ewing sarcoma.

Wang WL(1), Patel NR, Caragea M, Hogendoorn PC, López-Terrada D, Hornick JL,
Lazar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. wlwang@mdanderson.org

ERG gene encodes for an Ets family regulatory transcription factor and is
involved in recurrent chromosomal translocations found in a subset of acute
myeloid leukemias, prostate carcinomas and Ewing sarcomas. The purpose of this
study was to examine the utility of an ERG antibody to detect EWSR1-ERG
rearranged Ewing sarcomas. A formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue microarray
and whole-tissue sections from 32 genetically characterized Ewing sarcomas were
examined: 22 with EWSR1-FLI1, 8 with EWSR1-ERG and 2 with EWSR1-NFATC2.
Immunohistochemistry was performed using a rabbit anti-ERG monoclonal antibody
directed against the C-terminus of the protein and a mouse anti-FLI1 monoclonal
antibody against a FLI1 Ets domain (C-terminus) fusion protein. Immunoreactivity 
was graded for extent and intensity of positive tumor cell nuclei. ERG labeling
was seen in 7/8 EWSR1-ERG cases (predominantly diffuse (5+), moderate to strong),
while only 3/24 non-EWR1-ERG cases showed labeling (very weak). FLI1 labeling was
observed in 29/31 cases regardless of fusion variant; 23 displayed diffuse (5+)
strong/moderate labeling (5/7 EWSR1-ERG, 18/22 EWSR1-FLI1). Both EWSR1-NFATC2
cases had weak reactivity with FLI1 and weak or no reactivity for ERG. In
conclusion, strong nuclear ERG immunoreactivity is specific for Ewing sarcomas
with EWSR1-ERG rearrangement. In contrast, FLI1 was not specific to rearrangement
type, likely because of cross reactivity with the highly homologous Ets
DNA-binding domain present in the C-terminus of both ERG and FLI1.

PMID: 22766791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jul;36(7):1093-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824cd174.

A novel sarcoma with dual differentiation: clinicopathologic and molecular
characterization of a combined synovial sarcoma and extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma.

Vergara-Lluri ME(1), Stohr BA, Puligandla B, Brenholz P, Horvai AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.

We report on an unusual case of a 43-year-old woman who developed a malignant
soft tissue tumor of the arm with overlapping morphology between synovial sarcoma
(SS) and extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC). The tumor recurred 7 years
after the initial diagnosis and continued to demonstrate both SS and EMC
histology. Immunophenotypically, the primary and recurrent tumors were both
positive, focally, for cytokeratin, S-100, bcl-2, and epithelial membrane
antigen. At the time of recurrence, the primary and recurrent tumors were further
characterized for genetic and molecular abnormalities. Intriguingly, fluorescence
in situ hybridization of the primary tumor revealed rearrangements of both the
SS18 and EWSR1 genes. Furthermore, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction studies of both the primary tumor and the recurrence confirmed the
presence of both SS18-SSX2 and EWSR1-NR4A3 (exon 3) gene fusions, characteristic 
of SS and EMC, respectively. This is the first reported case of a remarkable soft
tissue sarcoma that exhibits overlapping morphologic features between SS and EMC 
and that also harbors a combination of SS18-SSX2 and EWS-NR4A3 gene fusions. This
case supports the fact that specific, reproducible gene fusions frequently
direct, cooperatively or competitively, basic histogenetic processes to produce
tumor phenotypes.

PMID: 22743288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Aug;10(8):1098-108. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0086. Epub
2012 Jun 20.

EWS/FLI1 regulates EYA3 in Ewing sarcoma via modulation of miRNA-708, resulting
in increased cell survival and chemoresistance.

Robin TP(1), Smith A, McKinsey E, Reaves L, Jedlicka P, Ford HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
CO 80045, USA.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive pediatric cancer of the bone and soft tissue, in
which patients whose tumors have a poor histologic response to initial
chemotherapy have a poor overall prognosis. Therefore, it is important to
identify molecules involved in resistance to chemotherapy. Herein, we show that
the DNA repair protein and transcriptional cofactor, EYA3, is highly expressed in
Ewing sarcoma tumor samples and cell lines compared with mesenchymal stem cells, 
the presumed cell-of-origin of Ewing sarcoma, and that it is regulated by the
EWS/FLI1 fusion protein transcription factor. We further show that EWS/FLI1
mediates upregulation of EYA3 via repression of miR-708, a miRNA that targets the
EYA3 3'-untranslated region, rather than by binding the EYA3 promoter directly.
Importantly, we show that high levels of EYA3 significantly correlate with low
levels of miR-708 in Ewing sarcoma samples, suggesting that this miR-mediated
mechanism of EYA3 regulation holds true in human cancers. Because EYA proteins
are important for cell survival during development, we examine, and show, that
loss of EYA3 decreases survival of Ewing sarcoma cells. Most importantly,
knockdown of EYA3 in Ewing sarcoma cells leads to sensitization to DNA-damaging
chemotherapeutics used in the treatment of Ewing sarcoma, and as expected, after 
chemotherapeutic treatment, EYA3 knockdown cells repair DNA damage less
effectively than their control counterparts. These studies identify EYA3 as a
novel mediator of chemoresistance in Ewing sarcoma and define the molecular
mechanisms of both EYA3 overexpression and of EYA3-mediated chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC3432289
PMID: 22723308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Pathologe. 2013 Feb;34(1):70-3. doi: 10.1007/s00292-012-1608-6.

[Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the testis. Molecular analysis and discussion
of genesis].

[Article in German]

Brandt S(1), Lohe B, Vogetseder A, Rüdiger T, Moch H, Bode P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Pathologie, Universitätsspital Zürich, Schmelzbergstr. 
12, 8091, Zürich, Schweiz. simone.brandt@usz.ch

We describe a case of a testicular primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) with
intratubular germ cell neoplasia of the adjacent testicular parenchyma. The
occurrence of testicular PNET is rare because malignant transformation of
testicular germ cell tumors into somatic malignancy is uncommon. Based on
morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular pathological findings these
tumors resemble central PNETs as they otherwise typically occur in children
without rearrangement of the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region (EWSR) gene on
chromosome 22. This case also showed no evidence for a translocation.

PMID: 22706883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Hum Pathol. 2012 Oct;43(10):1772-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.03.006. Epub 2012
Jun 14.

Extraosseous Ewing sarcoma with foci of neuroblastoma-like differentiation
associated with EWSR1(Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1)/FLI1 translocation
without prior chemotherapy.

Vali K(1), Kokta V, Beaunoyer M, Fetni R, Teira P, Sartelet H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Hum Pathol. 2014 Mar;45(3):662-3.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma and neuroblastoma are
distinct malignant tumors belonging to the group of undifferentiated solid
pediatric tumors. We report a case of a 14-year-old adolescent girl who presented
with a right lower quadrant mass. At surgery, a mobile retroperitoneal mass was
entirely removed. Histologic evaluation revealed 2 distinct components; the
first, consisting of sheets of undifferentiated cells, was CD99+ and CD56-,
whereas the second, consisting of multiple foci of neuropil and maturing
neuroblasts, was CD99- and CD56+. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis
revealed the presence of EWSR1/FLI1 translocation in both histologic distinct
components. MYCN (myelocytomatosis viral related oncogene, neuroblastoma derived)
was not amplified. The tests for t(11;22) and t(21;22) performed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction were negative. The final diagnosis
corresponds to an extraosseous Ewing sarcoma with foci of neuroblastoma-like
differentiation. This is the first case, documented by molecular studies, in
which neuroblastoma-like differentiation has been noted in primitive
neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma without prior chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22703924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Neurosurgery. 2012 Oct;71(4):E901-4.

Myoepithelioma of the skull: a case report.

Fritchie KJ(1), Bauman MD, Durward QJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, Department of Anatomic Pathology, Rochester, Minnesota 55905,
USA. fritchie.karen@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Neurosurgery. 2012 Oct;71(4):E904.

BACKGROUND AND IMPORTANCE: Myoepithelioma of bone is a rare osseous tumor thought
to be related to myoepithelial lesions found at other anatomic sites such as the 
salivary gland and skin. These tumors are composed of varying proportions of
epithelial and myoepithelial cells and exhibit a spectrum of biologic behavior
ranging from benign to malignant. We present the first reported case of
myoepithelioma of the skull.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A 20-year-old white woman presented with a persistent
right parieto-occipital skull nodule, relating its presence to a fall on the site
2 years previously. The nodule had become painful in the past 2 months. Her past 
medical history and workup were otherwise unremarkable. The initial biopsy was
inconclusive for diagnosis. The lytic bone lesion was subsequently resected, and 
histopathological examination showed a proliferation of epithelioid cells in a
myxochondroid background. Fluorescence in situ hybridization studies revealed a
rearrangement of the EWSR1 locus. The morphologic and molecular findings were
consistent with the diagnosis of myoepithelioma of bone.
CONCLUSION: Six months after surgery, the patient is doing well with no evidence 
of recurrence. This case illustrates the clinical presentation, histopathology,
and molecular findings of a myoepithelioma of the skull with successful surgical 
treatment. Because myoepitheliomas with benign morphological appearance may
rarely act aggressively, long-term clinical follow-up is warranted.

PMID: 22653393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Tumour Biol. 2012 Oct;33(5):1599-605. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0415-2. Epub 2012
May 18.

Identification of genes regulated by the EWS/NR4A3 fusion protein in
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Filion C(1), Labelle Y.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche de l'Hôpital Saint-François d'Assise/CHUQ, 10 rue de
l'Espinay, local D0-711, Québec, QC, Canada.

Approximately 75 % of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma tumors (EMC) harbor a
t(9;22) chromosome translocation generating an EWS/NR4A3 fusion protein that is
thought to be instrumental in the tumoral process. Current evidence suggests that
one function of the fusion protein is to overexpress target genes. We have
generated an in vitro human cellular model in which the fusion protein is
expressed in mesenchymal bone marrow stem cells. We have performed microarray
analyses of these cells and identified several genes overexpressed in the
presence of EWS/NR4A3 which are also overexpressed in EMC tumors. These genes and
their products represent potential therapeutic targets for EMC tumors.

PMID: 22592656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jun;36(6):857-68. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824644ac.

Malignant gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor: clinicopathologic,
immunohistochemical, ultrastructural, and molecular analysis of 16 cases with a
reappraisal of clear cell sarcoma-like tumors of the gastrointestinal tract.

Stockman DL(1), Miettinen M, Suster S, Spagnolo D, Dominguez-Malagon H, Hornick
JL, Adsay V, Chou PM, Amanuel B, Vantuinen P, Zambrano EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI
53226, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Dec;36(12):1905-8; author reply 1908.

The clinical, histologic, immunophenotypic, ultrastructural, and molecular
features of a distinctive gastrointestinal tumor are described. Sixteen patients,
8 women and 8 men aged 17 to 77 years (mean age, 42 y; 63% less than 40 y)
presented with abdominal pain, intestinal obstruction, and an abdominal mass.
Mean tumor size was 5.2 cm (range, 2.4 to 15.0 cm). The tumors arose in the small
bowel (10), stomach (4), and colon (2) and were histologically characterized by a
sheet-like or nested population of epithelioid or oval-to-spindle cells with
small nucleoli and scattered mitoses. Five cases showed focal clearing of the
cytoplasm. Scattered osteoclast-type multinucleated giant cells were present in 8
cases. The tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein, SOX10, and vimentin in
100% of cases, for CD56 in 70%, for synaptophysin in 56%, for NB84 in 50%, for
NSE in 45%, and for neurofilament protein in 14% of cases. All cases tested were 
negative for specific melanocytic, gastrointestinal stromal tumors, epithelial,
and myoid markers. Ultrastructural examination of 5 cases showed features of
primitive neuroectodermal cells with clear secretory vesicles, dense-core
granules, occasional gap junctions, and no evidence of melanogenesis. EWSR1 gene 
rearrangement was assessed by fluorescence in situ hybridization in 14 cases.
Twelve cases (86%) showed split EWSR1 signal consistent with a chromosomal
translocation involving EWSR1. One case showed extra intact signals, indicating
that the nuclei possessed either extra copies of the EWSR1 gene or chromosome 22 
polysomy. Only 1 case showed no involvement of the EWSR1 gene. Six cases
demonstrated rearrangement of the partner fusion gene ATF1 (46%), and 3 showed
rearrangement of CREB1 (23%); 2 cases lacked rearrangement of either partner
gene. Clinical follow-up was available in 12 patients and ranged from 1.5 to 106 
months. Six patients died of their tumors (mean survival, 32 mo; 83% less than 24
mo). At last follow-up, 4 patients were alive with regional, lymph node, and
liver metastases, and 2 patients were alive with no evidence of disease. The
tumor described here is an aggressive form of neuroectodermal tumor that should
be separated from other primitive epithelioid and spindle cell tumors of the
gastrointestinal tract. The distinctive ultrastructural features and absence of
melanocytic differentiation serve to separate them from soft tissue clear cell
sarcomas involving the gastrointestinal tract. The designation "malignant
gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor" is proposed for this tumor type.

PMID: 22592145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jun;36(6):883-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824b1ee0.

Endobronchial pulmonary angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: two cases with
EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusions.

Thway K(1), Nicholson AG, Wallace WA, Al-Nafussi A, Pilling J, Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 203 Fulham
Road, London, UK. khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue neoplasm of
intermediate biological potential, predominantly occurring in the extremities of 
children and young adults. It has only recently been reported as a primary lung
tumor. We describe 2 cases arising endobronchially harboring EWSR1 gene
rearrangements by fluorescence in situ hybridization and, respectively,
EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 gene fusions by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. Histologically, both tumors showed classical features of AFH,
comprising multiple nodules of bland spindle to epithelioid cells surrounded by
lymphoplasmacytic inflammation and at least a partial fibrous capsule. Both
tumors showed focal but strong desmin immunoreactivity, with focal pancytokeratin
and epithelial membrane antigen in 1 case. The lung is now a recognized site of
AFH occurrence, but tumors arising here can be associated with different gene
fusions. It is important to recognize AFH in the pulmonary region, as its
behavior at other sites is generally relatively indolent; however, it may be
mistaken for metastatic or more aggressive primary lung tumors. It is likely that
cases of AFH in the lung may have been previously missed because of their
morphologic and genetic overlap with other pulmonary lesions.

PMID: 22588066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Clin Sarcoma Res. 2012 Jan 25;2(1):3. doi: 10.1186/2045-3329-2-3.

Paratesticular desmoplastic small round cell tumour: an unusual tumour with an
unusual fusion; cytogenetic and molecular genetic analysis combining RT-PCR and
COBRA-FISH.

Cliteur VP(1), Szuhai K, Baelde HJ, van Dam J, Gelderblom H, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
Albinusdreef 2, Leiden, The Netherlands. P.C.W.Hogendoorn@lumc.nl.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumour is a rare malignant tumour with a male to
female ratio of 4:1. It manifests mostly at serosal sites. Here we present a case
of a 28-year-old male patient, who presented with a fast growing paratesticular
mass. On biopsy nests and cords of small round cells, without a clear
morphological lineage of differentiation were seen. Occasionally desmoplatic
small round cell tumour shows different lines of differentiation. An unequivocal 
histological diagnosis might be difficult in such cases. Here we demonstrate by a
combination of methods the characteristic immunohistochemical profile and -
albeit unusual - molecular background and discuss the eventual link with Ewing
sarcoma.Immunohistochemical studies showed a membranous staining of Keratine
AE1/3 and a dot-like staining of Desmine, confirming its diagnosis. Using
COBRA-FISH following a metaphase approach we demonstrated a balanced
translocation, t(11;22)(p13;q12) and in RT-PCR formation of the EWSR1-WT1 fusion 
product, a specific translocation of desmoplastic round cell tumour. The fusion
involves exon 9 of EWSR1 to exon 8 of WT1, an unusual fusion product, though
earlier described in a case of a desmoplastic small round cell tumour of the
hand. The EWSR1-WT1 chimera seems to function as an oncogenic transcription
factor. Here the zinc finger domain of the WT1 acts with affinity with certain
promoter domains influencing the expression of various downstream proteins such
as: PDGFA, PAX2, insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor, epidermal growth factor
receptor, IL2 receptor beta, BAIAP3, MLF1, TALLA-1, LRRC15 and ENT. We discuss
their potential oncogenic roles and potential therapeutic consequences.

PMCID: PMC3351707
PMID: 22587803  [PubMed]


352. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2012;15(1 Suppl):108-26. doi: 10.2350/11-08-1078-PB.1.

Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor and related tumors.

Tsokos M(1), Alaggio RD, Dehner LP, Dickman PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/pPNET) and other
tumors with EWS gene rearrangements encompass a malignant and intermediate
neoplasm with a broad anatomic distribution and a wide age range but a
predilection for soft tissue in children, adolescents, and young adults. The
overlapping histologic, immunohistochemical and cytogenetic and molecular genetic
features create diagnostic challenges despite significant clinical and prognostic
differences. Ewing sarcoma is the 3rd most common sarcoma in children and
adolescents, and desmoplastic small round cell tumor is a rare neoplasm that
occurs more often in older children, adolescents, and young adults. Pathologic
examination is complemented by immunohistochemistry, cytogenetics, and molecular 
genetics. This article reviews the clinicopathologic features of EWS/pPNET and
desmoplastic small round cell tumor in the spectrum of tumors with EWS gene
rearrangements. Other tumors with different histopathologic features and an EWS
gene rearrangement are discussed elsewhere in this volume.

PMID: 22420726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36682. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036682. Epub 2012 May 3.

Myxoid liposarcoma-associated EWSR1-DDIT3 selectively represses osteoblastic and 
chondrocytic transcription in multipotent mesenchymal cells.

Suzuki K(1), Matsui Y, Higashimoto M, Kawaguchi Y, Seki S, Motomura H, Hori T,
Yahara Y, Kanamori M, Kimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toyama, 
Toyama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Liposarcomas are the most common class of soft tissue sarcomas, and
myxoid liposarcoma is the second most common liposarcoma. EWSR1-DDIT3 is a
chimeric fusion protein generated by the myxoid liposarcoma-specific chromosomal 
translocation t(12;22)(q13;q12). Current studies indicate that multipotent
mesenchymal cells are the origin of sarcomas. The mechanism whereby EWSR1-DDIT3
contributes to the phenotypic selection of target cells during oncogenic
transformation remains to be elucidated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Reporter assays showed that the EWSR1-DDIT3
myxoid liposarcoma fusion protein, but not its wild-type counterparts EWSR1 and
DDIT3, selectively repressed the transcriptional activity of cell
lineage-specific marker genes in multipotent mesenchymal C3H10T1/2 cells.
Specifically, the osteoblastic marker Opn promoter and chondrocytic marker
Col11a2 promoter were repressed, while the adipocytic marker Ppar-<U+03B3>2 promoter was
not affected. Mutation analyses, transient ChIP assays, and treatment of cells
with trichostatin A (a potent inhibitor of histone deacetylases) or
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (a methylation-resistant cytosine homolog) revealed the
possible molecular mechanisms underlying the above-mentioned selective
transcriptional repression. The first is a genetic action of the EWSR1-DDIT3
fusion protein, which results in binding to the functional C/EBP site within Opn 
and Col11a2 promoters through interaction of its DNA-binding domain and
subsequent interference with endogenous C/EBPß function. Another possible
mechanism is an epigenetic action of EWSR1-DDIT3, which enhances histone
deacetylation, DNA methylation, and histone H3K9 trimethylation at the
transcriptional repression site. We hypothesize that EWSR1-DDIT3-mediated
transcriptional regulation may modulate the target cell lineage through target
gene-specific genetic and epigenetic conversions.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study elucidates the molecular mechanisms
underlying EWSR1-DDIT3 fusion protein-mediated phenotypic selection of putative
target multipotent mesenchymal cells during myxoid liposarcoma development. A
better understanding of this process is fundamental to the elucidation of
possible direct lineage reprogramming in oncogenic sarcoma transformation
mediated by fusion proteins.

PMCID: PMC3343026
PMID: 22570737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Prenat Diagn. 2012 Jul;32(7):668-73. doi: 10.1002/pd.3885. Epub 2012 May 9.

Origin of trisomy: no evidence to support the ovarian mosaicism theory.

Morris CR(1), Haigh S, Cuthbert G, Crosier M, Harding F, Wolstenholme J.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Genetics Service, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Central Parkway,
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK. charlotte.morris@nuth.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Prenat Diagn. 2012 Dec;32(12):1221.

OBJECTIVE: Trisomy is the most common type of chromosome abnormality, affecting
4% of clinically recognised pregnancies, of which, trisomies 16, 21 and 22 are
the most prevalent. It has been suggested that a large proportion of maternally
derived trisomic pregnancies, specifically trisomy 21, are the result of
low-level ovarian mosaicism. In this study, we aimed to reproduce these
previously published results on trisomy 21 and investigate the other common
maternally derived trisomies (i.e. trisomies 16 and 22) by determining chromosome
copy number in fetal ovarian and control skin cells.
METHODS: Ovarian and control skin tissue was collected from eight karyotypically 
normal female fetuses of between 10 and 14 weeks gestation, which were terminated
for social reasons. Tissues were dissociated and fluorescence in situ
hybridisation was performed with break-apart probes: CBFß (16q22), RUNX1 (21q22) 
and EWSR1 (22q12).
RESULTS: A small number of trisomic cells, 13 out of 51,146 cells examined
(0.025%), were identified in both ovarian and control skin samples. Only three of
these trisomic cells were present in the fetal ovarian tissue.
CONCLUSION: This study found no evidence of fetal ovarian mosaicism for trisomies
16, 21 and 22.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and Crown copyright.

PMID: 22570272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Virchows Arch. 2012 Jun;460(6):621-8. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1240-0. Epub 2012
May 9.

NR4A3 rearrangement reliably distinguishes between the clinicopathologically
overlapping entities myoepithelial carcinoma of soft tissue and cellular
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Flucke U(1), Tops BB, Verdijk MA, van Cleef PJ, van Zwam PH, Slootweg PJ, Bovée
JV, Riedl RG, Creytens DH, Suurmeijer AJ, Mentzel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, P.O. Box 
9101, 6500 Nijmegen, The Netherlands. u.flucke@pathol.umcn.nl

Myoepithelial carcinoma of soft tissue (MEC) and cellular extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma (cEMC) share striking similarities. In this paper, we compare ten 
MECs with five cEMCs. MEC patients had an equal gender distribution. The age
range was 15-76 years (mean, 42 years). Tumours were located on extremities,
pelvic girdle, vulva and neck. Follow-up, available for nine patients, ranged
from 4 to 85 months (mean, 35 months). Five patients were alive without evidence 
of disease, two were alive with disease and two died 8 months after the initial
diagnosis. cEMCs were from three males and two females with an age range of 37-82
years (mean, 57 years); they presented in extremities, shoulder and
paravertebral/cervical. Follow-up, available for four patients, ranged from 6 to 
220 months (mean, 61 months). All patients were alive, two with recurrences
and/or metastases and two without evidence of disease. Morphologically, the
distinction between these two entities was difficult since all cases exhibited
features typically seen in myoepithelial tumours. Immunohistochemically, MECs
expressed pan-keratin (80 %), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA; 57 %), S100 (50
%), alpha-smooth muscle actin (ASMA; 75 %), calponin (67 %) and p63 (25 %). S100 
and EMA were expressed in 40 % of cEMC cases respectively with additional
immunoreactivity for p63, ASMA and glial fibrillary acidic protein in one case.
Pan-keratin was negative in all neoplasms. NR4A3 rearrangement was present in
four of four cEMCs and in none of the MECs. In contrast, three of nine (33 %)
MECs and four of five (80 %) cEMCs showed an EWSR1 rearrangement. In summary,
MECs and cEMCs share clinical, morphological, immunohistochemical and genetic
characteristics. The pathognomic rearrangement of NR4A3 is a useful diagnostic
feature in identifying cEMCs.

PMCID: PMC3371325
PMID: 22569967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Med Oncol. 2012 Dec;29(5):3421-30. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0243-7. Epub 2012 May 
6.

Prediction and identification of B cell epitopes derived from EWS/FLI-l fusion
protein of Ewing's sarcoma.

Liu H(1), Huang L, Luo J, Chen W, Zhang Z, Liao X, Dai M, Shu Y, Cao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, 330006, People's Republic of China.

To predict B cell epitope of Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI-l fusion protein and to
analyze its antigenicity and immunogenicity. Comprehensive algorithms were
applied to predict the possible B cell epitopes of EWS/FLI-l fusion protein.
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis
were performed to identify the synthesized epitope peptides, ELISA assays and
Western blot to detect the antigenicity, and the immunogenicity of epitope
peptides. Three B cell epitopes were screened out, and HPLC and MS analysis
confirmed all three synthesized epitope peptides were demandable. ELISA assays
verified all three epitope peptides could prime intense antigen-antibody reaction
and induce ideal antibody titers after immunization to the New Zealand white
rabbit. However, Western blot confirmed that antiserum of one of these epitope
peptides could not recognize EWS/FLI-1 protein. Two B cell epitopes,
PQDGNKPTETSQPQ and DPDEVARRWGQRKS, derived from EWS/FLI-l protein, are identified
to have potential antigenicity and immunogenicity.

PMID: 22562156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Cancer Genet. 2012 Apr;205(4):182-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.02.001.

Deep intronic point mutations of the KIT gene in a female patient with cutaneous 
clear cell sarcoma and her family.

Gambichler T(1), Pantelaki I, Othlinghaus N, Moritz RK, Stricker I, Skrygan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
t.gambichler@klinikum-bochum.de

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) of tendons and aponeuroses is an aggressive neoplasm
that is characterized by a pathognomonic translocation, t(12;22)(q13;q12),
resulting in an EWSR1-ATF1 chimeric gene. We report for the first time a female
patient with CCS exhibiting both EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcripts and hereditary
homozygous point mutations in introns 11 and 16 of the KIT gene. Her parents and 
two brothers each had heterozygous point mutations in intron 11 or intron 16 of
the KIT gene. The functional significance of these germline deep intronic point
mutations and their relationship to the pathogenesis of CCS are unclear. Future
studies investigating KIT intron mutations in a larger cohort of CCS patients are
warranted.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22559980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Sarcoma. 2012;2012:714986. doi: 10.1155/2012/714986. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor: current management and recent findings.

Dufresne A(1), Cassier P, Couraud L, Marec-Bérard P, Meeus P, Alberti L, Blay JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunity, Virus and Microenvironnement, Cancer Research Center
of Lyon (CRCL), UMR INSERM 1052-CNRS 5286, Leon Berard Cancer Center, 28 Rue
Laennec, 69008 Lyon, France.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a rare and highly aggressive
mesenchymal tumor that develops in the abdominal cavity of young men adults.
Patients typically present with symptoms of abdominal sarcomatosis. Diagnosis is 
based on histological analysis of biopsies which typically show small round blue 
cells in nests separated by an abundant desmoplastic stroma. DSRCT is associated 
with a unique chromosomal translocation t(11:22) (p 13; q 12) that involves the
EWSR1 and WT1 genes. The prognosis is particularly poor; median survival ranges
from 17 to 25 months, largely due to the presentation of the majority of patients
with metastatic disease. Management of DSRCT remains challenging and current
schemes lack a significant cure rate despite the use of aggressive treatments
such as polychemotherapy, debulking surgery and whole abdominal radiation.
Several methods are being evaluated to improve survival: addition of chemotherapy
and targeted therapies to standard neoadjuvant protocol, completion of surgical
resection with HIPEC, postoperative IMRT, treatment of hepatic metastases with
[(90)Y]Yttrium microsphere liver embolization.

PMCID: PMC3329898
PMID: 22550424  [PubMed]


359. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2012 Aug;16(4):267-74. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2011.07.011. 
Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney: clinicopathologic
analysis of 34 cases.

Karpate A(1), Menon S, Basak R, Yuvaraja TB, Tongaonkar HB, Desai SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, India.

The present study describes the clinicopathologic analysis of 34 cases of Ewing
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor occurring in the kidney. The patients
were 21 males and 13 females with an age range of 6 to 44 years. Clinically,
patients presented with multiple symptoms including hematuria, pain, and/or lump 
in the abdomen. Nephrectomy was performed in most of the cases. Grossly, whole of
the renal parenchyma was involved by a variegated tumor. Histologically, the
tumor was composed of monomorphic, small, and round cells arranged in a variety
of patterns. Rosettes, geographical areas of necrosis, and arborizing vascular
pattern were the prominent histologic features. The nucleus was monomorphic and
round. Anisonucleosis was also noted in some cases. The nucleus was mostly
hyperchromatic. A mixture of hyperchromatic and powdery chromatin was noted in
few cases. Immunohistochemically, MIC2 (CD99) was positive in 32 of 34 cases
followed by neuron-specific enolase (9/12 cases), vimentin (8/14 cases),
synaptophysin (1/8 cases), and S-100 protein (1/4 cases). Molecular analysis by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction that was carried out in 26 cases 
revealed presence of EWS-FLI-1 type 1 translocation in 12 cases, EWS-FLI-1 type 2
translocation in 10 cases, and both type 1 and type 2 EWS-FLI-1 translocation in 
2 cases. Two cases did not demonstrate any translocation. Follow-up data were
available for 17 of 34 cases. Local recurrence of the tumor was seen in 4
patients, and 10 patients were recorded to have distant metastasis in various
organs, such as lung, bone, and lymph node, during the course of the disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22534242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Pathol Res Pract. 2012 Jun 15;208(6):356-9. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2012.03.005. Epub 
2012 Apr 19.

Extra-osseous Ewing sarcoma of the thyroid gland mimicking lymphoma recurrence: a
case report.

Maldi E(1), Monga G, Rossi D, Tosoni A, Mezzapelle R, Boldorini R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina della Salute, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia,
Università del Piemonte Orientale Amedeo Avogadro, Novara, Italy.
elena.maldi@gmail.com

Extra-osseous Ewing sarcomas/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(EOES/pPNETs) are high-grade malignant tumors found in various organs, such as
the lung, skin, intestine, kidney and female genital tract; however, to the best 
of our knowledge, only two cases have previously been identified in the thyroid
gland. We describe a case of primary EOES/PNET of the thyroid gland in a
66-year-old man with a previous history of large B cell lymphoma. During a
routine follow-up examination, the patient underwent an ultrasound cervical scan 
showing a solid nodule of the left thyroid lobe. The fine-needle aspiration
biopsy of the nodule suggested a neuroendocrine tumor. Histological and
immunohistochemical examination of the surgical specimen supported a diagnosis of
EOES/PNET, which was further confirmed by the demonstration of EWSR1 gene
translocation by means of fluorescent in situ hybridization and by the detection 
of glycogen particles and neurosecretory granules by means of electron
microscopy. Total body computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging
excluded the involvement of other sites, and therefore a diagnosis of primary
EOES/PNET of the thyroid gland was made.This paper also discusses the main
differential diagnoses, including lymphoma recurrence, other small round cell
tumors (primary or metastatic), and a thyroid localization of an EWS/PNET from
another organ.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22520405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jul;36(7):e1-e11. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31825485c5.

Tumors with EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusions: the current status.

Thway K(1), Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.
khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk

EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 are gene fusions of which one or both have now been
consistently described in 5 histopathologically and behaviorally diverse
neoplasms: angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, conventional clear cell sarcoma (of 
tendons and aponeuroses), clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal
tract, hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma of the salivary gland, and primary
pulmonary myxoid sarcoma. Some of the tumors in this group have been described
only recently, and others have been the subject of recent genetic insights
contributing to their characterization. These neoplasms are all rare; yet, the
increasing frequency with which EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusions are being
described in separate entities is noteworthy. The additional molecular mechanisms
by which tumors with such variable morphologic, immunohistochemical, and clinical
phenotypes are generated are yet to be understood. We review the
clinicopathologic and molecular features of this group of neoplasms unified by
the presence of EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 genetic fusions.

PMID: 22510762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Clin Oncol. 2012 May 20;30(15):1849-56. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.37.2359. Epub
2012 Apr 16.

Phase II study of ganitumab, a fully human anti-type-1 insulin-like growth factor
receptor antibody, in patients with metastatic Ewing family tumors or
desmoplastic small round cell tumors.

Tap WD(1), Demetri G, Barnette P, Desai J, Kavan P, Tozer R, Benedetto PW,
Friberg G, Deng H, McCaffery I, Leitch I, Badola S, Chang S, Zhu M, Tolcher A.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Los Angeles Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
tapw@mskcc.org

PURPOSE: Ganitumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody against type-1
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R). An open-label phase II study was
conducted to evaluate the efficacy and safety of ganitumab monotherapy in
patients with metastatic Ewing family tumors (EFT) or desmoplastic small round
cell tumors (DSRCT).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients =16 years of age with relapsed or refractory EFT
or DSRCT received 12 mg/kg of ganitumab every 2 weeks. Objective response rate
(ORR) was the primary end point. Secondary end points included clinical benefit
rate (CBR = complete + partial responses + stable disease [SD] = 24 weeks) and
safety and pharmacokinetic profiles of ganitumab. The relationship between tumor 
response and EWS gene translocation status and IGF-1 levels was evaluated.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight patients (22 with EFT; 16 with DSRCT) received one or more 
doses of ganitumab. Twenty-four patients (63%) experienced ganitumab-related
adverse events. Grade 3 related events included hyperglycemia (n = 2),
thrombocytopenia (n = 5), neutropenia (n = 2), leukopenia (n = 1), and transient 
ischemic attack (n = 1). There were no grade 4 or 5 treatment-related events. Of 
35 patients assessed for response, two had partial responses (ORR, 6%) and 17
(49%) had SD. Four patients had SD = 24 weeks, contributing to a CBR of 17%. The 
pharmacokinetic profile of ganitumab was similar to that observed in the
first-in-human trial. Elevation of IGF-1 levels was observed postdose. EWS-Fli1
translocations were analyzed by RNA sequencing and fluorescent in situ
hybridization, and novel translocations were observed in EFT and DSCRT. No
apparent relationship between tumor response and IGF-1 levels or EWS gene
translocations was observed.
CONCLUSION: Ganitumab was well tolerated and demonstrated antitumor activity in
patients with advanced recurrent EFT or DSRCT.

PMID: 22508822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2012 May;31(3):276-9. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31823ef912.

High-grade sarcoma masquerading as growing teratoma syndrome after resection of
ovarian immature teratoma: report of a case.

Morency EG(1), Lerner D, Garcia R, Kalir T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029-6574, USA. Elizabeth.Morency@mssm.edu

SUMMARY: A thorough literature search revealed no previous reports of this
entity, and we are the first to describe a case of a high-grade sarcoma arising
from a recurrent immature teratoma misdiagnosed as growing teratoma syndrome. The
patient was a 23-yr-old female, diagnosed at the age of 20 with a Stage IIIB
immature ovarian teratoma. After surgery and chemotherapy, the patient developed 
multiple liver and pelvic masses that were diagnosed as mature teratomas based on
small samples obtained by computed tomography-guided core biopsy. Three years
after diagnosis the patient presented with severe respiratory difficulty and
following resection, the final pathology revealed multiple tumors with foci of
high grade sarcoma compatible with primitive neuroectodermal tumor/extraskeletal 
Ewing sarcoma based on morphology and immunohistochemistry (CD99, CD56). However,
on the basis of further immunostaining and fluorescent in situ hybridization
studies negative for rearrangement of EWSR1, the final pathologic diagnosis was
high-grade unspecified (undifferentiated) sarcoma. This case illustrates the
pitfalls of biopsying 1 site in a patient with recurrence of a heterogeneous
tumor such as immature ovarian teratoma, especially when rendering a benign
diagnosis such as growing teratoma syndrome. It is of utmost importance to
adequately sample large-volume recurrent teratomas, and we suggest biopsying
several different sites, to increase the likelihood of detecting a malignant
component.

PMID: 22498946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2013 Feb;39(2):157-65. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2012.01274.x.

Nuclear carrier and RNA-binding proteins in frontotemporal lobar degeneration
associated with fused in sarcoma (FUS) pathological changes.

Davidson YS(1), Robinson AC(1), Hu Q(1), Mishra M(1), Baborie A(1), Jaros E(1),
Perry RH(1), Cairns NJ(1), Richardson A(1), Gerhard A(1), Neary D(1), Snowden
JS(1), Bigio EH(1), Mann DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health and Neurodegeneration Research Group, Faculty of Human and
Medical Sciences, University of Manchester, ManchesterCerebral Function Unit,
Greater Manchester Neuroscience Centre, Salford Royal Foundation Trust,
SalfordDepartment of Neuropathology, Walton Centre for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, LiverpoolNeuropathology/Cellular Pathology, Royal Victoria
InfirmaryInstitute for Ageing and Health, Campus for Ageing and Vitality,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UKNorthwestern CNADC Neuropathology
Core, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois,
Departments ofNeurologyPathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA.

AIMS: We aimed to investigate the role of the nuclear carrier and binding
proteins, transportin 1 (TRN1) and transportin 2 (TRN2), TATA-binding
protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15) and Ewing's sarcoma protein (EWS) in
inclusion body formation in cases of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)
associated with fused in sarcoma protein (FTLD-FUS).
METHODS: Eight cases of FTLD-FUS (five cases of atypical FTLD-U, two of neuronal 
intermediate filament inclusion body disease and one of basophilic inclusion body
disease) were immunostained for FUS, TRN1, TRN2, TAF15 and EWS. Ten cases of FTLD
associated with TDP-43 inclusions served as reference cases.
RESULTS: The inclusion bodies in FTLD-FUS contained TRN1 and TAF15 and, to a
lesser extent, EWS, but not TRN2. The patterns of immunostaining for TRN1 and
TAF15 were very similar to that of FUS. None of these proteins was associated
with tau or TDP-43 aggregations in FTLD.
CONCLUSIONS: Data suggest that FUS, TRN1 and TAF15 may participate in a
functional pathway in an interdependent way, and imply that the function of
TDP-43 may not necessarily be in parallel with, or complementary to, that of FUS,
despite each protein sharing many similar structural elements.

© 2012 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2012 British
Neuropathological Society.

PMCID: PMC3479345
PMID: 22497712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Neoplasia. 2012 Mar;14(3):238-48.

Rare Drosha splice variants are deficient in microRNA processing but do not
affect general microRNA expression in cancer cells.

Grund SE(1), Polycarpou-Schwarz M, Luo C, Eichmüller SB, Diederichs S.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-University-Group Molecular RNA Biology & Cancer, German Cancer
Research Center DKFZ & Institute of Pathology, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Drosha is a key enzyme in microRNA biogenesis, generating the precursor miRNA
(pre-miRNA) by excising the stem-loop embedded in the primary transcripts
(pri-miRNA). The specificity for the pri-miRNAs and determination of the cleavage
site are provided by its binding partner DGCR8, which is necessary for efficient 
processing. The crucial Drosha domains for pri-miRNA cleavage are the middle
part, the two enzymatic RNase III domains (RIIID), and the dsRNA binding domain
(dsRBD) in the C-terminus. Here, we identify alternatively spliced transcripts in
human melanoma and NT2 cell lines, encoding C-terminally truncated Drosha
proteins lacking part of the RIIIDb and the entire dsRBD. Proteins generated from
these alternative splice variants fail to bind to DGCR8 but still interact with
Ewing sarcoma protein (EWS). In vitro as well as in vivo, the Drosha splice
variants are deficient in pri-miRNA processing. However, the aberrant transcripts
in melanoma cells do not consistently reduce mature miRNA levels compared with
melanoma cell lines lacking those splice variants, possibly owing to their
limited abundance. Our findings show that alternative processing-deficient Drosha
splice variants exist in melanoma cells. In elevated amounts, these alternatively
spliced transcripts could provide one potential mechanism accounting for the
deregulation of miRNAs in cancer cells. On the basis of our results, the search
for alternative inactive splice variants might be fruitful in different tumor
entities to unravel the molecular basis of the previously observed decreased
microRNA processing efficiency in cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Neoplasia Press, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3323901
PMID: 22496623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Nature. 2012 Mar 28;483(7391):570-5. doi: 10.1038/nature11005.

Systematic identification of genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cells.

Garnett MJ(1), Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD, Dastur A, Lau KW, Greninger
P, Thompson IR, Luo X, Soares J, Liu Q, Iorio F, Surdez D, Chen L, Milano RJ,
Bignell GR, Tam AT, Davies H, Stevenson JA, Barthorpe S, Lutz SR, Kogera F,
Lawrence K, McLaren-Douglas A, Mitropoulos X, Mironenko T, Thi H, Richardson L,
Zhou W, Jewitt F, Zhang T, O'Brien P, Boisvert JL, Price S, Hur W, Yang W, Deng
X, Butler A, Choi HG, Chang JW, Baselga J, Stamenkovic I, Engelman JA, Sharma SV,
Delattre O, Saez-Rodriguez J, Gray NS, Settleman J, Futreal PA, Haber DA,
Stratton MR, Ramaswamy S, McDermott U, Benes CH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2012 May;11(5):353.
    Nature. 2012 Mar 29;483(7391):544-5.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 May;12(5):315.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 May;9(5):249.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 May;13(5):300.

Clinical responses to anticancer therapies are often restricted to a subset of
patients. In some cases, mutated cancer genes are potent biomarkers for responses
to targeted agents. Here, to uncover new biomarkers of sensitivity and resistance
to cancer therapeutics, we screened a panel of several hundred cancer cell
lines--which represent much of the tissue-type and genetic diversity of human
cancers--with 130 drugs under clinical and preclinical investigation. In
aggregate, we found that mutated cancer genes were associated with cellular
response to most currently available cancer drugs. Classic oncogene addiction
paradigms were modified by additional tissue-specific or expression biomarkers,
and some frequently mutated genes were associated with sensitivity to a broad
range of therapeutic agents. Unexpected relationships were revealed, including
the marked sensitivity of Ewing's sarcoma cells harbouring the EWS (also known as
EWSR1)-FLI1 gene translocation to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. 
By linking drug activity to the functional complexity of cancer genomes,
systematic pharmacogenomic profiling in cancer cell lines provides a powerful
biomarker discovery platform to guide rational cancer therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3349233
PMID: 22460902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 1;21(13):2899-911. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds116. Epub 2012 Mar
27.

Evaluating the role of the FUS/TLS-related gene EWSR1 in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.

Couthouis J(1), Hart MP, Erion R, King OD, Diaz Z, Nakaya T, Ibrahim F, Kim HJ,
Mojsilovic-Petrovic J, Panossian S, Kim CE, Frackelton EC, Solski JA, Williams
KL, Clay-Falcone D, Elman L, McCluskey L, Greene R, Hakonarson H, Kalb RG, Lee
VM, Trojanowski JQ, Nicholson GA, Blair IP, Bonini NM, Van Deerlin VM, Mourelatos
Z, Shorter J, Gitler AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur
Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease
affecting motor neurons. Mutations in related RNA-binding proteins TDP-43,
FUS/TLS and TAF15 have been connected to ALS. These three proteins share several 
features, including the presence of a bioinformatics-predicted prion domain,
aggregation-prone nature in vitro and in vivo and toxic effects when expressed in
multiple model systems. Given these commonalities, we hypothesized that a related
protein, EWSR1 (Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1), might also exhibit similar
properties and therefore could contribute to disease. Here, we report an analysis
of EWSR1 in multiple functional assays, including mutational screening in ALS
patients and controls. We identified three missense variants in EWSR1 in ALS
patients, which were absent in a large number of healthy control individuals. We 
show that disease-specific variants affect EWSR1 localization in motor neurons.
We also provide multiple independent lines of in vitro and in vivo evidence that 
EWSR1 has similar properties as TDP-43, FUS and TAF15, including
aggregation-prone behavior in vitro and ability to confer neurodegeneration in
Drosophila. Postmortem analysis of sporadic ALS cases also revealed cytoplasmic
mislocalization of EWSR1. Together, our studies highlight a potential role for
EWSR1 in ALS, provide a collection of functional assays to be used to assess
roles of additional RNA-binding proteins in disease and support an emerging
concept that a class of aggregation-prone RNA-binding proteins might contribute
broadly to ALS and related neurodegenerative diseases.

PMCID: PMC3373238
PMID: 22454397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jul;36(7):993-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824ee43c.

NKX2.2 is a useful immunohistochemical marker for Ewing sarcoma.

Yoshida A(1), Sekine S, Tsuta K, Fukayama M, Furuta K, Tsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Clinical Laboratory Division, National Cancer Center Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan. akyoshid@ncc.go.jp

Ewing sarcoma is a high-grade round cell sarcoma that affects bones and soft
tissues in children and young adults. Its diagnosis can be challenging, and the
differential diagnoses include a wide variety of small round cell tumors. CD99
and FLI-1 are the currently accepted immunohistochemical markers for Ewing
sarcoma, but their accuracy has been controversial. NKX2.2 is a
homeodomain-containing transcription factor that plays a critical role in
neuroendocrine/glial differentiation. The NKX2.2 gene was recently identified as 
a target of EWS-FLI-1, the fusion protein specific to Ewing sarcoma, and was
shown to be differentially upregulated in Ewing sarcoma on the basis of
array-based gene expression analysis. However, the immunohistochemical diagnostic
potential of this marker has not been tested. We immunostained representative
sections of 30 genetically confirmed Ewing sarcomas and 130 non-Ewing small round
cell tumors by using an antibody to NKX2.2. Nuclear staining in at least 5% of
the cells was deemed positive. Twenty-eight (93%) of the 30 Ewing sarcomas were
positive for NKX2.2. The staining was diffuse (>50%) in all the positive cases
and was moderate or strong in intensity for most cases (25 of 28). NKX2.2 was
also positive in 14 non-Ewing tumors, including all the olfactory neuroblastomas 
and a minor subset of small cell carcinomas, synovial sarcomas, mesenchymal
chondrosarcomas, and malignant melanomas. All the other non-Ewing tumors tested
were negative for this marker. NKX2.2 is a valuable marker for Ewing sarcoma,
with a sensitivity of 93% and a specificity of 89%, and aids in the differential 
diagnosis of small round cell tumors.

PMID: 22446943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Brain Res. 2012 Jun 26;1462:61-80. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.01.016. Epub 2012
Jan 21.

The tip of the iceberg: RNA-binding proteins with prion-like domains in
neurodegenerative disease.

King OD(1), Gitler AD, Shorter J.

Author information: 
(1)Boston Biomedical Research Institute, 64 Grove St., Watertown, MA 02472, USA. 
king@bbri.org

Prions are self-templating protein conformers that are naturally transmitted
between individuals and promote phenotypic change. In yeast, prion-encoded
phenotypes can be beneficial, neutral or deleterious depending upon genetic
background and environmental conditions. A distinctive and portable 'prion
domain' enriched in asparagine, glutamine, tyrosine and glycine residues unifies 
the majority of yeast prion proteins. Deletion of this domain precludes
prionogenesis and appending this domain to reporter proteins can confer
prionogenicity. An algorithm designed to detect prion domains has successfully
identified 19 domains that can confer prion behavior. Scouring the human genome
with this algorithm enriches a select group of RNA-binding proteins harboring a
canonical RNA recognition motif (RRM) and a putative prion domain. Indeed, of 210
human RRM-bearing proteins, 29 have a putative prion domain, and 12 of these are 
in the top 60 prion candidates in the entire genome. Startlingly, these
RNA-binding prion candidates are inexorably emerging, one by one, in the
pathology and genetics of devastating neurodegenerative disorders, including:
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontotemporal lobar degeneration with
ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U), Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's
disease. For example, FUS and TDP-43, which rank 1st and 10th among RRM-bearing
prion candidates, form cytoplasmic inclusions in the degenerating motor neurons
of ALS patients and mutations in TDP-43 and FUS cause familial ALS. Recently,
perturbed RNA-binding proteostasis of TAF15, which is the 2nd ranked RRM-bearing 
prion candidate, has been connected with ALS and FTLD-U. We strongly suspect that
we have now merely reached the tip of the iceberg. We predict that additional
RNA-binding prion candidates identified by our algorithm will soon surface as
genetic modifiers or causes of diverse neurodegenerative conditions. Indeed,
simple prion-like transfer mechanisms involving the prion domains of RNA-binding 
proteins could underlie the classical non-cell-autonomous emanation of
neurodegenerative pathology from originating epicenters to neighboring portions
of the nervous system. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled
RNA-Binding Proteins.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3372647
PMID: 22445064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 20;31:24. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-31-24.

An integrated analysis of miRNA and gene copy numbers in xenografts of Ewing's
sarcoma.

Mosakhani N(1), Guled M, Leen G, Calabuig-Fariñas S, Niini T, Machado I, Savola
S, Scotlandi K, López-Guerrero JA, Llombart-Bosch A, Knuutila S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute and HUSLAB, University of Helsinki
and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Xenografts have been shown to provide a suitable source of tumor
tissue for molecular analysis in the absence of primary tumor material. We
utilized ES xenograft series for integrated microarray analyses to identify novel
biomarkers.
METHOD: Microarray technology (array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and
micro RNA arrays) was used to screen and identify copy number changes and
differentially expressed miRNAs of 34 and 14 passages, respectively. Incubated
cells used for xenografting (Passage 0) were considered to represent the primary 
tumor. Four important differentially expressed miRNAs (miR-31, miR-31*, miR-145, 
miR-106) were selected for further validation by real time polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Integrated analysis of aCGH and miRNA data was performed on 14
xenograft passages by bioinformatic methods.
RESULTS: The most frequent losses and gains of DNA copy number were detected at
9p21.3, 16q and at 8, 15, 17q21.32-qter, 1q21.1-qter, respectively. The presence 
of these alterations was consistent in all tumor passages. aCGH profiles of
xenograft passages of each series resembled their corresponding primary tumors
(passage 0). MiR-21, miR-31, miR-31*, miR-106b, miR-145, miR-150*, miR-371-5p,
miR-557 and miR-598 showed recurrently altered expression. These miRNAS were
predicted to regulate many ES-associated genes, such as genes of the IGF1
pathway, EWSR1, FLI1 and their fusion gene (EWS-FLI1). Twenty differentially
expressed miRNAs were pinpointed in regions carrying altered copy numbers.
CONCLUSION: In the present study, ES xenografts were successfully applied for
integrated microarray analyses. Our findings showed expression changes of miRNAs 
that were predicted to regulate many ES associated genes, such as IGF1 pathway
genes, FLI1, EWSR1, and the EWS-FLI1 fusion genes.

PMCID: PMC3338077
PMID: 22429812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jan-Feb;205(1-2):55-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.01.007.

A t(17;22)(q21;q12) with partial ETV4 deletion in a soft tissue Ewing sarcoma.

Rougemont AL(1), Bouron-Dal Soglio D, Patey-Mariaud de Serre N, Fetni R, Fan L,
Barrette S, Fournet JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine,
Montréal, Québec, Canada. anne-laure.rougemont@hcuge.ch

Cytogenetic analysis of a lumbar soft tissue Ewing sarcoma (ES) in a 7-month-old 
female child showed a t(17;22)(q21;q12), a rare translocation leading to an
EWSR1-ETV4 chimeric transcript. These findings were confirmed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) techniques. The breakpoints were characterized by direct
sequencing of the chimeric fusion gene. Tumor genotyping using the Affymetrix
Genome-Wide Human single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array 6.0 Genechip
identified deletions of both chromosomal regions involved in the translocation,
resulting in partial deletion of ETV4, but an uninvolved EWSR1 gene. The creation
of a fusion between EWSR1 and an ETS family gene consecutive to a chromosomal
translocation is characteristic of the Ewing family of tumors (EFT). This is the 
first report of a deletion involving the two breakpoints in an EWS-ETS
translocation. To date, only two cases of t(17;22)(q21;q12) in Ewing sarcoma have
been reported, with no associated deletion. Interestingly, both cases had also
occurred in soft tissue tumors, which are less common than their bone-involving
counterparts.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22429598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Am J Dermatopathol. 2012 Aug;34(6):619-25. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e3182473190.

Cutaneous clear cell sarcoma: report of three cases of a potentially
underestimated mimicker of spindle cell melanoma.

Falconieri G(1), Bacchi CE, Luzar B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, General Hospital S. Maria Della Misericordia, Udine, 
Italy. Falconieri.Giovanni@aoud.sanita.fvg.it

Clear cell sarcoma is a unique soft tissue tumor with distinct microscopic
features that include a nested or fascicular pattern of spindle cells accompanied
by larger wreath-like giant cells scattered throughout. It harbors a unique
EWSR1-ATF1 gene fusion secondary to a t(12;22)(q13;q12) translocation. Recently, 
it was reported that clear cell sarcoma can occur in the skin and mimic a broad
spectrum of entities, including spindle cell melanoma. Here, we describe 3 new
cases of clear cell sarcoma of the skin, all of which were confirmed molecularly.
The patients, a 12-year-old boy, a 29-year-old woman, and a 60-year-old man, had 
cutaneous lesions on the thigh, dorsum of foot, and sole, respectively. All 3
lesions were originally considered suspicious of spindle cell melanoma.
Microscopically, the lesions featured nodular proliferation centered in the
dermis that consisted of discrete fascicles of spindle cell enmeshed by thin
fibrous strands. Wreath-like cells were present in all cases. Tumor cells were
positive for S100 protein (3 of 3 cases), melan A (2 of 3 cases), HMB 45 (1 of 3 
cases) although a junctional melanocytic proliferation was seen in 1 case.
Sentinel lymph node biopsy was negative in 2 patients. Follow-up was uneventful
in 2 patients, whereas the other patient developed a lymph node metastasis 5
months after primary tumor excision. This study confirms that malignant dermal
tumors that mimic but do not exactly replicate spindle cell melanoma should raise
suspicion for cutaneous clear cell sarcoma and prompt the investigation for the
confirmatory gene fusion t(12;22).

PMID: 22421295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Hum Pathol. 2012 Sep;43(9):1463-70. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.10.022. Epub 2012
Mar 9.

Identification of biomarkers to distinguish clear cell sarcoma from malignant
melanoma.

Yang L(1), Chen Y, Cui T, Knösel T, Zhang Q, Geier C, Katenkamp D, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Jena,
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany.

Clear cell sarcoma is a rare and malignant soft tissue tumor that shows
phenotypic and immunohistochemical overlap with cutaneous malignant melanoma;
identification of biomarkers that differentiate clear cell sarcoma from malignant
melanoma is therefore needed. In this study, we performed mutation analysis of
BRAF and NRAS, investigated the EWSR1 gene rearrangement and evaluated the
protein expression of insulin-like growth factor 2 and insulin-like growth factor
1R in 31 cases of malignant melanoma and 16 cases of clear cell sarcoma. By
direct sequencing and high-resolution melting analysis, we identified BRAF and
NRAS mutations in 51.6% and 12.9% of malignant melanoma cases, respectively,
while none of clear cell sarcoma harbored BRAF or NRAS mutations. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization showed that 78.6% of clear cell sarcoma exhibited the
t(12;22)(q13;q12) translocation. The presence of type 1, 2, and 3 EWSR1/ATF1
fusion gene transcripts was confirmed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction analysis, but type 4 and EWSR1/CREB1 fusion gene transcripts were not
found. No fusion transcript could be detected in any of the malignant melanoma
cases. Additionally, immunohistochemistry showed that the majority of clear cell 
sarcoma and malignant melanoma had insulin-like growth factor 2 and insulin-like 
growth factor receptor 1 expression; however the expression of insulin-like
growth factor 1R was significantly higher in clear cell sarcoma compared to
melanoma (p = .006). Our results suggest that the combination of BRAF and NRAS
mutation analysis with fusion gene detection contributes to diagnosis of
malignant melanoma and clear cell sarcoma, and that insulin-like growth factor 1R
might be a novel target for the treatment of these two malignancies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22406360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;725:106-25. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0659-4_7.

Molecular recognition by the EWS transcriptional activation domain.

Lee KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong
Kong, China. bokaw@ust.hk

Interactions between Intrinsically Disordered Protein Regions (IDRs) and their
targets commonly exhibit localised contacts via target-induced disorder to order 
transitions. Other more complex IDR target interactions have been termed "fuzzy" 
because the IDR does not form a well-defined induced structure. In some
remarkable cases of fuzziness IDR function is apparently sequence independent and
conferred by amino acid composition. Such cases have been referred to as "random 
fuzziness" but the molecular features involved are poorly characterised. The
transcriptional activation domain (EAD) of oncogenic Ewing's Sarcoma Fusion
Proteins (EFPs) is an ˜280 residue IDR with a biased composition restricted to
Ala, Gly, Gln, Pro, Ser, Thr and Tyr. Multiple aromatic side chains (exclusively 
from Try residues) and the particular EAD composition are crucial for molecular
recognition but there appears to be no other major geometrically constrained
requirement. Computational analysis of the EAD using PONDR (Molecular Kinetics,
Inc. http://www.pondr. com) complements the functional data and shows,
accordingly, that propensity for structural order within the EAD is conferred by 
Tyr residues. To conclude, molecular recognition by the EAD is extraordinarily
malleable and involves multiple aromatic contacts facilitated by a flexible
peptide backbone and, most likely, a limited number of weaker contributions from 
amenable side chains. I propose to refer to this mode of fuzzy recognition as
"polyaromatic", noting that it shares some fundamental features with the
"polyelectrostatic" (phosphorylation-dependent) interaction of the Sic1 Cdk
inhibitor and Cdc4._I will also speculate on more detailed models for molecular
recognition by the EAD and their relationship to native (non-oncogenic) EAD
function.

PMID: 22399321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Nat Genet. 2012 Mar 4;44(4):461-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.1107.

A new subtype of bone sarcoma defined by BCOR-CCNB3 gene fusion.

Pierron G(1), Tirode F, Lucchesi C, Reynaud S, Ballet S, Cohen-Gogo S, Perrin V, 
Coindre JM, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Unité de Génétique Somatique-Centre Hospitalier, Paris,
France.

Comment in
    Bull Cancer. 2012 May;99(5):512.

The identification of subtype-specific translocations has revolutionized the
diagnostics of sarcoma and has provided new insight into oncogenesis. We used
RNA-seq to investigate samples from individuals diagnosed with small round cell
tumors of bone, possibly Ewing sarcoma, but which lacked the canonical EWSR1-ETS 
translocation. A new fusion was observed between BCOR (encoding the BCL6
co-repressor) and CCNB3 (encoding the testis-specific cyclin B3) on the X
chromosome. RNA-seq results were confirmed by RT-PCR and through cloning of the
tumor-specific genomic translocation breakpoints. In total, 24
BCOR-CCNB3-positive tumors were identified among a series of 594 sarcoma cases.
Gene profiling experiments indicated that BCOR-CCNB3-positive cases are
biologically distinct from other sarcomas, particularly Ewing sarcoma. Finally,
we show that CCNB3 immunohistochemistry is a powerful diagnostic marker for this 
subgroup of sarcoma and that overexpression of BCOR-CCNB3 or of truncated CCNB3
activates S phase in NIH3T3 cells. Thus, the intrachromosomal X-chromosome fusion
described here represents a new subtype of bone sarcoma caused by a newly
identified gene fusion mechanism.

PMID: 22387997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Oncotarget. 2012 Feb;3(2):172-82.

Single enantiomer of YK-4-279 demonstrates specificity in targeting the oncogene 
EWS-FLI1.

Barber-Rotenberg JS(1), Selvanathan SP, Kong Y, Erkizan HV, Snyder TM, Hong SP,
Kobs CL, South NL, Summer S, Monroe PJ, Chruszcz M, Dobrev V, Tosso PN, Scher LJ,
Minor W, Brown ML, Metallo SJ, Üren A, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Washington, DC, USA.

Oncogenic fusion proteins, such as EWS-FLI1, are excellent therapeutic targets as
they are only located within the tumor. However, there are currently no agents
targeted toward transcription factors, which are often considered to be
'undruggable.' A considerable body of evidence is accruing that refutes this
claim based upon the intrinsic disorder of transcription factors. Our previous
studies show that RNA Helicase A (RHA) enhances the oncogenesis of EWS-FLI1, a
putative intrinsically disordered protein. Interruption of this protein-protein
complex by small molecule inhibitors validates this interaction as a unique
therapeutic target. Single enantiomer activity from a chiral compound has been
recognized as strong evidence for specificity in a small molecule-protein
interaction. Our compound, YK-4-279, has a chiral center and can be separated
into two enantiomers by chiral HPLC. We show that there is a significant
difference in activity between the two enantiomers. (S)-YK-4-279 is able to
disrupt binding between EWS-FLI1 and RHA in an immunoprecipitation assay and
blocks the transcriptional activity of EWS-FLI1, while (R)-YK-4-279 cannot.
Enantiospecific effects are also established in cytotoxicity assays and caspase
assays, where up to a log-fold difference is seen between (S)-YK-4-279 and the
racemic YK-4-279. Our findings indicate that only one enantiomer of our small
molecule is able to specifically target a protein-protein interaction. This work 
is significant for its identification of a single enantiomer effect upon a
protein interaction suggesting that small molecule targeting of intrinsically
disordered proteins can be specific. Furthermore, proving YK-4-279 has only one
functional enantiomer will be helpful in moving this compound towards clinical
trials.

PMCID: PMC3326647
PMID: 22383402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Pathol Res Pract. 2012 Apr 15;208(4):245-9. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2012.01.004. Epub 
2012 Feb 24.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the cervix confirmed with molecular
analysis in a 23-year-old woman: A case report.

Masoura S(1), Kourtis A, Kalogiannidis I, Kotoula V, Anagnostou E, Angelidou S,
Agorastos T.

Author information: 
(1)4th Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor (PNET) of the genital tract is very rare,
especially in the cervix. A case report of a young woman with a diagnosis of PNET
originating from the uterine cervix is presented here. A 23-year-old woman
presented with abnormal uterine bleeding and sharp lower abdominal pain of two
months duration. CT and MRI of the abdomen and thorax revealed the presence of a 
large mass in the uterine cervix, enlarged pelvic lymph nodes and
broncho-pulmonary infiltrations with regional nodes. Pathological examination of 
the tumor revealed a malignant neoplasm composed predominantly of small cells,
immunohistochemically positive for CD99, vimentin and c-Kit. Molecular testing
demonstrated the expression of EWS/FLI1 fusion transcripts corresponding to the
t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation, which confirmed the diagnosis of PNET of the
uterine cervix. Despite surgical excision and administration of the first cycle
of adjuvant chemotherapy, the patient died from multiple-organ failure and
cardiac arrest. PNET arising from the genital tract, especially in the uterine
cervix, is very rare and presents a diagnostic challenge. A timely confirmation
with molecular analysis is essential for the diagnosis of such a tumor at an
unusual site as in the present case.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Head Neck Pathol. 2012 Sep;6(3):389-94. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0338-7. Epub 2012
Feb 16.

Recurrent hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma of the base of tongue with high-grade 
transformation and EWSR1 gene rearrangement by FISH.

Jin R(1), Craddock KJ, Irish JC, Perez-Ordonez B, Weinreb I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network, Toronto General Hospital
Site, 200 Elizabeth Street, Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada.

Hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma (HCCC) is a rare, low-grade salivary gland tumor
with clear cells and hyalinized stroma. Prognosis of HCCC is excellent with few
cases metastasizing to the lymph nodes and lung. We present a case of a
61-year-old male with recurrent HCCC on the base of tongue. Histologic
examination revealed sheets of clear and eosinophilic cells with a background of 
a myxoid-like matrix. In addition, large, bizarre malignant cells, focal
necrosis, and atypical mitotic figures were identified. By immunohistochemistry, 
the clear cells were positive for CK18, EMA and vimentin, focally positive for
CK7 and CD10, but negative for p63, HMWK, SMA and calponin. A metastatic renal
cell carcinoma was considered a possibility but the tumor was called
"poorly-differentiated carcinoma, NOS". The patient underwent primary
radiotherapy. A recurrence was identified at 10 months follow-up. A biopsy of the
recurrent tumor showed clear cell differentiation and a predominant cribriform
pattern with focal cords of eosinophilic cells invading the stroma. In contrast
to the original tumor, no mitotic figures, atypia or necrosis were identified.
The combination of lower grade and different architectural patterns appeared
markedly different than the previous biopsy and the immunohistochemical pattern
was also different. The recurrent tumor showed diffuse positivity for p63 and
HMWK. It was negative for CD10, vimentin, SMA and calponin. Fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) analysis was positive for rearrangement of the EWSR1 gene in
both samples, confirming that this represented a recurrence of the same tumor. It
also confirmed that the initial tumor was a HCCC with high-grade transformation.

PMCID: PMC3422586
PMID: 22350795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Nat Genet. 2012 Feb 12;44(3):323-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.1085.

Common variants near TARDBP and EGR2 are associated with susceptibility to Ewing 
sarcoma.

Postel-Vinay S(1), Véron AS, Tirode F, Pierron G, Reynaud S, Kovar H, Oberlin O, 
Lapouble E, Ballet S, Lucchesi C, Kontny U, González-Neira A, Picci P, Alonso J, 
Patino-Garcia A, de Paillerets BB, Laud K, Dina C, Froguel P, Clavel-Chapelon F, 
Doz F, Michon J, Chanock SJ, Thomas G, Cox DG, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U Génétique et Biologie des Cancers, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

Ewing sarcoma, a pediatric tumor characterized by EWSR1-ETS fusions, is
predominantly observed in populations of European ancestry. We performed a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 401 French individuals with Ewing
sarcoma, 684 unaffected French individuals and 3,668 unaffected individuals of
European descent and living in the United States. We identified candidate risk
loci at 1p36.22, 10q21 and 15q15. We replicated these loci in two independent
sets of cases and controls. Joint analysis identified associations with rs9430161
(P = 1.4 × 10(-20); odds ratio (OR) = 2.2) located 25 kb upstream of TARDBP,
rs224278 (P = 4.0 × 10(-17); OR = 1.7) located 5 kb upstream of EGR2 and, to a
lesser extent, rs4924410 at 15q15 (P = 6.6 × 10(-9); OR = 1.5). The major risk
haplotypes were less prevalent in Africans, suggesting that these loci could
contribute to geographical differences in Ewing sarcoma incidence. TARDBP shares 
structural similarities with EWSR1 and FUS, which encode RNA binding proteins,
and EGR2 is a target gene of EWSR1-ETS. Variants at these loci were associated
with expression levels of TARDBP, ADO (encoding cysteamine dioxygenase) and EGR2.

PMID: 22327514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Int J Cancer. 2012 Nov 1;131(9):2153-64. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27472. Epub 2012 Mar
29.

Small-molecule screen identifies modulators of EWS/FLI1 target gene expression
and cell survival in Ewing's sarcoma.

Boro A(1), Prêtre K, Rechfeld F, Thalhammer V, Oesch S, Wachtel M, Schäfer BW,
Niggli FK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital, Steinwiesstrasse 75, Zurich, Switzerland.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) is characterized by the presence of
chromosomal translocations leading to the expression of oncogenic transcription
factors such as, in the majority of cases, EWS/FLI1. Because of its key role in
Ewing's sarcoma development and maintenance, EWS/FLI1 represents an attractive
therapeutic target. Here, we characterize PHLDA1 as a novel direct target gene
whose expression is repressed by EWS/FLI1. Using this gene and additional
specific well-characterized target genes such as NROB1, NKX2.2 and CAV1, all
activated by EWS/FLI1, as a read-out system, we screened a small-molecule
compound library enriched for FDA-approved drugs that modulated the expression of
EWS/FLI1 target genes. Among a hit-list of nine well-known drugs such as
camptothecin, fenretinide, etoposide and doxorubicin, we also identified the
kinase inhibitor midostaurin (PKC412). Subsequent experiments demonstrated that
midostaurin is able to induce apoptosis in a panel of six Ewing's sarcoma cell
lines in vitro and can significantly suppress xenograft tumor growth in vivo.
These results suggest that midostaurin might be a novel drug that is active
against Ewing's cells, which might act by modulating the expression of EWS/FLI1
target genes.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22323082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Case Rep Med. 2012;2012:190581. doi: 10.1155/2012/190581. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney: two unusual
presentations of a rare tumor.

Castro EC(1), Parwani AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, A71 Scaife
Hall, 3550 Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Only few cases of primary renal Ewing's sarcoma have been reported in the
literature to date. We present here two cases of renal ES/PNET with an uncanny
presentation. The first case was discovered after the patient presented
clinically with irradiating flank pain, mimicking the pain related with kidney
stones. The second case had clinical presentation of pulmonary thromboembolism
after the patient was involved in an automobilist accident. The tumors were
mainly composed of small blue cells which by immunohistochemical were positive
for neural markers, and FISH revealed the translocation 22q12 for the EWSR1 gene.
The diagnosis of renal primitive neuroectodermal tumor/EWING tumor is very rare
and usually involves several different diagnostic techniques. The differential
diagnosis is usually broad with frequent overlapping features between the
entities. The cases presented in this paper illustrated the difficulties with
which routine anatomical pathologist is faced when dealing with rare renal poorly
differentiated neoplasm in adults.

PMCID: PMC3270556
PMID: 22312368  [PubMed]


382. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Oct;18(4):1101-6. Epub 2012 Feb 5.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of ovary in a young lady, confirmed with
molecular and cytogenetic results--a rare case report with a diagnostic and
therapeutic challenge.

Ostwal V, Rekhi B, Noronha V, Basak R, Desai SB, Maheshwari A, Prabhash K.

PMID: 22311546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2012 Feb;29(1):12-27. doi: 10.3109/08880018.2011.627582.

Ewing sarcoma: biology-based therapeutic perspectives.

Potratz J(1), Jürgens H, Craft A, Dirksen U.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's Hospital Münster,
Münster, Germany.

Ewing sarcoma, a rare malignancy of childhood and adolescence, has attracted wide
research interest. Tumor-specific chromosomal translocations generate aberrant
EWS-ETS transcription factors, which alter intracellular signaling networks
through gene and protein expression and are considered to be the primary
tumor-initiating event. Ewing sarcoma therefore offers insights into principle
molecular mechanisms of cancer development and maintenance. Still, despite
long-standing research, biology-based targeted treatment strategies for Ewing
sarcoma are only beginning to emerge. This article provides an overview of the
biological basis and putative targeted treatment options.

PMID: 22304007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 1;72(7):1608-13. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3648. Epub
2012 Jan 27.

PARP-1 inhibition as a targeted strategy to treat Ewing's sarcoma.

Brenner JC(1), Feng FY, Han S, Patel S, Goyal SV, Bou-Maroun LM, Liu M, Lonigro
R, Prensner JR, Tomlins SA, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) refers to aggressive malignancies which
frequently harbor characteristic EWS-FLI1 or EWS-ERG genomic fusions. Here, we
report that these fusion products interact with the DNA damage response protein
and transcriptional coregulator PARP-1. ESFT cells, primary tumor xenografts, and
tumor metastases were all highly sensitive to PARP1 inhibition. Addition of a
PARP1 inhibitor to the second-line chemotherapeutic agent temozolamide resulted
in complete responses of all treated tumors in an EWS-FLI1-driven mouse xenograft
model of ESFT. Mechanistic investigations revealed that DNA damage induced by
expression of EWS-FLI1 or EWS-ERG fusion genes was potentiated by PARP1
inhibition in ESFT cell lines. Notably, EWS-FLI1 fusion genes acted in a positive
feedback loop to maintain the expression of PARP1, which was required for
EWS-FLI-mediated transcription, thereby enforcing oncogene-dependent sensitivity 
to PARP-1 inhibition. Together, our findings offer a strong preclinical rationale
to target the EWS-FLI1:PARP1 intersection as a therapeutic strategy to improve
the treatment of ESFTs.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3319786
PMID: 22287547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012 Feb;93(2):e27-9. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.08.039.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the heart.

Nwaejike N(1), Rassl D, Ford H, Large SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

We present a case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the left atrium with
involvement of the coronary sinus. The initial presentation was of cardiac
tamponade resulting from the size of the tumor. There was no evidence of tumor
elsewhere, and after complete resection and without adjuvant chemotherapy the
patient is well at 2-year follow-up. There has been no evidence of tumor
recurrence. This is a rare reported case of resection of a cardiac primitive
neuroectodermal tumor without adjuvant chemotherapy. Other cases in the
literature have been treated by orthoptic transplantation and resection with
chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2012 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22269764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Cancer Res Ther. 2011 Oct-Dec;7(4):488-90. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.92010.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the uterus: a case report with an
unusual molecular pathology finding.

Kathuria K, Gupta S, Maheshwari A, Basak R, Desai S, Deodhar KK.

PMID: 22269417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Cancer Lett. 2012 Jul 1;320(1):14-22. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.01.018. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

Impairment of p53 acetylation by EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein in Ewing family
tumors.

Li Y(1), Li X, Fan G, Fukushi J, Matsumoto Y, Iwamoto Y, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, China
Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

The chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) yields the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene, 
which contributes to the development of Ewing Family Tumors (EFTs). Previous
studies have shown the ability of EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein to silence p53
activity. Here we demonstrate that the introduction of EWS-Fli1 significantly
inhibited p300-mediated acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 and depletion of EWS-Fli1
protein by small interfering RNAs (siRNA) in EFTs cells facilitated it in
response to DNA damage. Furthermore, the deacetylation of p53 by EWS-Fli1
suppressed its transcriptional activity and enhanced mdm2-mediated p53
degradation. On the other hand, immunoprecipitation study shows that N-terminal
region of EWS-Fli1 associated with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to forms a
complex with p53. Knockdown of HDAC1, but not HDAC2 or HDAC3 protein restored the
expression of p53 Lys-382 in EFTs cells. Overexpression of HDAC1 also
significantly inhibited p53 transcriptional activity. Pharmacologic inhibitor of 
HDAC, trichostatin A (TSA) promoted p53-p300 interaction and recruitment of p53
Lys-382 to promoter regions of its target genes p21 and Puma, consequently
inducing apoptosis and stabilizing the acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 together
with the upregulation of p21 and Puma, which were impaired in EFTs cells after
the knockdown of p53 expression. Our data indicate EWS-Fli1 might deacetylate p53
to inhibit its transcriptional function and protein stability via the recruitment
of HDAC1. These results might elucidate a novel molecular mechanism about the
abrogation of p53 pathway by EWS-Fli1 in EFTs pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22266186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Brain Res. 2012 Jun 26;1462:40-3. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.12.010. Epub 2011 
Dec 13.

FET proteins in frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Mackenzie IR(1), Neumann M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, 855 West 12th Avenue,
Vancouver, BC, Canada V5Z 1M9. ian.mackenzie@vch.ca

Mutations in the fused in sarcoma gene (FUS) cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS) with TDP-43-negative, FUS-positive pathology. FUS is also the pathological 
protein in most tau/TDP-43-negative subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration
(FTLD-FUS). FUS, together with Ewing's sarcoma protein (EWS) and TATA-binding
protein associated factor 15 (TAF15), make up the FET family of DNA/RNA binding
proteins that share functional homology and have the potential to interact. We
recently investigated the role of the other FET proteins in the
clinicopathological spectrum of FUS-opathies. In all FTLD-FUS subtypes,
FUS-positive pathology was also labeled for TAF15 and EWS and cells with
inclusions showed a reduction in the normal nuclear staining of all FET proteins.
In contrast, in cases of ALS-FUS, TAF15 and EWS remained localized to the nucleus
and did not label FUS-positive inclusions. Cell culture models replicated the
human diseases. These findings indicate that ALS-FUS and FTLD-FUS have different 
pathomechanisms and add TAF15 and EWS to the growing list of RNA-binding proteins
involved in neurodegeneration. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: 
RNA-Binding Proteins.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22261247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 1;72(5):1260-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2254. Epub
2012 Jan 12.

PRAS40 is a functionally critical target for EWS repression in Ewing sarcoma.

Huang L(1), Nakai Y, Kuwahara I, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Entomology Laboratory, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are highly aggressive and highly metastatic
tumors caused by a chromosomal fusion between the Ewing sarcoma protein (EWS)
with the transcription factor FLI-1. However, expression of the EWS/FLI-1
chimeric oncogene by itself is insufficient for carcinogenesis, suggesting that
additional events are required. Here, we report the identification of the Akt
substrate PRAS40 as an EWS target gene. EWS negatively regulates PRAS40
expression by binding the 3' untranslated region in PRAS40 mRNA. ESFT cell
proliferation was suppressed by treatment with an Akt inhibitor, and ESFT cell
proliferation and metastatic growth were suppressed by siRNA-mediated PRAS40
knockdown. Furthermore, PRAS40 knockdown was sufficient to reverse an increased
cell proliferation elicited by EWS knockdown. In support of a pathologic role for
PRAS40 elevation in EFST, we documented inverse protein levels of EWS and PRAS40 
in ESFT cells. Together, our findings suggest that PRAS40 promotes the
development of ESFT and might therefore represent a novel therapeutic target in
this aggressive disease.

PMID: 22241085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Cancers (Basel). 2012 Oct 18;4(4):1036-49. doi: 10.3390/cancers4041036.

Do non-genomically encoded fusion transcripts cause recurrent chromosomal
translocations?

Kowarz E(1), Dingermann T, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology/ZAFES/DCAL, Goethe-University of
Frankfurt, Biocenter, Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, D-60438 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
Rolf.Marschalek@em.uni-frankfurt.de.

We among others have recently demonstrated that normal cells produce "fusion
mRNAs". These fusion mRNAs do not derive from rearranged genomic loci, but rather
they are derived from "early-terminated transcripts" (ETTs). Premature
transcriptional termination takes place in intronic sequences that belong to
"breakpoint cluster regions". One important property of ETTs is that they exhibit
an unsaturated splice donor site. This results in: (1) splicing to "cryptic
exons" present in the final intron; (2) Splicing to another transcript of the
same gene (intragenic trans-splicing), resulting in "exon repetitions"; (3)
splicing to a transcript of another gene (intergenic trans-splicing), leading to 
"non-genomically encoded fusion transcripts" (NGEFTs). These NGEFTs bear the
potential risk to influence DNA repair processes, since they share identical
nucleotides with their DNA of origin, and thus, could be used as "guidance RNA"
for DNA repair processes. Here, we present experimental data about four other
genes. Three of them are associated with hemato-malignancies (ETV6, NUP98 and
RUNX1), while one is associated with solid tumors (EWSR1). Our results
demonstrate that all genes investigated so far (MLL, AF4, AF9, ENL, ELL, ETV6,
NUP98, RUNX1 and EWSR1) display ETTs and produce transpliced mRNA species,
indicating that this is a genuine property of translocating genes.

PMCID: PMC3712730
PMID: 24213499  [PubMed]


391. Int J Surg Pathol. 2012 Aug;20(4):401-6. doi: 10.1177/1066896911428073. Epub 2011
Dec 28.

Clear cell sarcoma of the ileum: report of a case and review of the literature.

D'Amico FE(1), Ruffolo C, Romeo S, Massani M, Dei Tos AP, Bassi N.

Author information: 
(1)II Department of Surgery (IV unit), Regional Hospital Ca' Foncello, Treviso,
Italy. fr.damico@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Clear cell sarcoma of the gastrointestinal tract (CCS-GI) is an
extremely rare and aggressive tumor, which often mimics other neoplastic
processes. Because of this feature, its real incidence may have been
underestimated, especially in the past when genetic tests were less available
than nowadays. To date, less then 30 cases have been described in the literature 
on the GI tract.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the case of a 69-year-old woman who presented with
active rectal bleeding. After a negative colonoscopy, the patient underwent a
video-capsule endoscopy. The latter detected an ileal mass that was surgically
resected. The microscopic appearance was consistent with a malignant mesenchymal 
neoplasm; immunohistochemistry was positive for S100 protein, CD56, and INI1.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed a translocation involving the EWSR1
(Ewing sarcoma 1) gene region. All these findings were consistent with a CCS-GI.
CONCLUSION: Herein we present a case of CCS-GI, discuss its clinical and
pathological features, and review the literature on the subject.

PMID: 22207412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Pathol Int. 2012 Jan;62(1):16-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2011.02739.x. Epub
2011 Nov 28.

Detection of specific genetic abnormalities by fluorescence in situ hybridization
in soft tissue tumors.

Miura Y(1), Keira Y, Ogino J, Nakanishi K, Noguchi H, Inoue T, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, Chuo-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

For the detection of chromosome translocations/chimeric genes and specific
genetic abnormalities in soft tissue tumors, we conducted fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis on 280 cases of soft tissue and other tumors using 
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections. The detection rate of the FISH 
split-signal was 84% (129/154 cases) for the translocation-associated soft tissue
tumors, such as Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor, synovial
sarcoma, alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, myxoid liposarcoma, clear cell sarcoma and so
forth. Positive split-signals from EWSR1, SS18 and FOXO1A probes were detected in
3% (2/64) of various histological types of carcinoma, lymphoma, melanoma,
meningioma and soft tissue tumors. In FISH using the INI1/CEP22 probe, the INI1
deletion signal was detected in 100% (9/9) of epithelioid sarcoma. In
well-differentiated and dedifferentiated liposarcomas, detection of MDM2
amplification signals in FISH using the MDM2/CEP12 probe were both as high as 85%
(11/13) and 100% (13/13), respectively. In other adipocytic and non-adipocytic
tumors requiring differentiation from these types, detection was only 13% (5/39),
and CEP12 polysomy was frequently detected. As these results demonstrate the high
sensitivity and specificity of FISH, we concluded FISH to be a useful
pathological diagnostic adjunct for definite and differential diagnosis of soft
tissue tumors.

© 2011 The Authors. Pathology International © 2011 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 22192800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Hum Pathol. 2012 May;43(5):764-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.08.004. Epub 2011
Dec 7.

EWSR1-ATF1 chimeric transcript in a myoepithelial tumor of soft tissue: a case
report.

Flucke U(1), Mentzel T, Verdijk MA, Slootweg PJ, Creytens DH, Suurmeijer AJ, Tops
BB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 6500 HB
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. u.flucke@pathol.umcn.nl

Soft tissue myoepithelial tumors, a recently defined entity, include benign and
malignant lesions showing a considerable morphological and immunohistochemical
heterogeneity. EWSR1 rearrangements are well recognized in this tumor type, and
some of the partner genes have been identified. Herein we describe a soft tissue 
myoepithelioma arising in the pelvis with an EWSR1-ATF1 fusion, therefore
extending the spectrum of partner genes of EWSR1. In addition, this case
indicates that there are overlapping genetic features of myoepithelial tumors,
clear cell sarcoma, angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, and hyalinizing clear-cell 
carcinoma of the salivary gland.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22154050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2012 Mar;10(1):63-5. doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2011.11.001.
Epub 2011 Dec 6.

Malignant small round blue cell tumor of the kidney without EWSR1 rearrangement: 
report of a case and review of the literature.

Osai WE(1), Demicco EG, Pagliaro LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The University of Texas, M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA.

PMID: 22153153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Gene. 2012 Feb 1;493(1):27-35. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.11.038. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

Characterization and expression analysis in the developing embryonic brain of the
porcine FET family: FUS, EWS, and TAF15.

Blechingberg J(1), Holm IE, Nielsen AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Denmark.

The FET protein family consists of FUS (TLS), EWS (EWSR1), and TAF15. The FET
proteins bind DNA and RNA and are involved in transcriptional regulation and RNA 
processing. Translocations involving the FET genes have been identified in human 
sarcomas, and mutations in the FUS and TAF15 genes are associated with
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. We here describe the characterization of the
porcine FET proteins and an expression analysis during embryonic brain
development. The FET proteins are well conserved between pig and human. FET
protein mutations associated with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis affect
evolutionary conserved amino acids. In cultured cells the porcine FET proteins
have a nuclear localization with some specific cytoplasmic aggregation of TAF15
in neuronal progenitor cells. Immunohistochemical analyses supported a
predominant nuclear localization, but also faint cytoplasmic localization. The
FET proteins have similar expression profiles throughout the development of the
embryonic porcine brain and most cell types appeared positive for expression.
Quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed that the FET mRNA expression decreased during
embryonic development of hippocampus and for FUS and EWS during embryonic
development of cortex. FET mRNA expression was relatively constant in brain stem,
basal ganglia, and cerebellum. Overall the FET protein localization and mRNA and 
protein expression analyses were concordant with previous analysis from the human
brain. The presented results indicate that the porcine brain could be an
alternative model for the future examination of the normal functions as well as
neurological disease associated functions of the FET proteins.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22143032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2011 Dec;20(4):218-24. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e3182107eb9.

DDIT3 gene break-apart as a molecular marker for diagnosis of myxoid
liposarcoma--assay validation and clinical experience.

Narendra S(1), Valente A, Tull J, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, SUNY Upstate University, Syracuse, NY, USA.

Myxoid liposarcoma with or without a round cell component is the most common
subtype of liposarcoma. The diagnosis of myxoid liposarcoma could be challenging 
with histology, as a variety of soft tissue tumors with myxoid change might mimic
myxoid liposarcoma, especially on small biopsy tissues. Chromosomal
translocations of t(12,16) (q13;p11) and t(12;22) (q13;q12), rendering gene
fusions of DDIT3 (previously CHOP) with FUS and EWSR1, have been found to be
characteristic of myxoid liposarcoma, and were identifiable in more than 95%
cases. These genetic alterations, therefore, are ideal as molecular markers to
facilitate the diagnosis of this type of tumor. DDIT3 (12q13) dual-color
break-apart rearrangement probe for fluorescence in situ hybridization has been
commercially available. However, its consistency with DDIT3-associated gene
fusion and its clinical use, including sensitivity and specificity, have not been
adequately evaluated. In this study, we assessed the locus specificity of the
probe on metaphase, and then tested it on 8 cases of myxoid liposarcoma, 12 cases
of other sarcomas, and 18 cases of tumors with myxoid differentiation. All 8
myxoid liposarcomas showed DDIT3 gene break-apart, whereas all 12 other sarcomas 
were negative. All the cases with DDIT3 break-apart also showed FUS-DDIT3 fusion 
by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, with 100% consistency. In
addition, the FISH assay has been clinically applied on 18 myxoid tumors with
promising outcome. In conclusion, FISH with DDIT3 break-apart probe is a highly
sensitive and specific assay for detection of DDIT3-associated gene fusions, and 
therefore is a valuable adjunct in diagnosis or differential diagnosis of myxoid 
liposarcoma.

PMID: 22089349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Genome Res. 2012 Feb;22(2):259-70. doi: 10.1101/gr.125666.111. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

Tumor-specific retargeting of an oncogenic transcription factor chimera results
in dysregulation of chromatin and transcription.

Patel M(1), Simon JM, Iglesia MD, Wu SB, McFadden AW, Lieb JD, Davis IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Chromosomal translocations involving transcription factor genes have been
identified in an increasingly wide range of cancers. Some translocations can
create a protein "chimera" that is composed of parts from different proteins. How
such chimeras cause cancer, and why they cause cancer in some cell types but not 
others, is not understood. One such chimera is EWS-FLI, the most frequently
occurring translocation in Ewing Sarcoma, a malignant bone and soft tissue tumor 
of children and young adults. Using EWS-FLI and its parental transcription
factor, FLI1, we created a unique experimental system to address questions
regarding the genomic mechanisms by which chimeric transcription factors cause
cancer. We found that in tumor cells, EWS-FLI targets regions of the genome
distinct from FLI1, despite identical DNA-binding domains. In primary endothelial
cells, however, EWS-FLI and FLI1 demonstrate similar targeting. To understand
this mistargeting, we examined chromatin organization. Regions targeted by
EWS-FLI are normally repressed and nucleosomal in primary endothelial cells. In
tumor cells, however, bound regions are nucleosome depleted and harbor the
chromatin signature of enhancers. We next demonstrated that through chimerism,
EWS-FLI acquired the ability to alter chromatin. Expression of EWS-FLI results in
nucleosome depletion at targeted sites, whereas silencing of EWS-FLI in tumor
cells restored nucleosome occupancy. Thus, the EWS-FLI chimera acquired
chromatin-altering activity, leading to mistargeting, chromatin disruption, and
ultimately, transcriptional dysregulation.

PMCID: PMC3266033
PMID: 22086061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Nov 13;18(12):1428-31. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2163.

RNA targets of wild-type and mutant FET family proteins.

Hoell JI(1), Larsson E, Runge S, Nusbaum JD, Duggimpudi S, Farazi TA, Hafner M,
Borkhardt A, Sander C, Tuschl T.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of RNA Molecular Biology, The
Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA.

FUS, EWSR1 and TAF15, constituting the FET protein family, are abundant, highly
conserved RNA-binding proteins with important roles in oncogenesis and neuronal
disease, yet their RNA targets and recognition elements are unknown. Using
PAR-CLIP, we defined global RNA targets for all human FET proteins and two
ALS-causing human FUS mutants. FET members showed similar binding profiles,
whereas FUS mutants showed a drastically altered binding pattern, consistent with
changes in subcellular localization.

PMCID: PMC3230689
PMID: 22081015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Mar;51(3):207-18. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20945. Epub
2011 Nov 10.

High prevalence of CIC fusion with double-homeobox (DUX4) transcription factors
in EWSR1-negative undifferentiated small blue round cell sarcomas.

Italiano A(1), Sung YS, Zhang L, Singer S, Maki RG, Coindre JM, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065, USA.

Primitive round cell sarcomas of childhood and young adults have been problematic
to diagnose and classify. Our goal was to investigate the pathologic and
molecular characteristics of small blue round cell tumors (SBRCT) that remained
unclassified after exhaustive immunohistochemistry and molecular screening to
exclude known sarcoma-related translocations. As rare examples of EWSR1-negative 
SBRCT have been shown to carry rearrangements for FUS and CIC genes, we undertook
a systematic screening for these two genes. CIC rearrangements by FISH were
detected in 15/22 (68%), while none showed FUS abnormalities. RACE, RT-PCR,
and/or long-range DNA PCR performed in two cases with frozen material showed that
CIC was fused to copies of the DUX4 gene on either 4q35 or 10q26.3. Subsequent
FISH analysis confirmed fused signals of CIC with either 4q35 or 10q26.3 region
in six cases each. Tumors positive for CIC-DUX4 fusion occurred mainly in male
young adult patients (median age: 29 years), with the extremities being the most 
frequent location. Microscopically, tumors displayed a primitive, round to oval
cell morphology with prominent nucleoli, high mitotic count, and areas of
necrosis. O13 expression was variable, being either diffuse or patchy and tumors 
mostly lacked other markers of differentiation. Although CIC-DUX4 resulting in a 
t(4;19) translocation has been previously described in primitive sarcomas, this
is the first report implicating the related DUX4 on 10q26 in oncogenesis. These
results suggest the possibility of a newly defined subgroup of primitive round
cell sarcomas characterized by CIC rearrangements, distinct from Ewing sarcoma
family of tumors.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3404826
PMID: 22072439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Pathol Res Pract. 2011 Dec 15;207(12):780-5. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.09.004. Epub
2011 Nov 3.

Primary intraosseous myoepithelioma arising in the iliac bone and displaying
trisomies of 11, 15, 17 with del (16q) and del (22q11)--A rare case report with
review of literature.

Rekhi B(1), Amare P, Gulia A, Baisane C, Patil A, Agarwal S, Puri A, Jambhekar
NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Dr. E.B. Road, Parel, Mumbai 
400012, India. rekhi.bharat@gmail.com

Mixed tumors are uncommonly observed in the musculoskeletal system, where they
form a common spectrum with a myoepithelioma and a parachordoma. Herein, we
present a rare case of a mixed tumor/myoepithelioma arising in the iliac bone of 
a young adult male who presented with swelling in his right hip. Radiological
imaging disclosed a large, intraosseous, lytic, heterogenous mass with a soft
tissue component. Biopsy and subsequent tumor resection showed an 18cm sized
tumor involving the iliac bone and soft tissues and comprising polygonal and
spindly cells, arranged in cords and aggregates, embedded in a myxohyaline stroma
with osteochondroid differentiation. Tumor cells exhibited mild nuclear
variation, rare mitotic figures, focal cytoplasmic clearing, and prominent
squamous differentiation. On immunohistochemistry (IHC), tumor cells were
diffusely positive for S100-P, EMA, CK5/6, p63, GFAP, calponin, and focally
positive for CK/MNF116, but negative for Brachyury/T. Diagnosis of a
myoepithelioma/mixed tumor was offered. Further, cytogenetic analysis revealed
lack of EWSR1 gene rearrangement and showed clonal trisomies of 11, 15, 17 with
del (16q) and del (22q11). The present case is a rare documentation of a
myoepithelioma in the appendicular bones and the second such case identified in
the iliac bone. IHC and cytogenetic findings supported a myoepithelial cell
origin, and reinforced its relationship with a parachordoma and its distinction
from mixed salivary gland tumors, a chordoma, and an extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma that form its differential diagnoses.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22054860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Feb;51(2):111-26. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20933. Epub
2011 Nov 1.

Receptor tyrosine kinase pathway analysis sheds light on similarities between
clear-cell sarcoma and metastatic melanoma.

Negri T(1), Brich S, Conca E, Bozzi F, Orsenigo M, Stacchiotti S, Alberghini M,
Mauro V, Gronchi A, Dusio GF, Pelosi G, Picci P, Casali PG, Pierotti MA, Pilotti 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.

To highlight possible similarities and differences in receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK) and downstream signalling activation profiles between clear-cell sarcomas
(CCS) and metastatic melanomas (MM), frozen, and paired-matched fixed samples of 
six CCS with EWSR1 rearrangement (EWSR1+), five CCS without EWSR1 rearrangement
(EWSR1-), and seven MM were investigated by means of biochemical,
immunohistochemical, FISH, molecular analyses, and immunofluorescence confocal
microscopy. Fixed samples of a further 10 CCS and 14 MM were investigated by
means of sequencing for BRAF, NRAS, and KRAS mutations and FISH analyses for the 
gain of chromosomes 22 and 8. RTK analysis of all CCS/MM samples showed
activation of short-form (sf) recepteur d'origine nantais (RON) RTK and of
PDGFRB, MET, and HER3. Analysis of downstream signaling revealed consistent
phosphorylation patterns of PI3K/AKT, RSK, and the mTOR targets S6 and 4EBP1.
Analysis of frozen and fixed material from 21 CCS and 21 MM showed the presence
of the V600E BRAF mutation in 2/12 EWSR1+ and 3/9 EWSR1- CCS and 9/21 MM and
demonstrated a significant (P < 0.001) correlation between the gain of
chromosomes 22 and 8 and EWSR1- CCS. Our results show that BRAF mutation can also
be present in CCS and support the proposed aberration of chromosomes 22 and 8 as 
a possibly useful nonrandom hallmark of EWSR1- CCS. Besides, they broaden the
spectrum of the similarities of RTK pathway activation between CCS and MM, thus
suggesting that new drugs found to be active in melanoma and RON inhibitors could
have a role in CCS treatment. © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22045652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Diagn Cytopathol. 2012 Aug;40 Suppl 2:E86-93. doi: 10.1002/dc.21830. Epub 2011
Nov 1.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma a series of five cytologic cases with literature
review and emphasis on diagnostic pitfalls.

Qian X(1), Hornick JL, Cibas ES, Dal Cin P, Domanski HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. xqian@partners.org

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is an uncommon and mostly indolent soft
tissue neoplasm, which usually occurs in the subcutaneous tissue of the
extremities in children and young adults. Although the histologic features of AFH
are well established, reports of its cytomorphology are very limited. This report
characterizes the cytomorphologic features of five cases of AFH, with correlation
to clinical, histology, and cytogenetic findings. Smears of fine needle
aspiration (FNA; four cases) and intraoperative scrape (one case) were reviewed
from five patients with a histologically confirmed diagnosis of AFH. A review of 
six previously reported AFH cases with cytomorphology was also performed. The
tumor presented as a cystic, deep dermal mass in three pediatric cases and as a
solid, deeply seated mass in two adults. The cytomorphologic features are mostly 
nondistinctive and include cellular smears with ovoid to spindled histiocytoid
cells that may be isolated or in clusters. Some of these cells are atypical and
others contain hemosiderin. Large cellular clusters with a capillary structure
and a whorled arrangement of tumor cells can be appreciated in some cases. There 
is always a bloody background, but a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate is uncommon.
The presences of EWSR1 rearrangement in one case and three copies of FUS gene in 
another case were detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Diagnosing AFH 
by FNA cytology alone can be challenging because of its rarity and usually
nonspecific cytologic findings. Clinical correlation and ancillary studies are
essential to reach a specific diagnosis of AFH in small needle biopsies.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 22045622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Feb;51(2):140-8. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20938. Epub 2011
Oct 28.

A subset of cutaneous and soft tissue mixed tumors are genetically linked to
their salivary gland counterpart.

Bahrami A(1), Dalton JD, Krane JF, Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
armita.bahrami@stjude.org

Neoplasms morphologically similar to mixed tumors and myoepitheliomas of the
salivary glands, under the broad concept of myoepithelial neoplasia, have
recently been defined in the skin and soft tissue; however, to date, no data have
supported a shared genetic background with their salivary gland counterpart. From
a large body of research, it has been well established that rearrangement of
pleomorphic adenoma gene 1 (PLAG1) leads to aberrant expression of its protein
and is pathogenically relevant in the development of salivary mixed tumors. On
the other hand, in soft tissue lesions, compelling evidence suggests that EWSR1
is involved in a significant subset. To examine the hypothesis that there is a
genetic link between these histologically similar tumors at different sites, we
randomly selected 20 benign myoepitheliomas/mixed tumors of skin and soft tissue 
(10 cases each). Nineteen cases could be immunostained for PLAG1, of which 11
cases showed distinct nuclear staining with moderate or strong intensity in a
significant number of cells. Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization for
PLAG1 was successfully performed in 11 cases (seven in skin and four in soft
tissue) and was positive for gene rearrangement in eight cases (five in skin and 
three in soft tissue). All PLAG1-rearranged tumors, except one, had clear-cut
ductal structures and were immunoreactive for PLAG1. In our series, tumors with
PLAG1 alteration shared a common morphologic phenotype characterized by prominent
tubuloductal differentiation, suggesting that myoepithelial neoplasms with
genuine salivary gland-like morphology, so-called soft tissue/cutaneous mixed
tumors, are genetically related to their salivary gland counterpart.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3233652
PMID: 22038920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Apr;18(2):545-8. doi: 10.1007/s12253-011-9468-6. Epub 2011
Oct 26.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: pleomorphic variant associated with
multiplication of EWSR1-CREB1 fusion gene.

Tornóczky T(1), Bogner B, Krausz T, Ottóffy G, Szuhai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, II. Diagnostic Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine,
Clinical Center, Pécs University, Rákóczi út 2., 7623, Pécs, Hungary.
ttamas64@hotmail.com

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue tumor which
exceptionally occurs in visceral organs or bones. Histologically this is a bland,
monomorphic tumor and only occasionally shows pleomorphism. Vast majority of the 
soft tissue cases share the same translocation and the resulting EWSR1-CREB1 gene
fusion as background pathogenetic alteration. Here we report a 10-year-old boy
with subcutaneous tumor of the right shoulder. Histological, immunohistochemical 
and FISH analyses of the case revealed pleomorphic phenotype, characteristic
immunophenotype and multiplication of the EWSR1-CREB1 fusion gene in the nuclei
of the tumor cells. The possible explanation of the fusion gene multiplication,
its relation to the morphology and the clinical outcome are discussed in the
context of the published literature.

PMID: 22038502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26060. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026060. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

R1507, an anti-insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) antibody, and
EWS/FLI-1 siRNA in Ewing's sarcoma: convergence at the IGF/IGFR/Akt axis.

Huang HJ(1), Angelo LS, Rodon J, Sun M, Kuenkele KP, Parsons HA, Trent JC,
Kurzrock R.

Author information: 
(1)Phase I Program, Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of
America.

A subset of patients with Ewing's sarcoma responds to anti-insulin-like growth
factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) antibodies. Mechanisms of sensitivity and resistance
are unknown. We investigated whether an anti-IGF-1R antibody acts via a pathway
that could also be suppressed by small interfering (si) RNA against the EWS/FLI-1
fusion protein, the hallmark of Ewing's sarcoma. The growth of two Ewing's
sarcoma cell lines (TC-32 and TC-71) was inhibited by the fully human anti-IGF-1R
antibody, R1507 (clonogenic and MTT assays). TC-32 and TC-71 cells express high
levels of IGF-2, while RD-ES and A4573 Ewing's cell lines, which were less
responsive to R1507 in our assays, express low or undetectable IGF-2,
respectively. TC-71 cells also expressed high levels of IGF-1R, and R1507
decreased steady-state levels of this receptor by internalization/degradation, an
effect which was associated with a decrease in p-IGF-1R, p-IRS-1, and p-Akt.
EWS/FLI-1 siRNA also decreased p-Akt, due to its ability to increase IGF-BP3
levels and subsequently decrease IGF-1 and IGF-2 levels, thus inhibiting
signaling through p-IGF-1R. This inhibition correlated with growth suppression
and apoptosis. The attenuation of Akt activation was confirmed in TC-71 and
HEK-293 (human embryonic kidney) cells by transfecting them with IGF-1R siRNA. We
conclude that antibodies and siRNA to IGF-1R, as well as siRNA to EWS/FLI-1, act 
via intersecting IGF/IGF-1R signals that suppress a common point in this pathway,
namely the phosphorylation of Akt.

PMCID: PMC3191161
PMID: 22022506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cancer. 2012 Apr 15;118(8):2106-16. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26488. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

CAPER-a alternative splicing regulates the expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor165 in Ewing sarcoma cells.

Huang G(1), Zhou Z, Wang H, Kleinerman ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: TC-71 Ewing sarcoma cells overexpress vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) with a shift from the 189 to the 165 isoform.
METHODS: The effect of CAPER-a on the expression of the VEGF isoforms, tumor
growth, and vessel density was analyzed after transfection of TC-71 cells with
CAPER-a cDNA or siRNA.
RESULTS: CAPER-a correlated inversely with the VEGF(165) /VEGF(189) mRNA ratio.
Up-regulation of CAPER-a resulted in decreased tumor growth, tumor vessel
density, and chemotactic activity of the cell's supernatant. CAPER-a expression
was regulated by EWS/FLI-1 through a protein-protein interaction.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased VEGF(165) expression is secondary to the down-regulation
of CAPER-a by EWS/FLI-1. CAPER-a mediates alternative splicing and controls the
shift from VEGF(189) to VEGF(165) .

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3262942
PMID: 22009261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Neuropathology. 2012 Jun;32(3):293-300. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2011.01258.x.
Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Primary intracranial Ewing sarcoma with an unusually aggressive course: a case
report and review of the literature.

Tanboon J(1), Sitthinamsuwan B, Paruang T, Marrano P, Thorner PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
jtanboon@gmail.com

The occurrence of Ewing sarcoma-peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor as a
primary intracranial tumor is very rare, with only 29 cases reported in the
literature, 19 of which have included molecular studies. We present the clinical,
radiologic and pathologic findings of an intracranial Ewing sarcoma in a
22-year-old woman arising from the dura over the right frontal convexity. The
patient underwent craniotomy with gross total excision of the tumor. The tumor
showed atypical histology and the diagnosis was confirmed by detection of a
rearrangement of the EWSR1 gene by fluorescent in situ hybridization and
identification of the diagnostic t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Additional features were detected in
this tumor that are known to be associated with an unfavorable prognosis,
including loss of p16 expression and gains of chromosomes 1q and 12. The patient 
experienced the most rapid downhill course reported to date for intracranial
Ewing sarcoma, developing multiple extracranial metastases at 2 months and dying 
6 months after the initial operation.

© 2011 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 22007764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Int J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jun;20(3):305-10. doi: 10.1177/1066896911424898. Epub
2011 Oct 17.

Primary vaginal Ewing sarcoma: case report and review of the literature.

Bancalari E(1), de Álava E, Tardío JC.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitario de Fuenlabrada,
Madrid, Spain. ebancalari.hflr@salud.madrid.org

Ewing sarcoma (ES) and primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) are round-cell
sarcomas with varying degrees of neuroectodermal differentiation; they are
considered members of the same family of tumors based on their common genetic
profile. ES/PNET are very infrequent in the female genital tract, the vagina
being the rarest gynecological location, with 7 cases reported to date. The
authors present a case of vaginal ES/PNET with typical morphological and
immunohistochemical features. EWS gene rearrangement was demonstrated by
fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis. Of the 7 previously reported cases,
only 2 have molecular confirmation. The age at presentation for vaginal ES/PNET
is slightly higher than that for these neoplasms in bone and soft tissues, with
only 1 reported patient younger than 30 years. The outcome seems to be similar to
that of other superficially sited ES/PNET and more favorable than for those
observed in the more typical locations. However, the currently available data are
limited, and therefore, a larger number of cases is necessary to draw any firm
conclusions.

PMID: 22007080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Nov;35(11):1722-32. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318227e4d2.

Primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma with EWSR1-CREB1 fusion: a new tumor entity.

Thway K(1), Nicholson AG, Lawson K, Gonzalez D, Rice A, Balzer B, Swansbury J,
Min T, Thompson L, Adu-Poku K, Campbell A, Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.
khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk

We present clinicopathologic data on 10 pulmonary myxoid sarcomas, which are
defined by distinctive histomorphologic features and characterized by a recurrent
fusion gene, that appear to represent a distinct tumor entity at this site. The
patients [7 female, 3 male; aged 27 to 67 y (mean, 45 y)] presented with local or
systemic symptoms (n=5), symptoms from cerebral metastasis (1), or incidentally
(2). Follow-up of 6 patients showed that 1 with brain metastasis died shortly
after primary tumor resection, 1 developed a renal metastasis but is alive and
well, and 4 are disease free after 1 to 15 years. All tumors involved pulmonary
parenchyma, with a predominant endobronchial component in 8 and ranged from 1.5
to 4 cm. Microscopically, they were lobulated and composed of cords of polygonal,
spindle, or stellate cells within myxoid stroma, morphologically reminiscent of
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Four cases showed no or minimal atypia, 6
showed focal pleomorphism, and 5 had necrosis. Mitotic indices varied, with most 
tumors not exceeding 5/10 high-power fields. Tumors were immunoreactive for only 
vimentin and weakly focal for epithelial membrane antigen. Of 9 tumors, 7 were
shown to harbor a specific EWSR1-CREB1 fusion by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction and direct sequencing, with 7 of 10 showing EWSR1 rearrangement by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. This gene fusion has been described
previously in 2 histologically and behaviorally different sarcomas: clear cell
sarcoma-like tumors of the gastrointestinal tract and angiomatoid fibrous
histiocytomas; however, this is a novel finding in tumors with the morphology we 
describe and that occur in the pulmonary region.

PMID: 21997693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Dec;50(12):1054-62. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20923. Epub
2011 Aug 24.

A novel EWSR1-CREB3L1 fusion transcript in a case of small cell osteosarcoma.

Debelenko LV(1), McGregor LM, Shivakumar BR, Dorfman HD, Raimondi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
ldebelen@med.wayne.edu.

Cellular morphology of small cell osteosarcoma, an aggressive variant of
osteosarcoma, is similar to Ewing sarcoma, but its molecular pathogenesis is
largely unknown. We report the case of a 12-year-old girl with multifocal small
cell osteosarcoma positive for the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) gene
rearrangement by interphase fluorescent in situ hybridization and negative for
EWSR1-FLI1, EWSR1-ERG, and EWSR1-WT1 fusion transcripts by reverse transcriptase 
PCR. Rapid amplification of cDNA ends revealed exon 6 of the cAMP-responsive
element binding protein 3-like 1 gene (CREB3L1, also known as "OASIS,"
NM_52854.2) fused in-frame to the EWSR1 exon 11, consistent with the
EWSR1-CREB3L1 fusion transcript expressed in tumor tissue. The corresponding
chimeric gene was confirmed by amplification and subsequent sequencing of the
genomic breakpoint between introns 11 and 5 of EWSR1 and CREB3L1, respectively.
An ~70 kDa product in the tumor tissue lysate reacted with the CREB3L1
carboxyterminal antibody, consistent with a 656-amino acid predicted chimeric
protein. Immunohistochemistry with the same antibody showed signal translocation 
from the physiologic perinuclear compartment observed in glia and unrelated
osteoblasts to nuclei of tumor cells, consistent with the likely function of
EWSR1-CREB3L1 as a transcriptional regulator predicted by its structure. This is 
the first report of a fusion transcript in osteogenic sarcoma; it demonstrates a 
relation between molecular mechanisms of small cell osteogenic and Ewing
sarcomas. The 3'-end partner and the inferred structure of EWSR1-CREB3L1,
however, are different from those of Ewing sarcoma, suggesting different targets 
of the new oncogene.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21987447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Dis Model Mech. 2012 Jan;5(1):95-106. doi: 10.1242/dmm.007401. Epub 2011 Oct 6.

A zebrafish transgenic model of Ewing's sarcoma reveals conserved mediators of
EWS-FLI1 tumorigenesis.

Leacock SW(1), Basse AN, Chandler GL, Kirk AM, Rakheja D, Amatruda JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390-8534, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma, a malignant bone tumor of children and young adults, is a member
of the small-round-blue-cell tumor family. Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs),
which include peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs), are
characterized by chromosomal translocations that generate fusions between the EWS
gene and ETS-family transcription factors, most commonly FLI1. The EWS-FLI1
fusion oncoprotein represents an attractive therapeutic target for treatment of
Ewing's sarcoma. The cell of origin of ESFT and the molecular mechanisms by which
EWS-FLI1 mediates tumorigenesis remain unknown, and few animal models of Ewing's 
sarcoma exist. Here, we report the use of zebrafish as a vertebrate model of
EWS-FLI1 function and tumorigenesis. Mosaic expression of the human EWS-FLI1
fusion protein in zebrafish caused the development of tumors with histology
strongly resembling that of human Ewing's sarcoma. The incidence of tumors
increased in a p53 mutant background, suggesting that the p53 pathway suppresses 
EWS-FLI1-driven tumorigenesis. Gene expression profiling of the zebrafish tumors 
defined a set of genes that might be regulated by EWS-FLI1, including the
zebrafish ortholog of a crucial EWS-FLI1 target gene in humans. Stable zebrafish 
transgenic lines expressing EWS-FLI1 under the control of the heat-shock promoter
exhibit altered embryonic development and defective convergence and extension,
suggesting that EWS-FLI1 interacts with conserved developmental pathways. These
results indicate that functional targets of EWS-FLI1 that mediate tumorigenesis
are conserved from zebrafish to human and provide a novel context in which to
study the function of this fusion oncogene.

PMCID: PMC3255547
PMID: 21979944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Cancer Genet. 2011 Aug;204(8):423-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.05.006.

Molecular characterization of an EWSR1-POU5F1 fusion associated with a t(6;22) in
an undifferentiated soft tissue sarcoma.

Deng FM(1), Galvan K, de la Roza G, Zhang S, Souid AK, Stein CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York, Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, NY, USA.

We report a soft tissue sarcoma from the thigh with morphologic features
resembling Ewing sarcoma, clear cell sarcoma, and myoepithelial tumor of soft
tissue. In addition, the genetic and immunohistochemical findings do not
correspond to any established pattern, so the tumor does not clearly fit into any
one classification. The karyotype analysis revealed a rare chromosomal
rearrangement, t(6;22)(p22;q12), that previously has been reported in bone and
epithelial tumors. Molecular studies confirmed the presence of an EWSR1-POU5F1
fusion creating a chimeric gene with the N-terminal transcriptional activation
domain of EWSR1 and the C-terminal POU DNA binding domain of POU5F1. This report 
is novel in that to our knowledge, it is the first complete molecular
characterization of an EWSR1-POU5F1 fusion in a soft tissue sarcoma. Evaluation
of existing data on the known EWSR1-POU5F1 tumors suggests that the fusion gene
functions in a wide variety of cell types and may modify the differentiation
state of cells, resulting in susceptibility to tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21962892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Annu Rev Pathol. 2012;7:145-59. doi: 10.1146/annurev-pathol-011110-130237. Epub
2011 Sep 19.

Molecular pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma: new therapeutic and transcriptional
targets.

Lessnick SL(1), Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Children's Cancer Research at Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department
of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City,
Utah 84112, USA. stephen.lessnick@hci.utah.edu

Approximately one-third of sarcomas contain specific translocations. Ewing
sarcoma is the prototypical member of this group of sarcomas; it was the first to
be recognized pathologically as a singular entity and to have its signature
translocation defined cytogenetically, which led to the identification of its key
driver alteration, the EWS-FLI1 gene fusion that encodes this aberrant, chimeric 
transcription factor. We review recent progress in selected areas of Ewing
sarcoma research, including the application of genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses, to provide a comprehensive view of the EWS-FLI1
target gene repertoire, the identification of EWS-FLI1 target genes that may also
point to therapeutically targetable pathways, and data from model systems as they
relate to the elusive cell of origin of Ewing sarcoma and its possible
similarities to mesenchymal stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3555146
PMID: 21942527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cell Cycle. 2011 Oct 1;10(19):3397-408. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.19.17734. Epub 2011
Oct 1.

Novel peptide binds EWS-FLI1 and reduces the oncogenic potential in Ewing tumors.

Erkizan HV(1), Scher LJ, Gamble SE, Barber-Rotenberg JS, Sajwan KP, Üren A,
Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC,
USA.

Ewing tumor is driven by the oncogenic EWS-FLI1 fusion protein that functions as 
an aberrant transcription factor. The identification of EWS-FLI1 protein partners
is essential to enhance its vulnerability as a therapeutic target. We utilized
phage display library screening against recombinant EWS-FLI1 protein. We
identified 27 unique Ewing sarcoma binding peptides. The cytotoxicity evaluation 
of these peptides with in EWS-FLI1 containing cell lines yielded one potent
peptide called ESAP1 (TMRGKKKRTRAN). ESAP1 binds EWS-FLI1 with 0.202 micromolar
affinity as measured in surface plasmon resonance. The minimal interaction region
of ESAP1 is characterized and found that the lysine residues are critical for
cellular cytotoxicity. ESAP1 reduces the transcriptional activity of EWS-FLI1 as 
well as disrupts cell cycle kinetics in Ewing Tumor cells. These findings provide
both a novel experimental probe and a potential therapeutic scaffold for Ewing
Tumor.

© 2011 Landes Bioscience

PMCID: PMC3233630
PMID: 21926473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Am J Dermatopathol. 2011 Oct;33(7):733-5. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e31820bf95a.

Extraosseal Ewing sarcoma as a rare cause of the blueberry muffin baby syndrome: 
a case report and the review of the literature.

Krenova Z(1), Kren L, Blatny J, Falk M, Kazakov DV, Grossmann P, Shimada H,
Sterba J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech
Republic. zkrenova@fnbrno.cz

The blueberry muffin baby syndrome can be caused by a variety of entities, both
neoplastic and nonneoplastic. We present a rare cause of this syndrome:
congenital extraosseal Ewing sarcoma. The patient was a blueberry muffin baby
with a retroperitoneal tumor, whose cells were negative for neuronal markers and 
CD-99 immunohistochemically but were positive for a breakpoint in EWSR1 gene.
This tumor could be one of the most primitive/undifferentiated examples in the
Ewing/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor family.

PMID: 21915035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Int J Clin Oncol. 2012 Aug;17(4):399-406. doi: 10.1007/s10147-011-0311-6. Epub
2011 Sep 3.

Extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma of the pancreas.

Bose P(1), Murugan P, Gillies E, Holter JL.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. pbose@mcvh-vcu.edu

The Ewing's family of tumors (EFT) comprises a molecularly defined group of
"small round blue cell tumors", consisting of Ewing's sarcoma of bone (ESB),
extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma (EES), peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor
(pPNET), and Askin's tumor. Characteristic translocations that disrupt the EWSR1 
gene located at 22q12 create novel fusion genes that are central to the
pathogenesis. The EFT also shares certain clinical characteristics, such as a
peak incidence during the teenage years, a tendency to spread rapidly, and
responsiveness to the same chemotherapeutic regimens and radiation therapy.
Nearly all patients have occult disseminated disease at diagnosis; hence,
chemotherapy is routinely used. Improvements in multimodality treatment have had 
a dramatic impact on outcomes. EES/pPNET has been reported in a variety of sites,
including the pancreas, though this is extremely rare. We describe a case of
pancreatic EES/pPNET in a 35-year-old woman and provide a brief review of the
relevant literature.

PMID: 21892669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Cancer Genet. 2011 Jul;204(7):351-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.07.008.

Promiscuous partnerships in Ewing's sarcoma.

Sankar S(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a highly aggressive bone and soft tissue tumor of children and
young adults. At the molecular genetic level Ewing's sarcoma is characterized by 
a balanced reciprocal translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), which encodes an
oncogenic fusion protein and transcription factor EWS/FLI. This tumor-specific
chimeric fusion retains the amino terminus of EWS, a member of the TET
(TLS/EWS/TAF15) family of RNA-binding proteins, and the carboxy terminus of FLI, 
a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. In addition to EWS/FLI,
variant translocation fusions belonging to the TET/ETS family have been
identified in Ewing's sarcoma. These studies solidified the importance of TET/ETS
fusions in the pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma and have since been used as
diagnostic markers for the disease. EWS fusions with non-ETS transcription factor
family members have been described in sarcomas that are clearly distinct
from Ewing's sarcoma. However, in recent years there have been reports of rare
fusions in "Ewing's-like tumors" that harbor the amino-terminus of EWS fused to
the carboxy-terminal DNA or chromatin-interacting domains contributed by non-ETS 
proteins. This review aims to summarize the growing list of fusion oncogenes that
characterize Ewing's sarcoma and Ewing's-like tumors and highlights important
questions that need to be answered to further support the existing concept that
Ewing's sarcoma is strictly a "TET/ETS" fusion-driven malignancy. Understanding
the molecular mechanisms of action of the various different fusion oncogenes will
provide better insights into the biology underlying this rare but important solid
tumor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3164520
PMID: 21872822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Brain. 2011 Sep;134(Pt 9):2595-609. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr201. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

FET proteins TAF15 and EWS are selective markers that distinguish FTLD with FUS
pathology from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with FUS mutations.

Neumann M(1), Bentmann E, Dormann D, Jawaid A, DeJesus-Hernandez M, Ansorge O,
Roeber S, Kretzschmar HA, Munoz DG, Kusaka H, Yokota O, Ang LC, Bilbao J,
Rademakers R, Haass C, Mackenzie IR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, Schmelzbergstr. 12, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland.
manuela.neumann@usz.ch

Accumulation of the DNA/RNA binding protein fused in sarcoma as cytoplasmic
inclusions in neurons and glial cells is the pathological hallmark of all
patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with mutations in FUS as well as in
several subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration, which are not associated
with FUS mutations. The mechanisms leading to inclusion formation and fused in
sarcoma-associated neurodegeneration are only poorly understood. Because fused in
sarcoma belongs to a family of proteins known as FET, which also includes Ewing's
sarcoma and TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15, we investigated the
potential involvement of these other FET protein family members in the
pathogenesis of fused in sarcoma proteinopathies. Immunohistochemical analysis of
FET proteins revealed a striking difference among the various conditions, with
pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with FUS mutations being labelled
exclusively for fused in sarcoma, whereas fused in sarcoma-positive inclusions in
subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration also consistently immunostained for
TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 and variably for Ewing's sarcoma.
Immunoblot analysis of proteins extracted from post-mortem tissue of
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with fused in sarcoma pathology demonstrated a 
relative shift of all FET proteins towards insoluble protein fractions, while
genetic analysis of the TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 and Ewing's
sarcoma gene did not identify any pathogenic variants. Cell culture experiments
replicated the findings of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with FUS mutations by
confirming the absence of TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 and Ewing's
sarcoma alterations upon expression of mutant fused in sarcoma. In contrast, all 
endogenous FET proteins were recruited into cytoplasmic stress granules upon
general inhibition of Transportin-mediated nuclear import, mimicking the findings
in frontotemporal lobar degeneration with fused in sarcoma pathology. These
results allow a separation of fused in sarcoma proteinopathies caused by FUS
mutations from those without a known genetic cause based on neuropathological
features. More importantly, our data imply different pathological processes
underlying inclusion formation and cell death between both conditions; the
pathogenesis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with FUS mutations appears to be
more restricted to dysfunction of fused in sarcoma, while a more global and
complex dysregulation of all FET proteins is involved in the subtypes of
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with fused in sarcoma pathology.

PMCID: PMC3170539
PMID: 21856723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023592. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Let-7a is a direct EWS-FLI-1 target implicated in Ewing's sarcoma development.

De Vito C(1), Riggi N, Suvà ML, Janiszewska M, Horlbeck J, Baumer K, Provero P,
Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology and Medicine, Institute of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are the second most common bone malignancy
in children and young adults, characterized by unique chromosomal translocations 
that in 85% of cases lead to expression of the EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein.
EWS-FLI-1 functions as an aberrant transcription factor that can both induce and 
suppress members of its target gene repertoire. We have recently demonstrated
that EWS-FLI-1 can alter microRNA (miRNA) expression and that miRNA145 is a
direct EWS-FLI-1 target whose suppression is implicated in ESFT development.
Here, we use miRNA arrays to compare the global miRNA expression profile of human
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) and ESFT cell lines, and show that ESFT display a
distinct miRNA signature that includes induction of the oncogenic miRNA 17-92
cluster and repression of the tumor suppressor let-7 family. We demonstrate that 
direct repression of let-7a by EWS-FLI-1 participates in the tumorigenic
potential of ESFT cells in vivo. The mechanism whereby let-7a expression
regulates ESFT growth is shown to be mediated by its target gene HMGA2, as let-7a
overexpression and HMGA2 repression both block ESFT cell tumorigenicity.
Consistent with these observations, systemic delivery of synthetic let-7a into
ESFT-bearing mice restored its expression in tumor cells, decreased HMGA2
expression levels and resulted in ESFT growth inhibition in vivo. Our
observations provide evidence that deregulation of let-7a target gene expression 
participates in ESFT development and identify let-7a as promising new therapeutic
target for one of the most aggressive pediatric malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3154507
PMID: 21853155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2011 Sep;236(9):1030-5. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2011.010315.
Epub 2011 Aug 15.

BLCAP induces apoptosis in human Ewing's sarcoma cells.

Fan DG(1), Zhao F, Ding Y, Wu MM, Fan QY, Shimizu K, Dohjima T, Nozawa S,
Wakahara K, Ohno T, Guo YS, Ma BA, Jiang JL.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Oncology Institute of Chinese PLA, Tangdu Hospital, Xi-an, China.

Bladder cancer-associated protein (BLCAP) is a novel candidate tumor suppressor
gene identified from human bladder carcinoma and highly associated with the
invasion of bladder cancer. We previously reported that it also plays a key role 
in the tumorigenesis and metastasis of human osteosarcoma. In the present study, 
we constructed a recombinant encoding BLCAP cDNA. Overexpression of BLCAP
resulted in growth inhibition and induced apoptosis of human TC-135 Ewing's
sarcoma cells in vitro. We further investigated the caspase-3/7 activity and
expressions of the fusion transcription factor Ewing's sarcoma protein-friend
leukemia virus integration 1 (EWS-FLI1) and the apoptosis regulator B-cell
lymphoma 2 (BCL-2). Cell apoptosis was accompanied by the down-regulated
expression of EWS-FLI1 and BCL-2. Our present results suggest that BLCAP may play
a role not only in regulating cell proliferation but also in coordinating
apoptosis through the down-regulation of BCL-2 and EWS-FLI1 in human Ewing's
sarcoma cells.

PMID: 21844121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Cell. 2011 Aug 5;43(3):353-68. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.035.

The Ewing sarcoma protein regulates DNA damage-induced alternative splicing.

Paronetto MP(1), Miñana B, Valcárcel J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain.

The Ewing sarcoma (EWS) protein is a member of the TET (TLS/EWS/TAF15) family of 
RNA- and DNA-binding proteins whose expression is altered in cancer. We report
that EWS depletion results in alternative splicing changes of genes involved in
DNA repair and genotoxic stress signaling, including ABL1, CHEK2, and MAP4K2.
Chromatin and RNA crosslinking immunoprecipitation results indicate that EWS
cotranscriptionally binds to its target RNAs. This association is reduced upon
irradiation of cells with ultraviolet light, concomitant with transient
enrichment of EWS in nucleoli and with alternative splicing changes that parallel
those induced by EWS depletion and that lead to reduced c-ABL protein expression.
Consistent with the functional relevance of EWS-mediated alternative splicing
regulation in DNA damage response, EWS depletion reduces cell viability and
proliferation upon UV irradiation, effects that are attenuated by restoring c-ABL
expression. These results provide insights into posttranscriptional mechanisms of
DNA damage response by a TET protein.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21816343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 Jul 15;59(1):52-6. doi: 10.1002/pbc.23263. Epub 2011
Jul 25.

Evaluation of polymorphisms in EWSR1 and risk of Ewing sarcoma: a report from the
Childhood Cancer Survivor Study.

DuBois SG(1), Goldsby R, Segal M, Woo J, Copren K, Kane JP, Pullinger CR, Matthay
KK, Witte J, Lessnick SL, Robison LL, Bhatia S, Strong LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UCSF School of Medicine, San Francisco, California
94143-0106, USA. duboiss@peds.ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma is a malignant bone tumor characterized by a high
frequency of somatic EWSR1 translocations. Ewing sarcoma is less common in people
of African or African-American ancestry, suggesting a genetic etiology.
PROCEDURE: Germline DNA from white patients with Ewing sarcoma (n = 135), white
controls with Wilms tumor (n = 200), and African-American controls (n = 285) was 
genotyped at 21 SNPs in the EWSR1 gene. Intron 7 of EWSR1, the most common site
of translocation, was also sequenced in all subjects. Genetic variation between
groups was evaluated statistically using exact logistic regression and Fisher
exact tests.
RESULTS: One SNP in EWSR1 (rs2857461) showed a low level of statistical
association with the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma compared to Wilms tumor. The odds
ratio for having Ewing sarcoma in people with at least one copy of the minor
allele of rs2857461 was 3.57 (95% confidence interval 0.79-21.7; P = 0.07). No
other SNPs or variations in intron 7 of EWSR1 were associated with Ewing sarcoma.
The median relative difference in minor allele frequencies between white subjects
with Ewing sarcoma and African-American controls at the evaluated EWSR1 SNPs was 
45%.
CONCLUSIONS: Variations in EWSR1 at known SNPs or across intron 7 are not
associated with the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma. EWSR1 does not appear to be an
Ewing sarcoma susceptibility gene. The genetic basis for this disease remains
unknown.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3204324
PMID: 21793187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Sarcoma. 2011;2011:978319. doi: 10.1155/2011/978319. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Primary Ewing's Sarcoma of the Kidney in a 73-Year-Old Man.

Wedde TB(1), Lobmaier IV, Brennhovd B, Lohne F, Hall KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, P.O. Box 4953 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway.

Objective. Ewing's sarcoma of the kidney is rare and is usually found in young
adults. We present here a single case study of Ewing's sarcoma found in an
elderly man. Material and methods. A 73-year-old man underwent routine surgery
for hydrocoele of the testis. He developed urinary obstruction symptoms, and
radiological examinations revealed a tumour in the right kidney. Results.
Microscopical, immunohistochemical, and molecular pathological analysis of the
tumour was consistent with Ewing's sarcoma. FISH showed rearrangement of
chromosomes 22q12 (EWSR1). The patient subsequently underwent nephrectomy
followed by 6 adjuvant chemotherapy cycles. Follow-up after 7 months shows no
recurrence. Conclusion. This case report presents not only the rare finding of
Ewing's sarcoma in the kidney, but also the occurrence of this tumour entity in
an elderly patient. Treatment options for the different types of renal tumours
are vastly different and the need for a correct diagnosis is, therefore, vital.

PMCID: PMC3137979
PMID: 21776194  [PubMed]


424. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011 Oct;10(10):1846-56. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0100.
Epub 2011 Jul 18.

An integrated chemical biology approach identifies specific vulnerability of
Ewing's sarcoma to combined inhibition of Aurora kinases A and B.

Winter GE(1), Rix U, Lissat A, Stukalov A, Müllner MK, Bennett KL, Colinge J,
Nijman SM, Kubicek S, Kovar H, Kontny U, Superti-Furga G.

Author information: 
(1)Ce-M-M-Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Ewing's sarcoma is a pediatric cancer of the bone that is characterized by the
expression of the chimeric transcription factor EWS-FLI1 that confers a highly
malignant phenotype and results from the chromosomal translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12). Poor overall survival and pronounced long-term side effects
associated with traditional chemotherapy necessitate the development of novel,
targeted, therapeutic strategies. We therefore conducted a focused viability
screen with 200 small molecule kinase inhibitors in 2 different Ewing's sarcoma
cell lines. This resulted in the identification of several potential molecular
intervention points. Most notably, tozasertib (VX-680, MK-0457) displayed unique 
nanomolar efficacy, which extended to other cell lines, but was specific for
Ewing's sarcoma. Furthermore, tozasertib showed strong synergies with the
chemotherapeutic drugs etoposide and doxorubicin, the current standard agents for
Ewing's sarcoma. To identify the relevant targets underlying the specific
vulnerability toward tozasertib, we determined its cellular target profile by
chemical proteomics. We identified 20 known and unknown serine/threonine and
tyrosine protein kinase targets. Additional target deconvolution and functional
validation by RNAi showed simultaneous inhibition of Aurora kinases A and B to be
responsible for the observed tozasertib sensitivity, thereby revealing a new
mechanism for targeting Ewing's sarcoma. We further corroborated our cellular
observations with xenograft mouse models. In summary, the multilayered chemical
biology approach presented here identified a specific vulnerability of Ewing's
sarcoma to concomitant inhibition of Aurora kinases A and B by tozasertib and
danusertib, which has the potential to become a new therapeutic option.

PMID: 21768330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2011 Jul 19;48 Online:e43-8. doi:
10.3928/01913913-20110712-05.

Primary orbital Ewing sarcoma.

Yang Y(1), Liu Y, Yin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Southwest Hospital, Southwest Eye Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
No. 30 Gaotanyan Main Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing 400038, China.
yangyuli1979@yahoo.com.cn

The authors report the clinical manifestations, pathologic character, management,
and prognosis of primary orbital Ewing sarcoma, and review pertinent literature. 
A 6-year-old boy presented with the complaint of abruptly decreasing visual
acuity and right proptosis. Computed tomography scan revealed a mass in the
region of the right infratemporal orbit with extension into the infratemporal
fossa and masseteric space, and there was erosion of the right lateral orbital
wall. An anterior orbitotomy eyelid crease was performed to remove the tumor. The
tumor cells were positive in membranous pattern for CD99 immunostaining; all
other reactions were negative. The EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene was not detected by
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. Combined radiotherapy was
applied. Primary orbital Ewing sarcoma is an extremely rare malignant tumor that 
shows a predilection for males (ratio: 1.4 to 1). Appropriate treatment consists 
of local resection, radiotherapy, and adjunctive chemotherapy.

Copyright 2011, SLACK Incorporated.

PMID: 21766739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Diagn Pathol. 2011 Jul 15;6:66. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-6-66.

Adult urinary bladder tumors with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation: clinical,
pathological and immunohistochemical studies.

Bing Z(1), Zhang PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. bingz@uphs.upenn.edu

Adult rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) in the urinary bladder is rare, and is the subject
of case reports and small series. It consists of sheets of small round blue cells
with high nuclear cytoplasmic ratio, brisk mitosis and apoptosis. In this study, 
we reported one case of pure rhabdomyosarcoma and two cases of urothelial
carcinomas with extensive rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation. In addition,
their immunohistochemical profile was compared to that of small cell carcinoma of
the bladder. Our study showed that sufficient sampling was critical for the
diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma with extensive rhabdomyosarcomatous
differentiation. As adult RMS in the bladder and urothelial carcinoma with
rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation shared morphological features with small
cell carcinoma of the bladder, appropriate immunohistochemical stains were
necessary in the differential diagnosis. We showed both rhabdomyosarcoma and
rhabdomyosarcomatous areas of the urothelial carcinoma were positive for
myogenin, negative for cytokeratin and chromogranin stains. In contrast, small
cell carcinoma was positive for cytokeratin, and 7 out of 9 cases were also
positive for chromogranin. Both rhabdomyosarcoma and small cell carcinoma could
be positive for synaptophysin, a potential pitfall to avoid. In addition, all of 
the tumors with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation were negative for FKHR
rearrangement.

PMCID: PMC3150238
PMID: 21762516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mod Pathol. 2011 Nov;24(11):1444-50. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.108. Epub 2011
Jul 1.

EWSR1 gene rearrangement occurs in a subset of cutaneous myoepithelial tumors: a 
study of 18 cases.

Flucke U(1), Palmedo G, Blankenhorn N, Slootweg PJ, Kutzner H, Mentzel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands. u.flucke@pathol.umcn.nl

Cutaneous myoepithelial tumors form a clinicopathological spectrum ranging from
mixed tumor to myoepithelioma and myoepithelial carcinoma. Recently, EWSR1
rearrangement has been described in a subset of soft tissue myoepithelial tumors,
whereas the cutaneous counterparts showed this aberration in a minority of cases.
This raises the question whether cutaneous myoepithelial tumors have comparable
genetic alterations. We examined 18 cases of cutaneous myoepithelial tumors
arising in 7 female and 11 male patients (age range, 34-86 years; mean, 58
years). Eight mixed tumors occurred at the head, and one at the scrotum. Six
myoepitheliomas arose at the extremities, and one case each at the back and head.
One myoepithelial carcinoma occurred at the cheek. The tumor size ranged from 0.3
to 1.7 cm (mean, 1.0 cm). All mixed tumors and three myoepitheliomas were limited
to the dermis. Four myoepitheliomas and the myoepithelial carcinoma involved the 
subcutis. Mixed tumors and myoepitheliomas were composed of myoepithelial cells
with a variable cytomorphology, architecture and stromal background. Ductal
structures were seen by definition in mixed tumors. The myoepithelial carcinoma
represented an infiltrative dermal neoplasm consisting of atypical spindle cells.
Immunohistochemically, all cases tested were positive for EMA and calponin,
whereas S100, CK, ASMA and GFAP were expressed in 90%, 80%, 78% and 50% of the
cases tested, respectively. By fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis, 7 out 
of 16 cases (44%) exhibited EWSR1 rearrangement. Four of them were mixed tumors, 
two were myoepitheliomas and one was a myoepithelial carcinoma, confirming that
these lesions represent a spectrum of dermal myoepithelial tumors. Follow-up
information, available for five patients (including the patient with a
myoepithelial carcinoma), revealed no evidence of disease in all cases (range,
6-72 months). Our study provides a genetic relationship of myoepithelial tumors
of the skin with their counterparts in soft tissue, bone and visceral
localization by sharing EWSR1 rearrangement.

PMID: 21725291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2011 Oct;33(7):e279-83. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0b013e318211834e.

Primary cerebral myxofibrosarcoma: clinical, morphologic, immunohistochemical,
molecular, and ultrastructural study of an infrequent tumor in an extraordinary
localization.

Buccoliero AM(1), Castiglione F, Garbini F, Rossi Degl'Innocenti D, Moncini D,
Franchi A, Paglierani M, Simoni A, Baroni G, Daniele D, Sardi I, Giordano F,
Mussa F, Aricò M, Genitori L, Taddei GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy.
ambuccoliero@unifi.it

Herein, we describe an intracerebral primary low-grade myxofibrosarcoma occurring
in a 9-year-old boy. The lesion measured 7 cm and occupied the left
parieto-occipital region. A gross-total removal of the tumor was performed. Nine 
months later, radiologic follow-up revealed a local recurrence which was again
surgically removed. The patient then underwent radiotherapy and chemotherapy. He 
was well and disease-free at 6 months follow-up. The tumor was composed of
spindle, stellated, and multinucleated cells embedded in a myxoid background.
Foci of increased cellularity, pleomorphism, and high mitotic rate were present. 
The tumor borders were sharply demarcated from the non-neoplastic nervous
parenchyma. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the neoplastic cells were
vimentine and CD34 positive. Fluorescence in-situ hybridization analyses did not 
show FUS and EWSR1 gene rearrangements. Primary intracranial myxofibrosarcomas
are very rare (to the best of our knowledge, less than 10 published cases in the 
international literature). We believe each new case should be recorded to produce
a better clinical, pathologic, molecular, prognostic, and therapeutic
characterization of this lesion.

PMID: 21716137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Jun 22;103(12):962-78. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djr156. Epub
2011 Jun 8.

Identification of an inhibitor of the EWS-FLI1 oncogenic transcription factor by 
high-throughput screening.

Grohar PJ(1), Woldemichael GM, Griffin LB, Mendoza A, Chen QR, Yeung C, Currier
DG, Davis S, Khanna C, Khan J, McMahon JB, Helman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center
Dr-MSC 1104, 10 CRC 1W-3816, Bethesda, MD 20892-1104, USA. groharp@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Chromosomal translocations generating oncogenic transcription factors
are the hallmark of a variety of tumors, including many sarcomas. Ewing sarcoma
family of tumors (ESFTs) are characterized by the t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation
that generates the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 and Friend leukemia virus
integration 1 (EWS-FLI1) fusion transcription factor responsible for the highly
malignant phenotype of this tumor. Although continued expression of EWS-FLI1 is
believed to be critical for ESFT cell survival, a clinically effective
small-molecule inhibitor remains elusive likely because EWS-FLI1 is a
transcription factor and therefore widely felt to be "undruggable."
METHODS: We developed a high-throughput screen to evaluate more than 50 000
compounds for inhibition of EWS-FLI1 activity in TC32 ESFT cells. We used a TC32 
cell-based luciferase reporter screen using the EWS-FLI1 downstream target NR0B1 
promoter and a gene signature secondary screen to sort and prioritize the
compounds. We characterized the lead compound, mithramycin, based on its ability 
to inhibit EWS-FLI1 activity in vitro using microarray expression profiling,
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and immunoblot
analysis, and in vivo using immunohistochemistry. We studied the impact of this
inhibition on cell viability in vitro and on tumor growth in ESFT xenograft
models in vivo (n = 15-20 mice per group). All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Mithramycin inhibited expression of EWS-FLI1 downstream targets at the
mRNA and protein levels and decreased the growth of ESFT cells at half maximal
inhibitory concentrations between 10 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 8 to 13 nM) 
and 15 nM (95% CI = 13 to 19 nM). Mithramycin suppressed the growth of two
different ESFT xenograft tumors and prolonged the survival of ESFT
xenograft-bearing mice by causing a decrease in mean tumor volume. For example,
in the TC32 xenograft model, on day 15 of treatment, the mean tumor volume for
the mithramycin-treated mice was approximately 3% of the tumor volume observed in
the control mice (mithramycin vs control: 69 vs 2388 mm(3), difference = 2319
mm(3), 95% CI = 1766 to 2872 mm(3), P < .001).
CONCLUSION: Mithramycin inhibits EWS-FLI1 activity and demonstrates ESFT
antitumor activity both in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3119649
PMID: 21653923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Cutan Pathol. 2011 Aug;38(8):636-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0560.2011.01705.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Superficial Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors: a clinicopathological study with
differential diagnoses.

Machado I(1), Llombart B, Calabuig-Fariñas S, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Medical School, Valencia University, Valencia, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Superficial/cutaneous Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) are
rare and have a relatively favorable prognosis compared with deep-seated tumors. 
The aim of the present study is to describe the clinicopathological
characteristics of six genetically confirmed ESFT presenting a superficial
location.
METHODS: Clinical data, radiology, histopathology, immunohistochemistry,
molecular study [reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR)/fluorescence in situ hybridization], treatment and follow-up data were
retrieved.
RESULTS: Locations included fingers (2), back (1), neck (1), thigh (1) and
subcutaneous breast (1). Two tumors showed conventional morphology, one consisted
of primitive neuroectodermal tumor and three tumors showed atypical vascular
morphology with hemosiderin deposition and pigmentation. All cases showed CD99,
FLI-1, HNK-1 and CAV-1 positivity. RT-PCR revealed the EWS/Fli1 gene fusion in
all cases. Treatment was by wide excision in all cases; one received chemotherapy
(CT) and one CT and radiotherapy. Available follow-up revealed the following: two
patients with metastasis and death at 5 months and 2 years and one local
recurrence at 18 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Superficial ESFT appears to have a relatively favorable prognosis
but further studies with additional series, a larger number of cases and more
extensive follow-up are necessary to confirm this statement.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21649689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Sarcoma. 2011;2011:218483. doi: 10.1155/2011/218483. Epub 2011 May 2.

Tyrosine Phosphorylation in the C-Terminal Nuclear Localization and Retention
Signal (C-NLS) of the EWS Protein.

Leemann-Zakaryan RP(1), Pahlich S, Grossenbacher D, Gehring H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstraße 190, 8057
Zurich, Switzerland.

Ewing sarcoma (EWS) proto-oncoprotein, an RNA-binding protein, is involved in DNA
recombination and repair, gene expression, RNA processing and transport, as well 
as cell signalling. Chimeric EWS oncoproteins generated by chromosomal
translocations between EWSR1 and the genes of transcription factors cause
malignant tumors. To understand the loss of function by these translocations, the
role of the intact EWS protein has to be investigated. The predominantly nuclear 
localization of the EWS protein via a transportin-1-mediated mechanism is
dependent on the recently identified C-NLS (also known as PY-NLS). Among other
residues in the C-NLS, Y656 interacts with transportin-1 and is essential for its
nuclear localization. Here, we show that Y656 is phosphorylated, which seems to
be a critical factor for transportin-1-mediated nuclear import. If Y656 was
mutated cytosolic aggregates of the EWS protein, colocalized with transportin-1, 
were observed, similar to those described with mutants of the closely related
FUS/TLS protein that had amino acid substitutions in the PY-NLS causing familial 
amyothrophic lateral sclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3103976
PMID: 21647358  [PubMed]


432. Oncogene. 2011 Dec 8;30(49):4910-20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.197. Epub 2011 Jun 6.

A novel oncogenic mechanism in Ewing sarcoma involving IGF pathway targeting by
EWS/Fli1-regulated microRNAs.

McKinsey EL(1), Parrish JK, Irwin AE, Niemeyer BF, Kern HB, Birks DK, Jedlicka P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRs) are a novel class of cellular bioactive molecules with critical 
functions in the regulation of gene expression in normal biology and disease.
MiRs are frequently misexpressed in cancer, with potent biological consequences. 
However, relatively little is known about miRs in pediatric cancers, including
sarcomas. Moreover, the mechanisms behind aberrant miR expression in cancer are
poorly understood. Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive pediatric malignancy driven by 
EWS/Ets fusion oncoproteins, which are gain-of-function transcriptional
regulators. We employed stable silencing of EWS/Fli1, the most common of the
oncogenic fusions, and global miR profiling to identify EWS/Fli1-regulated miRs
with oncogenesis-modifying roles in Ewing sarcoma. In this report, we
characterize a group of miRs (100, 125b, 22, 221/222, 27a and 29a) strongly
repressed by EWS/Fli1. Strikingly, all of these miRs have predicted targets in
the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling pathway, a pivotal driver of Ewing
sarcoma oncogenesis. We demonstrate that miRs in this group negatively regulate
the expression of multiple pro-oncogenic components of the IGF pathway, namely
IGF-1, IGF-1 receptor, mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin and ribosomal
protein S6 kinase A1. Consistent with tumor-suppressive functions, these miRs
manifest growth inhibitory properties in Ewing sarcoma cells. Our studies thus
uncover a novel oncogenic mechanism in Ewing sarcoma, involving
post-transcriptional derepression of IGF signaling by the EWS/Fli1 fusion
oncoprotein via miRs. This novel pathway may be amenable to innovative
therapeutic targeting in Ewing sarcoma and other malignancies with activated IGF 
signaling.

PMCID: PMC4696862
PMID: 21643012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Am J Clin Pathol. 2011 Jun;135(6):839-44. doi: 10.1309/AJCP45SSNAOPXYXU.

Immunohistochemical staining for TLE1 distinguishes synovial sarcoma from
histologic mimics.

Foo WC(1), Cruise MW, Wick MR, Hornick JL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis St., Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Transducer-like enhancer of split 1 (TLE1) is overexpressed in synovial sarcomas.
We investigated TLE1 expression by immunohistochemical analysis in a
well-characterized series of synovial sarcomas and other mesenchymal tumors most 
commonly considered in the differential diagnosis. Whole tissue sections of 212
tumors were evaluated: 73 synovial sarcomas (23 biphasic, 28 monophasic, 22
poorly differentiated), 47 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs), 49 
solitary fibrous tumors (SFTs), 20 fibrosarcomatous variants of
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, and 23 Ewing sarcomas/primitive neuroectodermal 
tumors (PNETs). All monophasic and poorly differentiated SSs and Ewing
sarcoma/PNETs were previously confirmed to harbor t(X;18) and EWSR1 gene
rearrangements, respectively. In total, 60 (82%) of 73 synovial sarcomas were
positive for TLE1, including 18 biphasic (78%), 22 monophasic (79%), and 20
poorly differentiated (91%) tumors. Of the other tumors, only 7 MPNSTs (15%) and 
4 SFTs (8%) were positive for TLE1, most of which showed only weak staining. TLE1
is a sensitive and specific marker for synovial sarcoma and can be helpful to
distinguish synovial sarcoma from histologic mimics, particularly if moderate or 
strong staining is observed. In this study, only a small subset of MPNSTs and
SFTs showed limited staining for TLE1.

PMID: 21571956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2011 May;138(5):395-8. doi: 10.1016/j.annder.2010.11.010. 
Epub 2010 Dec 24.

[Primitive cutaneous Ewing's sarcoma: a diagnostic and therapeutic dilemma].

[Article in French]

Delaplace M(1), Mélard P, Perrinaud A, Goré C, Vergier B, Machet L.

Author information: 
(1)Service de dermatologie, hôpital Trousseau, CHU de Tours, Tours, France.

BACKGROUND: Ewing's sarcoma (or peripheral neuroectodermal tumour) is generally
found in bone tissue, and a primary dermal site is extremely rare. We report a
case of primary cutaneous Ewing's sarcoma in a 21-year-old woman.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A 21-year-old woman presented with a scapular lesion that
had been slowly developing for one year. The 1-cm lesion was removed and
histological examination showed proliferation of small round cells in the dermis.
Immunostaining revealed cytoplasmic membrane expression of CD99 and a negative
immunoprofile for other small round-cell tumors. Ewing's sarcoma fusion gene
transcripts were detected using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). A
staging examination revealed no other abnormalities. It was decided to treat the 
lesion as for osseous Ewing's sarcoma with wide resection followed by systemic
adjuvant chemotherapy.
DISCUSSION: Cutaneous Ewing's sarcoma raises concerns about diagnosis and
treatment. Owing to the non-specificity of its clinical presentation, histology
and immunoprofile, diagnosis of superficial Ewing's sarcoma is difficult and
numerous differential diagnoses must be considered. When dealing with a surface
tumour, the diagnosis of cutaneous Ewing's sarcoma must be considered. CD99
immunostaining and molecular testing for evidence of EWSR1 rearrangement are
useful investigations to confirm the diagnosis. Furthermore, modalities of
treatment must be carefully discussed. Cutaneous Ewing's sarcoma is currently
treated in the same way as osseous Ewing's sarcoma (wide surgical excision,
adjuvant radiotherapy when surgical margins are unsatisfactory, systemic adjuvant
chemotherapy, and, in some cases, bone marrow transplant). However, some studies 
show a more favourable prognosis for cutaneous Ewing's sarcoma than for osseous
Ewing's sarcoma. We may thus ask whether such aggressive multimodal treatment is 
needed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21570564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Biochemistry. 2011 Jun 14;50(23):5369-78. doi: 10.1021/bi2003857. Epub 2011 May
18.

Loop lengths of G-quadruplex structures affect the G-quadruplex DNA binding
selectivity of the RGG motif in Ewing's sarcoma.

Takahama K(1), Sugimoto C, Arai S, Kurokawa R, Oyoshi T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry, Shizuoka University , 836 Ohya,
Suruga, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

The G-quadruplex nucleic acid structural motif is a target for designing
molecules with potential anticancer properties. To achieve therapeutic
selectivity by targeting the G-quadruplex, the molecules must be able to
differentiate between the DNA of different G-quadruplexes. We recently reported
that the Arg-Gly-Gly repeat (RGG) of the C-terminus in Ewing's sarcoma protein
(EWS), which is a group of dominant oncogenes that arise due to chromosomal
translocations, is capable of binding to G-quadruplex telomere DNA and RNA via
arginine residues and stabilize the G-quadruplex DNA form in vitro. Here, we show
that the RGG of EWS binds preferentially to G-quadruplexes with longer loops,
which is not related to the topology of the G-quadruplex structure. Moreover, the
G-quadruplex DNA binding of the RGG in EWS depends on the phosphate backbone of
the loops in the G-quadruplex DNA. We also investigated the G-quadruplex DNA
binding activity of the N- and C-terminally truncated RGG to assess the role of
the regions in the RGG in G-quadruplex DNA binding. Our findings indicate that
the RGG and the other arginine-rich motif of residues 617-656 of the RGG in EWS
are important for the specific binding to G-quadruplex DNA. These findings will
contribute to the development of molecules that selectively target different
G-quadruplex DNA.

PMID: 21561087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 1;286(26):23521-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.220178. Epub 2011
May 9.

The BTB and CNC homology 1 (BACH1) target genes are involved in the oxidative
stress response and in control of the cell cycle.

Warnatz HJ(1), Schmidt D, Manke T, Piccini I, Sultan M, Borodina T, Balzereit D, 
Wruck W, Soldatov A, Vingron M, Lehrach H, Yaspo ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

The regulation of gene expression in response to environmental signals and
metabolic imbalances is a key step in maintaining cellular homeostasis. BTB and
CNC homology 1 (BACH1) is a heme-binding transcription factor repressing the
transcription from a subset of MAF recognition elements at low intracellular heme
levels. Upon heme binding, BACH1 is released from the MAF recognition elements,
resulting in increased expression of antioxidant response genes. To
systematically address the gene regulatory networks involving BACH1, we combined 
chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing analysis of BACH1 target genes in HEK
293 cells with knockdown of BACH1 using three independent types of small
interfering RNAs followed by transcriptome profiling using microarrays. The 59
BACH1 target genes identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing were
found highly enriched in genes showing expression changes after BACH1 knockdown, 
demonstrating the impact of BACH1 repression on transcription. In addition to
known and new BACH1 targets involved in heme degradation (HMOX1, FTL, FTH1, ME1, 
and SLC48A1) and redox regulation (GCLC, GCLM, and SLC7A11), we also discovered
BACH1 target genes affecting cell cycle and apoptosis pathways (ITPR2, CALM1,
SQSTM1, TFE3, EWSR1, CDK6, BCL2L11, and MAFG) as well as subcellular transport
processes (CLSTN1, PSAP, MAPT, and vault RNA). The newly identified impact of
BACH1 on genes involved in neurodegenerative processes and proliferation provides
an interesting basis for future dissection of BACH1-mediated gene repression in
neurodegeneration and virus-induced cancerogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3123115
PMID: 21555518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Diagn Cytopathol. 2012 Aug;40 Suppl 2:E156-61. doi: 10.1002/dc.21717. Epub 2011
May 4.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney: Report of 
a case diagnosed by fine needle aspiration cytology and confirmed by
immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR along with review of literature.

Kumar R(1), Gautam U, Srinivasan R, Lal A, Sharma U, Nijhawan R, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytology and Gynecological Pathology, Postgraduate Institute of 
Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) of the kidney
is a distinct entity that can be mistaken for variety of round cell tumors. We
report a rare case of ES/PNET of the kidney in a 35-year-old female patient
diagnosed by fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) and confirmed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Ultrasound guided FNAC smears from the kidney mass showed a population 
of malignant small round cells with perivascular arrangement and focal rosette
formation. IHC performed on the cell block, showed strong immunopositivity for
CD99 (MIC2) and vimentin. Molecular analysis of the aspirate by RT-PCR confirmed 
the EWS-FLI type1 transcript. The application of RT-PCR on FNAC material for
establishing a diagnosis of renal ES/PNET is being reported for the first time.
FNAC also confirmed metastases in the right level I cervical lymph node. The
utility of IHC and molecular techniques in diagnosis of such a rare case is
stressed and relevant literature is discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21548122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 1;286(26):22750-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.225433. Epub 2011 
Apr 28.

Oncogenic fusion protein EWS/FLI1 down-regulates gene expression by both
transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms.

France KA(1), Anderson JL, Park A, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

Ewing family tumors are characterized by a translocation between the RNA binding 
protein EWS and one of five ETS transcription factors, most commonly FLI1. The
fusion protein produced by the translocation has been thought to act as an
aberrant transcription factor, leading to changes in gene expression and cellular
transformation. In this study, we investigated the specific processes EWS/FLI1
utilizes to alter gene expression. Using both heterologous NIH 3T3 and human
Ewing Family Tumor cell lines, we have demonstrated by quantitative pre-mRNA
analysis that EWS/FLI1 repressed the expression of previously validated direct
target genes at the level of transcript synthesis. ChIP experiments showed that
EWS/FLI1 decreases the amount of Pol II at the promoter of down-regulated genes
in both murine and human model systems. However, in down-regulated target genes, 
there was a significant disparity between the modulation of cognate mRNA and
pre-mRNAs, suggesting that these genes could also be regulated at a
posttranscriptional level. Confirming this, we found that EWS/FLI1 decreased the 
transcript half-life of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3, a
down-regulated direct target gene in human tumor-derived Ewing's sarcoma cell
lines. Additionally, we have shown through reexpression experiments that full
EWS/FLI1-mediated transcriptional repression requires intact EWS and ETS domains.
Together these data demonstrate that EWS/FLI1 can dictate steady-state target
gene expression by modulating both transcript synthesis and degradation.

PMCID: PMC3123042
PMID: 21531709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Exp Mol Pathol. 2011 Aug;91(1):323-4. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2011.04.001. Epub 2011
Apr 13.

Cytokeratin 8/18 monoclonal antibody was dissimilar to anti-cytokeratin CAM
5.2.--a comment on: "Discovery of two novel EWSR1/ATF1 transcripts in four
chimerical transcripts-expressing clear cell sarcoma and their quantitative
evaluation, Experimental and Molecular Pathology 90(2): 194-200, April 2011".

Lin WL, Chen FL, Kuo JF, Lee MY, Han CP.

Comment on
    Exp Mol Pathol. 2011 Apr;90(2):194-200.

PMID: 21510931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Jul;50(7):559-70. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20881. Epub
2011 Apr 11.

EWSR1-ATF1 fusion is a novel and consistent finding in hyalinizing clear-cell
carcinoma of salivary gland.

Antonescu CR(1), Katabi N, Zhang L, Sung YS, Seethala RR, Jordan RC,
Perez-Ordoñez B, Have C, Asa SL, Leong IT, Bradley G, Klieb H, Weinreb I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. antonesc@mskcc.org

Hyalinizing clear-cell carcinoma (HCCC) is a rare, low-grade salivary gland tumor
with distinctive clear-cell morphology and pattern of hyalinization as well as
focal mucinous differentiation. However, histological overlap exists with other
salivary gland tumors, such as epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma (EMCa),
salivary myoepithelial carcinoma, and mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC). The
potential relationship between HCCC and its morphological mimics has not been yet
investigated at the genetic level. In this study, we conducted a molecular
analysis for the presence of rearrangements in MAML2, commonly seen in MECs, and 
EWSR1, involved in "soft tissue myoepithelial tumors" (SMET) by fusion with
POU5F1, PBX1, or ZNF444. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed 
on 23 HCCC cases for abnormalities in MAML2, EWSR1, FUS, POU5F1, PBX1, and
ZNF444. FISH for MAML2 was negative in all cases (0 of 14), including those with 
mucinous differentiation (0 of 7). An EWSR1 rearrangement was identified in 18 of
22 HCCCs (82%), while no break-apart signals were seen in FUS, POU5F1, PBX1, or
ZNF444. 3'RACE on an EWSR1 rearranged HCCC identified an EWSR1-ATF1 fusion, which
was confirmed by RT-PCR. ATF1 involvement was further confirmed by FISH analysis 
in 13 of 14 EWSR1-rearranged HCCC cases (93%). In contrast, all control cases
tested, including among others 5 EMCa and 3 MEC with clear cells, were negative
for EWSR1 and ATF1 rearrangements. The presence of EWSR1-ATF1 fusion in most
HCCCs reliably separates these tumors from its histological mimics. The
distinction from MEC is particularly important, as conventional MEC grading
schemes overgrade these indolent HCCCs, potentially impacting on treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21484932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Mol Diagn. 2011 May;13(3):313-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2011.01.004. Epub 2011 
Mar 31.

Molecular diagnosis in Ewing family tumors: the Rizzoli experience--222
consecutive cases in four years.

Gamberi G(1), Cocchi S, Benini S, Magagnoli G, Morandi L, Kreshak J, Gambarotti
M, Picci P, Zanella L, Alberghini M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Section of Molecular Biology, Rizzoli Institute, Via 
di Barbiano 1/10, Bologna, Italy. gabriella.gamberi@ior.it

The Ewing's family of tumors (EFTs) are characterized by chimeric transcripts
generated by specific chromosomal rearrangements. The most common fusions are
between the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 and the ETS family of transcription
factors; rarely, FUS (on chromosome 16) substitutes for EWSR1. The detection of
specific translocations using molecular analysis is now a routine part of the
pathological examination of EFT. Here, we report our experience with molecular
diagnosis of EFT during the 4 years (2006-2009) at the Rizzoli Institute. We
analyzed 222 consecutive tumors with a presumptive diagnosis of EFT using
molecular techniques and IHC. We found five distinct types of EWSR1-FLI1 fusion
transcripts resulting from translocation t(11;22), three types of EWSR1-ERG
transcripts resulting from t(21;22), and one type of t(2;22) resulting in
EWSR1-FEV fusion. Molecular investigation validated 92% of cases ultimately
diagnosed as EFT; IHC validated 76% of the cases. Thus, despite the difficulties 
and limitations associated with both molecular and IHC analysis on fresh and
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue, a combination of these techniques is
the best approach to enhancing the accuracy of EFT diagnosis. We also present our
method for choosing which molecular techniques to apply. Finally, we collected
the most prevalent breakpoints reported in the literature, indicating which exons
are involved, the sequence breakpoints, and the NCBI reference sequences.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3077725
PMID: 21458383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Oncogene. 2011 Aug 25;30(34):3705-15. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.90. Epub 2011 Mar 28.

Mutant K-Ras increases GSK-3ß gene expression via an ETS-p300 transcriptional
complex in pancreatic cancer.

Zhang JS(1), Koenig A, Harrison A, Ugolkov AV, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Couch FJ,
Billadeau DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Division of Oncology Research, Schulze Center for
Novel Therapeutics, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
zhang.jinsan@mayo.edu

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3ß) is overexpressed in a number of human
malignancies and has been shown to contribute to tumor cell proliferation and
survival. Although regulation of GSK-3ß activity has been extensively studied,
the mechanisms governing GSK-3ß gene expression are still unknown. Using
pancreatic cancer as a model, we find that constitutively active Ras signaling
increases GSK-3ß gene expression via the canonical mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling pathway. Analysis of the mechanism revealed that K-Ras regulates
the expression of this kinase through two highly conserved E-twenty six (ETS)
binding elements within the proximal region. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
mutant K-Ras enhances ETS2 loading onto the promoter, and ETS requires its
transcriptional activity to increase GSK-3ß gene transcription in pancreatic
cancer cells. Lastly, we show that ETS2 cooperates with p300 histone
acetyltransferase to remodel chromatin and promote GSK-3ß expression. Taken
together, these results provide a general mechanism for increased expression of
GSK-3ß in pancreatic cancer and perhaps other cancers, where Ras signaling is
deregulated.

PMCID: PMC3162070
PMID: 21441955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Apr;156B(3):285-90. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31158. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

Mutational analysis reveals the FUS homolog TAF15 as a candidate gene for
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Ticozzi N(1), Vance C, Leclerc AL, Keagle P, Glass JD, McKenna-Yasek D, Sapp PC, 
Silani V, Bosco DA, Shaw CE, Brown RH Jr, Landers JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, 01605, USA.

FUS, EWS, and TAF15 belong to the TET family of structurally similar
DNA/RNA-binding proteins. Mutations in the FUS gene have recently been discovered
as a cause of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS). Given the structural
and functional similarities between the three genes, we screened TAF15 and EWS in
263 and 94 index FALS cases, respectively. No coding variants were found in EWS, 
while we identified six novel changes in TAF15. Of these, two 24<U+2009>bp deletions and
a R388H missense variant were also found in healthy controls. A D386N
substitution was shown not to segregate with the disease in the affected
pedigree. A single A31T and two R395Q changes were identified in FALS cases but
not in over 1,100 controls. Interestingly, one of the R395Q FALS cases also
harbors a TARDBP mutation (G384R). Altogether, these results suggest that
additional studies are needed to determine whether mutations in the TAF15 gene
represent a cause of FALS.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21438137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2011 Mar 16;93(6):e23. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.J.00520.

Myxoid chondrosarcoma of the phalanx with an EWS translocation: a case report and
review of the literature.

Bumpass DB(1), Kyriakos M, Rubin DA, Manske PR, Goldfarb CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

PMID: 21411698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Hum Pathol. 2011 Sep;42(9):1359-63. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.12.003. Epub 2011
Mar 15.

Reticular angiomatoid "malignant" fibrous histiocytoma--a case report with
cytogenetics and molecular genetic analyses.

Moura RD(1), Wang X, Lonzo ML, Erickson-Johnson MR, García JJ, Oliveira AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Hospital das Clinicas, Sao Paulo University
School of Medicine, Sao Paulo 05410-000, Brazil.

Angiomatoid "malignant" fibrous histiocytoma is a rare sarcoma of low malignant
potential that occurs most commonly in the extremities of children and young
adults. Herein, we present a case of angiomatoid malignant fibrous histiocytoma
with unusual histologic features arising in the mediastinum of an 80-year-old
man. The tumor exhibited a reticular growth pattern and myxoid stroma. The tumor 
cells expressed epithelial membrane antigen and desmin. Cytogenetic analysis
revealed the translocation t(2;22)(q33;q12). Molecular genetic analysis confirmed
the rearrangement of the EWSR1 locus and the presence of the EWSR1/CREB1 fusion. 
This report expands the clinicopathologic spectrum of angiomatoid malignant
fibrous histiocytoma and underscores the value of integrating morphologic,
immunophenotypic, and molecular findings in the identification of its unusual
morphologic variants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21411119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Neoplasia. 2011 Feb;13(2):145-53.

Ecteinascidin 743 interferes with the activity of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma
cells.

Grohar PJ(1), Griffin LB, Yeung C, Chen QR, Pommier Y, Khanna C, Khan J, Helman
LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1928, USA.
groharp@mail.nih.gov

ET-743 (trabectedin; Yondelis) is approved in Europe for the treatment of soft
tissue sarcomas. Emerging phase 1 and 2 clinical data have shown high response
rates in myxoid liposarcoma in part owing to the inhibition of the FUS-CHOP
transcription factor. In this report, we show that modulation of specific
oncogenic transcription factors by ET-743 may extend to other tumor types. We
demonstrate that, among a panel of pediatric sarcomas, Ewing sarcoma family of
tumors (ESFTs) cell lines bearing the EWS-FLI1 transcription factor are the most 
sensitive to treatment with ET-743 compared with osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, 
and synovial sarcoma. We show that ET-743 reverses a gene signature of induced
downstream targets of EWS-FLI1 in two different ESFT cell lines (P = .001). In
addition, ET-743 directly suppresses the promoter activity of a known EWS-FLI1
downstream target NR0B1 luciferase reporter construct without changing the
activity of a constitutively active control in ESFT cells. Furthermore, the
effect is specific to EWS-FLI1, as forced expression of EWS-FLI1 in a cell type
that normally lacks this fusion protein, HT1080 cells, induces the same NR0B1
promoter, but this activation is completely blocked by ET-743 treatment. Finally,
we used gene set enrichment analysis to confirm that other mechanisms of ET-743
are active in ESFT cells. These results suggest a particular role for ET-743 in
the treatment of translocation-positive tumors. In addition, the modulation of
EWS-FLI1 makes it a novel targeting agent for ESFT and suggests that further
development of this compound for the treatment of ESFT is warranted.

PMCID: PMC3033593
PMID: 21403840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011 Jul 15;57(1):69-75. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22813. Epub 2011 
Mar 7.

Treatment of Ewing sarcoma family of tumors with a modified P6 protocol in
children and adolescents.

Mora J(1), de Torres C, Parareda A, Torner F, Galván P, Rodríguez E, Cardesa T,
Salvador H, Suñol M, Huguet R, Cruz O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
jmora@hsjdbcn.org

BACKGROUND: Reported overall survival (OS) rates of patients with localized Ewing
sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) are >80% when treated with the MSKCC P6 protocol.
However, it has been associated with a 5.8% incidence of secondary leukemias. A
modified P6 (mP6) protocol with reduced exposure to chemotherapy is presented.
PROCEDURE: Thirty-one newly diagnosed ESFT patients were enrolled onto this phase
II, single-arm, non-randomized protocol. Courses 1, 2 and 4 consisted of
cyclophosphamide 4.2 g/m², doxorubicin 75 mg/m², and vincristine 2 mg/m² (CDV).
Cycles 3 and 5 consisted of ifosfamide 9 g/m² and etoposide 500 mg/m² (IE).
Course 5 ifosfamide was 14 g/m² if necrosis was <90%.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients had loco-regional disease and seven had metastases.
The 4-year event-free survival (EFS) rate for patients with localized tumors is
83% and overall survival (OS) is 92%. The 3-year EFS rate for patients with
distant metastases is 28% and OS rate is 42%. EWS-FLI1 fusion genes were detected
in 17 cases (74%) and EWS-ERG in six cases (26%). Type 1 EWS-FLI1 variant was
present in 6/7 metastatic patients and 3/16 loco-regional cases (P = 0.001). None
of the patients experienced tumor progression before remission. All relapses
occurred within 2 years from the end of treatment and local relapses (n = 3)
happened in patients who did not receive radiation therapy. No secondary
malignancies have been observed, median follow-up of 4.3 years for surviving
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In this pilot study, the mP6 protocol produced a complete remission 
rate of 83% at 4 years in non-metastatic ESFT reducing the risk of secondary
malignancies.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21384537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Ann Pathol. 2011 Feb;31(1):28-31. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2010.07.043. Epub 2011
Feb 3.

[An unusual adrenal tumor: Ewing tumor].

[Article in French]

Gonin J(1), Larousserie F, Dousset B, Rousseau J, Delattre O, Waintrop C,
Tsatsaris V, Pierga JY, Vacher-Lavenu MC, Tissier F.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anatomie et cytologie pathologiques, hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

We report the case of a voluminous tumor of the adrenal diagnosed in a young
pregnant woman at 26(th) week of amenorrhea. Morphologically, a soft white tumor 
with haemorragic areas was observed, made of sheets of monomorphous, medium
sized, spindle-shaped to polygonal, with high mitotic activity. Tumorous cells
expressed cytokeratins AE1/AE3, EMA, and CD99 (expression of vimentin is not
relevant). Contemplated diagnoses included poorly differentiated
synovialosarcoma, sarcomatoid carcinoma and Ewing tumor. Thanks to molecular
biology, showing the specific transcript of Ewing/peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET) EWS/FLI1, the diagnosis of this atypical tumor in
an unusual location was performed. Indeed, 75% of Ewing tumors involve bones
(especially, the diaphysis of long bones) and 20 to 25% soft tissues. Primitive
visceral involvement is rare; less than 10 cases of adrenal involvement have been
reported. The hypothesis that Ewing cell's origin is a mesenchymal stem cell,
which may derive from neural crest cell, could explain the uncommon adrenal
involvement. Diagnosis of Ewing tumor is based on pathologic and molecular
findings, especially in atypical cases.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21349385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 May;50(5):338-47. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20858. Epub
2011 Feb 22.

mRNA and protein levels of FUS, EWSR1, and TAF15 are upregulated in liposarcoma.

Spitzer JI(1), Ugras S, Runge S, Decarolis P, Antonescu C, Tuschl T, Singer S.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of RNA Molecular Biology, The
Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Translocations or mutations of FUS, EWSR1, and TAF15 (FET) result in distinct
genetic diseases. N-terminal translocations of any FET protein to a series of
transcription factors yields chimeric proteins that contribute to sarcomagenesis,
whereas mutations in the conserved COOH-terminal domain of wild-type FUS were
recently shown to cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. We thus
investigated whether the loss of one FUS allele by translocation in liposarcoma
may be followed by mutations in either the remaining FUS allele or the paralogous
EWSR1. Furthermore, we investigated the strength of the FET promoters and their
contributions to sarcomagenesis given the proteins' frequent involvement in
oncogenic translocations. We sequenced the respective genomic regions of both FUS
and EWSR1 in 96 liposarcoma samples. Additionally, we determined FET transcript
and protein levels in several liposarcoma cell lines. We did not observe sequence
variations in either FUS or EWSR1. However, protein copy numbers reached an
impressive 0.9 and 5.5 Mio of FUS and EWSR1 per tumor cell, respectively.
Compared with adipose-derived stem cells, FUS and EWSR1 protein expression levels
were elevated on average 28.6-fold and 7.3-fold, respectively. TAF15 mRNA levels 
were elevated on average 3.9-fold, although with a larger variation between
samples. Interestingly, elevated TAF15 mRNA levels did not translate to strongly 
elevated protein levels, consistent with its infrequent occurrence as
translocation partner in tumors. These results suggest that the powerful
promoters of FET genes are predominantly responsible for the oncogenic effect of 
transcription factor translocations in sarcomas.

2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3056538
PMID: 21344536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Orthop Sci. 2011 Mar;16(2):250-2. doi: 10.1007/s00776-011-0024-8. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma in a 67-year-old man.

Hanaoka N(1), Goto T, Kasai T, Matsuura T, Nishisho T, Enishi T, Yasui N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of 
Tokushima Graduate School, 2-50-1 Kuramotocyo, Tokushima, 770-8503, Japan.
ubucya@hotmail.com

PMID: 21327980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Pathol Oncol Res. 2011 Sep;17(3):619-25. doi: 10.1007/s12253-010-9358-3. Epub
2011 Jan 26.

The evaluation of CD99 immunoreactivity and EWS/FLI1 translocation by
fluorescence in situ hybridization in central PNETs and Ewing's sarcoma family of
tumors.

Vural C(1), Uluoglu O, Akyürek N, Oguz A, Karadeniz C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey. dr.cvural@gmail.com

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFTs) are indicated by malignant, small, round
and blue cell tumors of the bone and soft tissue. Gene rearrangements between EWS
gene on chromosome 22q12 and members of the ETS gene family are common in and
specific to ESFTs. Another defining characteristic of ESFTs is their membranous
expression of the CD99. In contrast, such translocations and immunoreactivity are
not found in central primitive neuroectodermal tumors (cPNETs). The aim of this
study was to investigate the detection of EWS/FLI1 translocations and CD99
immunoreactivity in order to evaluate their clinicopathological features and
their roles in the differential diagnosis of these tumors. In this study, we
investigated CD99 immunoreactivity using immunohistochemistry and Ewing's sarcoma
/ Friend leukaemia virus integration 1 (EWS/FLI1) translocation using the
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) method in 23 cases. CD99 expression was
detected in 10/11 (90%) ESFT cases and 2/7 cPNET cases. In 18 cases EWS/FLI1
translocation was examined using the FISH method. The EWS/FLI1 translocations
were detected in 7/8 (87.5%) ESFTs cases, whereas non of 8 cPNET cases were
detected with this translocation. One case could not be classified as either
central or peripheral, showed EWS/FLI1 translocation. There was a statistically
significant difference in CD99 expression (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0013) and EWS/FLI1 translocation
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0,002) between cPNETs and ESFTs cases. In conclusion, CD99 expression and
EWS/FLI1 translocation are specific and sensitive markers in the diagnosis of
ESFTs. However, these were often not found in cases of cPNET. Therefore, in the
diagnosis of ESFTs, clinical, radiological, histopathological and
immunohistochemical parameters should always be evaluated together.

PMID: 21267687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Mol Biol. 2011 Mar 25;407(2):273-83. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.12.041. Epub 2011 
Jan 20.

Characterization of a family of RanBP2-type zinc fingers that can recognize
single-stranded RNA.

Nguyen CD(1), Mansfield RE, Leung W, Vaz PM, Loughlin FE, Grant RP, Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The recognition of single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) is an important aspect of gene
regulation, and a number of different classes of protein domains that recognize
ssRNA in a sequence-specific manner have been identified. Recently, we
demonstrated that the RanBP2-type zinc finger (ZnF) domains from the human
splicing factor ZnF Ran binding domain-containing protein 2 (ZRANB2) can bind to 
a sequence containing the consensus AGGUAA. Six other human proteins, namely,
Ewing's sarcoma (EWS), translocated in liposarcoma (TLS)/FUS, RNA-binding protein
56 (RBP56), RNA-binding motif 5 (RBM5), RNA-binding motif 10 (RBM10) and
testis-expressed sequence 13A (TEX13A), each contains a single ZnF with homology 
to the ZRANB2 ZnFs, and several of these proteins have been implicated in the
regulation of mRNA processing. Here, we show that all of these ZnFs are able to
bind with micromolar affinities to ssRNA containing a GGU motif. NMR titration
data reveal that binding is mediated by the corresponding surfaces on each ZnF,
and we also show that sequence selectivity is largely limited to the GGU core
motif and that substitution of the three flanking adenines that were selected in 
our original selection experiment has a minimal effect on binding affinity. These
data establish a subset of RanBP2-type ZnFs as a new family of ssRNA-binding
motifs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21256132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. FEBS J. 2011 Apr;278(6):988-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08020.x. Epub 2011 
Feb 7.

Identification of Ewing's sarcoma protein as a G-quadruplex DNA- and RNA-binding 
protein.

Takahama K(1), Kino K, Arai S, Kurokawa R, Oyoshi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Shizuoka University, Japan.

The Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) oncogene contains an N-terminal transcription
activation domain and a C-terminal RNA-binding domain. Although the EWS
activation domain is a potent transactivation domain that is required for the
oncogenic activity of several EWS fusion proteins, the normal role of intact EWS 
is poorly characterized because little is known about its nucleic acid
recognition specificity. Here we show that the Arg-Gly-Gly (RGG) domain of the
C-terminal in EWS binds to the G-rich single-stranded DNA and RNA fold in the
G-quadruplex structure. Furthermore, inhibition of DNA polymerase on a template
containing a human telomere sequence in the presence of RGG occurs in an RGG
concentration-dependent manner by the formation of a stabilized G-quadruplex
DNA-RGG complex. In addition, mutated RGG containing Lys residues replacing Arg
residues at specific Arg-Gly-Gly sites and RGG containing Arg methylated by
protein arginine N-methyltransferase 3 decrease the binding ability of EWS to
G-quadruplex DNA and RNA. These findings suggest that the RGG of EWS binds to
G-quadruplex DNA and RNA via the Arg residues in it.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

PMID: 21244633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Oncogene. 2011 May 5;30(18):2173-80. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.581. Epub 2011 Jan 10.

Hsa-mir-145 is the top EWS-FLI1-repressed microRNA involved in a positive
feedback loop in Ewing's sarcoma.

Ban J(1), Jug G, Mestdagh P, Schwentner R, Kauer M, Aryee DN, Schaefer KL,
Nakatani F, Scotlandi K, Reiter M, Strunk D, Speleman F, Vandesompele J, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria.

EWS-FLI1 is a chromosome translocation-derived chimeric transcription factor that
has a central and rate-limiting role in the pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma.
Although the EWS-FLI1 transcriptomic signature has been extensively characterized
on the mRNA level, information on its impact on non-coding RNA expression is
lacking. We have performed a genome-wide analysis of microRNAs affected by
RNAi-mediated silencing of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's sarcoma cell lines, and
differentially expressed between primary Ewing's sarcoma and mesenchymal
progenitor cells. Here, we report on the identification of hsa-mir-145 as the top
EWS-FLI1-repressed microRNA. Upon knockdown of EWS-FLI1, hsa-mir-145 expression
dramatically increases in all Ewing's sarcoma cell lines tested. Vice versa,
ectopic expression of the microRNA in Ewing's sarcoma cell lines strongly reduced
EWS-FLI1 protein, whereas transfection of an anti-mir to hsa-mir-145 increased
the EWS-FLI1 levels. Reporter gene assays revealed that this modulation of
EWS-FLI1 protein was mediated by the microRNA targeting the FLI1 3'-untranslated 
region. Mutual regulations of EWS-FLI1 and hsa-mir-145 were mirrored by an
inverse correlation between their expression levels in four of the Ewing's
sarcoma cell lines tested. Consistent with the role of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's
sarcoma growth regulation, forced hsa-mir-145 expression halted Ewing's sarcoma
cell line growth. These results identify feedback regulation between EWS-FLI1 and
hsa-mir-145 as an important component of the EWS-FLI1-mediated Ewing's
sarcomagenesis that may open a new avenue to future microRNA-mediated therapy of 
this devastating malignant disease.

PMID: 21217773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2011 Mar;20(3):449-53. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-1170. Epub 2011 Jan 6.

Racial differences in the incidence of mesenchymal tumors associated with EWSR1
translocation.

Worch J(1), Cyrus J, Goldsby R, Matthay KK, Neuhaus J, DuBois SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, School of
Medicine, 505 Parnassus Avenue, M646, San Francisco, CA 94143-0106, USA.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of Ewing sarcoma varies by race, with very low rates
among persons of African and East Asian ancestry. The incidence by race of other 
mesenchymal tumors that also harbor EWSR1 translocations has not been studied.
METHODS: The SEER database was queried to find cases of mesenchymal tumors
associated with EWSR1 translocations: Ewing sarcoma; clear cell sarcoma;
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma; myxoid liposarcoma; desmoplastic small round
cell tumor; and myoepithelial tumor. Age-adjusted incidence rates were calculated
for white, African American, and Asian/Native American populations and compared
statistically.
RESULTS: Ewing sarcoma was significantly less common in the African American and 
Asian/Native American populations compared with the white population, with
incidence rate ratios of 0.12 (95% CI, 0.08-0.20; P<0.001) and 0.54 (95% CI,
0.41-0.69; P<0.001), respectively. Desmoplastic small round cell tumor was
significantly more common in the African American population compared with the
white population (incidence rate ratio=3.0; 95% CI, 1.62-5.49; P<0.001). Myxoid
liposarcoma was significantly less common in the Asian/Native American population
compared with the white population (incidence rate ratio=0.72; 95% CI, 0.56-0.92;
P=0.006). The incidence rates for extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma,
myoepithelial tumors, and clear cell sarcoma did not differ significantly by
race.
CONCLUSIONS: Tumors associated with EWSR1 translocation are not uniformly more
common in people of European ancestry.
IMPACT: The relationship between race and EWSR1 somatic translocation is complex.
Future studies investigating the genetic epidemiology of EWSR1 translocated
tumors are required.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3051020
PMID: 21212061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Protein Cell. 2010 Oct;1(10):927-34. doi: 10.1007/s13238-010-0114-y. Epub 2010
Nov 9.

A transcription assay for EWS oncoproteins in Xenopus oocytes.

Ng KP(1), Cheung F, Lee KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon Hong Kong, China.

Aberrant chromosomal fusion of the Ewing's sarcoma oncogene (EWS) to several
different cellular partners produces the Ewing's family of oncoproteins
(EWS-fusion-proteins, EFPs) and associated tumors (EFTs). EFPs are potent
transcriptional activators, dependent on the N-terminal region of EWS (the
EWS-activation-domain, EAD) and this function is thought to be central to EFT
oncogenesis and maintenance. Thus EFPs are promising therapeutic targets, but
detailed molecular studies will be pivotal for exploring this potential. Such
studies have so far largely been restricted to intact mammalian cells while
recent evidence has indicated that a mammalian cell-free transcription system may
not support bona fide EAD function. Therefore, the lack of manipulatable assays
for the EAD presents a significant barrier to progress. Using Xenopus laevis
oocytes we describe a plasmid-based micro-injection assay that supports
efficient, bona fide EAD transcriptional activity and hence provides a new
vehicle for molecular dissection of the EAD.

PMID: 21204019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Sarcoma. 2011;2011:837474. doi: 10.1155/2011/837474. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde: The Two Faces of the FUS/EWS/TAF15 Protein Family.

Kovar H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, 1090
Vienna, Austria.

FUS, EWS, and TAF15 form the FET family of RNA-binding proteins whose genes are
found rearranged with various transcription factor genes predominantly in
sarcomas and in rare hematopoietic and epithelial cancers. The resulting fusion
gene products have attracted considerable interest as diagnostic and promising
therapeutic targets. So far, oncogenic FET fusion proteins have been regarded as 
strong transcription factors that aberrantly activate or repress target genes of 
their DNA-binding fusion partners. However, the role of the transactivating
domain in the context of the normal FET proteins is poorly defined, and,
therefore, our knowledge on how FET aberrations impact on tumor biology is
incomplete. Since we believe that a full understanding of aberrant FET protein
function can only arise from looking at both sides of the coin, the good and the 
evil, this paper summarizes evidence for the central function of FET proteins in 
bridging RNA transcription, processing, transport, and DNA repair.

PMCID: PMC3005952
PMID: 21197473  [PubMed]


458. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2011 Jan 1;16:105-15.

TGF-beta-dependent and -independent roles of STRAP in cancer.

Reiner JE(1), Datta PK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The serine-threonine kinase receptor-associated protein (STRAP) was initially
identified as a putative inhibitor of the canonical TGF-beta signaling pathway.
Because the Smad-dependent TGF-beta pathway negatively regulates cellular growth,
early functional studies suggested that STRAP behaves as an oncogene. Indeed, a
correlation between STRAP overexpression and various cancers has been identified.
With the emergence of new studies on the biological function of STRAP, it is
becoming clear that STRAP regulates several distinct cellular processes and
modulates multiple signaling pathways. While STRAP itself does not possess
enzymatic activity, it appears that STRAP influences biological processes through
associations with cellular proteins. In this review, we will describe the
TGF-beta-dependent and -independent functions of STRAP and provide a context for 
the significance of STRAP activity in the development of cancer.

PMCID: PMC4281466
PMID: 21196161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Clin Sarcoma Res. 2011 Oct 13;1(1):10. doi: 10.1186/2045-3329-1-10.

Reclassification and subtyping of so-called malignant fibrous histiocytoma of
bone: comparison with cytogenetic features.

Mertens F(1), Romeo S, Bovée JV, Tirabosco R, Athanasou N, Alberghini M,
Hogendoorn PC, Dei Tos AP, Sciot R, Domanski HA, Aström K, Mandahl N,
Debiec-Rychter M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Skåne
University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. fredrik.mertens@med.lu.se.

BACKGROUND: The diagnostic entity malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) of bone
is, like its soft tissue counterpart, likely to be a misnomer, encompassing a
variety of poorly differentiated sarcomas. When reviewing a series of 57
so-called MFH of bone within the framework of the EuroBoNeT consortium according 
to up-to-date criteria and ancillary immunohistochemistry, a fourth of all tumors
were reclassified and subtyped.
METHODS: In the present study, the cytogenetic data on 11 of these tumors (three 
myoepithelioma-like sarcomas, two leiomyosarcomas, one undifferentiated
pleomorphic sarcoma with incomplete myogenic differentiation, two
undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomas, one osteosarcoma, one spindle cell
sarcoma, and one unclassifiable biphasic sarcoma) are presented.
RESULTS: All tumors were high-grade lesions and showed very complex karyotypes.
Neither the overall pattern (ploidy level, degree of complexity) nor specific
cytogenetic features distinguished any of the subtypes. The subgroup of
myoepithelioma-like sarcomas was further investigated with regard to the status
of the EWSR1 and FUS loci; however, no rearrangement was found. Nor was any
particular aberration that could differentiate any of the subtypes from
osteosarcomas detected.
CONCLUSIONS: chromosome banding analysis is unlikely to reveal potential
genotype-phenotype correlations between morphologic subtypes among so-called MFH 
of bone.

PMCID: PMC3351725
PMID: 22588017  [PubMed]


460. Genet Res Int. 2011;2011:497148. doi: 10.4061/2011/497148. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Cytogenetics and molecular genetics of myxoid soft-tissue sarcomas.

Nishio J(1), Iwasaki H, Nabeshima K, Naito M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University,
7-45-1 Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan.

Myxoid soft-tissue sarcomas represent a heterogeneous group of mesenchymal tumors
characterized by a predominantly myxoid matrix, including myxoid liposarcoma
(MLS), low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (LGFMS), extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma
(EMC), myxofibrosarcoma, myxoinflammatory fibroblastic sarcoma (MIFS), and myxoid
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP). Cytogenetic and molecular genetic
analyses have shown that many of these sarcomas are characterized by recurrent
chromosomal translocations resulting in highly specific fusion genes (e.g.,
FUS-DDIT3 in MLS, FUS-CREB3L2 in LGFMS, EWSR1-NR4A3 in EMC, and COL1A1-PDGFB in
myxoid DFSP). Moreover, recent molecular analysis has demonstrated a
translocation t(1;<U+2009>10)(p22;<U+2009>q24) resulting in transcriptional upregulation of
FGF8 and NPM3 in MIFS. Most recently, the presence of TGFBR3 and MGEA5
rearrangements has been identified in a subset of MIFS. These genetic alterations
can be utilized as an adjunct in diagnostically challenging cases. In contrast,
most myxofibrosarcomas have complex karyotypes lacking specific genetic
alterations. This paper focuses on the cytogenetic and molecular genetic findings
of myxoid soft-tissue sarcomas as well as their clinicopathological
characteristics.

PMCID: PMC3335514
PMID: 22567356  [PubMed]


461. Exp Mol Pathol. 2011 Apr;90(2):194-200. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2010.12.005. Epub
2010 Dec 24.

Discovery of two novel EWSR1/ATF1 transcripts in four chimerical
transcripts-expressing clear cell sarcoma and their quantitative evaluation.

Jakubauskas A(1), Valceckiene V, Andrekute K, Seinin D, Kanopka A, Griskevicius
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Regenerative Medicine, Hematology, Oncology and
Transfusion Medicine Center, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics,
Santariskiu 2, Vilnius LT-08661, Lithuania. arturas.jakubauskas@santa.lt

Comment in
    Exp Mol Pathol. 2011 Aug;91(1):323-4.

The most common recurrent translocation in clear cell sarcoma t(12;22)(q13;q12)
results in an EWSR1/ATF1 chimeric gene. We present a molecular analysis of tumor 
overgrowing right proximal tibia with bone destruction metastatic to two groin
lymph nodes. Fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis performed on
paraffin-embedded tissue sections of primary tumor sample indicated one
rearranged locus of EWSR1 gene and one additional red signal. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed the presence of four
different EWSR1/ATF1 chimerical transcripts in the tumor sample as well as in
both metastatic lymph nodes. Two previously described transcripts
EWSR1exon7/ATF1exon5 and EWSR1exon8/ATF1exon4, and two novel transcripts
EWSR1exon7/ATF1exon4 and EWSR1exon9/ATF1exon4 were identified. Both novel
transcripts were out-of-frame fusions and, therefore, most likely had limited
biological impact in oncogenesis of clear cell sarcoma. Quantitative evaluation
demonstrated unequal distribution of these transcripts, with EWSR1exon8/ATF1exon4
type being overexpressed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21185830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Virchows Arch. 2011 Mar;458(3):281-90. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-1023-4. Epub 2010 
Dec 23.

The many faces of atypical Ewing's sarcoma. A true entity mimicking sarcomas,
carcinomas and lymphomas.

Machado I(1), Noguera R, Mateos EA, Calabuig-Fariñas S, López FI, Martínez A,
Navarro S, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Medical School, Valencia University, Avda Blasco Ibáñez,
15, Valencia, 46010, Spain.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumours (ESFT) comprises a group of small round cell
tumours (SRCT) genetically defined by specific chromosomal translocations
resulting in a fusion of the EWSR1 gene with a member of the ETS family of
transcription factors. Atypical ESFT are the most challenging of the ESFT
subtypes, and the differential diagnosis with other SRCT of bone and soft tissue 
is difficult since these subtypes can resemble other neoplasms. The present
article describes nine cases of genetically confirmed, atypical ESFT, having
unusual alterations at morphological and immunohistochemical (IHC) levels
associated with atypical clinical presentation mimicking sarcomas, carcinomas and
lymphomas. Present results demonstrate that ESFT showing overlapping
morphological and immunohistochemical features with other SRCT of soft tissue and
bone, or even with carcinomas or lymphoma, can be differentiated using molecular 
techniques. In SRCT with EWSR1 translocation demonstrated by FISH, the RT-PCR
analysis of specific sarcoma-related gene fusion can offer important clues for
the diagnosis of specific entities, especially in tumours with unusual
histopathology and/or IHC findings. Thus, we confirm that the integration of
clinical, histopathological, IHC and genetic data becomes decisive in the
diagnosis of bone and soft tissue sarcomas.

PMID: 21181413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Gulf J Oncolog. 2011 Jan;(9):73-7.

Soft tissue high grade myoepithelial carcinoma with round cell morphology: report
of a newly described entity with EWSR1 gene rearrangement.

El-Kabany M(1), Al-Abdulghani R, Ali AE, Francis IM, Hussein SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hussain Makki Al-Juma Center for Specialized Surgery,
Kuwait. moustafaelkabany@hotmail.com

The case of soft tissue malignant myoepithelioma is presented including
clinicopathological, immunohistochemical and cytogenetic findings. A 36-year-old 
Saudi male patient suffered from large mass involving right scapula and right
shoulder joint measuring 14x13x11 mm. Core biopsy revealed sheets and lobules of 
poorly differentiated small malignant cells with marked atypia and frequent
mitosis. Initially, immunohistochemistry was reactive for vimentin,
pan-cytokeratin, EMA and CD99. The case was negative for desmin, SMA, CD34, S-100
protein and GFAP. FISH analysis exhibited negativity for SS18 (18q11.2) gene
rearrangement and positivity for EWSR1 (22q12) gene rearrangement and a diagnosis
of Ewing/PNET was considered. Clinical behavior and therapeutic response did not 
match the diagnosis with re-evaluation. Wedge biopsy demonstrated aggregates of
epithelioid cells besides calponin and P63 positivity. Final diagnosis of
malignant myoepithelioma with EWSR1 gene rearrangement was issued; a new entity
with aggressive course. Myoepithelial carcinoma of soft tissue exhibits a wide
spectrum of cytomorphology with overlapping phenotype similar to other soft
tissue sarcoma like synovial sarcoma, mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, epithelioid
sarcoma as well as Ewing/PNET. Moreover, a new finding of EWSR1 gene
rearrangement is recognized in malignant myoepithelioma with different fusion
partners. Hence, myoepithelial carcinoma should be kept in mind in diagnosis of
soft tissue tumors even with unusual phenotype and gene rearrangement.

PMID: 21177214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2010 Dec;134(12):1797-803. doi: 10.1043/2009-0571-OAR.1.

Utilization of fluorescence in situ hybridization in the diagnosis of 230
mesenchymal neoplasms: an institutional experience.

Tanas MR(1), Rubin BP, Tubbs RR, Billings SD, Downs-Kelly E, Goldblum JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Ohio, USA.

CONTEXT: Mesenchymal neoplasms harbor characteristic translocations and
amplification of gene regions amenable to evaluation by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH).
OBJECTIVE: To determine the utility of FISH in the diagnosis of mesenchymal
neoplasms.
DESIGN: Two hundred thirty soft tissue cases analyzed by FISH were reviewed
retrospectively.
RESULTS: Morphologic patterns where FISH was used included high-grade round cell 
sarcomas (n <U+200A>=<U+200A> 67), nonmyogenic spindle cell sarcomas (n <U+200A>=<U+200A> 40), low-grade
myxoid neoplasms (n <U+200A>=<U+200A> 34), adipocytic neoplasms (n <U+200A>=<U+200A> 20), and melanocytic
neoplasms (n <U+200A>=<U+200A> 19). Fifty cases did not fit into the previously mentioned
categories. SYT FISH (96% of monophasic synovial sarcomas were positive; 0% of
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor were positive) and DDIT3 FISH (100% of
myxoid/round cell liposarcomas; no other neoplasm positive) were very sensitive
and specific. EWSR1 FISH was very sensitive and specific in the differential
diagnosis of melanocytic neoplasms (88% of clear cell sarcomas were positive; all
melanomas were negative). EWSR1 FISH was sensitive among high-grade round cell
sarcomas (positive in 100% of desmoplastic small round cell tumors and 96% of
Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors) but not specific because clear
cell sarcoma, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, and a subset of round cell
liposarcomas also harbor rearrangements of EWSR1. FUS FISH was very sensitive in 
detecting low-grade fibromyxoid sarcomas (91% positive) but not specific because 
most myxoid/round cell liposarcomas also contain rearrangements of FUS. All
atypical lipomatous tumors were positive for amplification of MDM2, whereas all
lipomas were negative. FOXO1A FISH was positive in ~70% of cases of alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma.
CONCLUSION: FISH is a useful adjunct in the diagnosis of mesenchymal neoplasms.

PMID: 21128778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Anticancer Res. 2010 Nov;30(11):4679-83.

Myxoid liposarcoma with EWS-CHOP type 1 fusion gene.

Suzuki K(1), Matsui Y, Endo K, Kubo T, Hasegawa T, Kimura T, Ohtani O, Yasui N.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: In myxoid liposarcoma (MLS), the t(12;16)(q13;p11) chromosomal
translocation and its resultant fusion transcript, the human translocation
liposarcoma (TLS)-CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein
(CHOP), are found in the majority of cases. On the other hand, the variant
translocation, t(12;22)(q13;q12) creating the Ewing sarcoma (EWS)-CHOP fusion
transcript, is detectable in a limited number of cases.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tissue from MLS arising in the left thigh of a 19-year-old 
female was analyzed for possible detection of chromosome translocation and fusion
transcript. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) methods were used.
RESULTS: FISH analysis demonstrated a rearrangement in the CHOP gene. RT-PCR
analysis confirmed the presence of EWS-CHOP chimeric transcript type 1, in which 
exon 7 of EWS was in-frame fused to exon 2 of CHOP with a serine (AGT) to
methionine (ATG) transition at the junction. The patient underwent a radical
segmental resection including a left vastus medialis musclectomy. Sixty months
following the surgical resection, the patient was alive with no evidence of
disease.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of MLS with EWS-CHOP variant transcripts, type 1 through
type 4, including this case together with 15 cases in the literature, indicated
that MLS with type 1 fusion transcript may show a more favorable clinical
behavior than MLS with other types of fusion transcript.

PMID: 21115923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Mod Pathol. 2011 Mar;24(3):333-42. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.201. Epub 2010 Nov
26.

A novel t(4;22)(q31;q12) produces an EWSR1-SMARCA5 fusion in extraskeletal Ewing 
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Sumegi J(1), Nishio J, Nelson M, Frayer RW, Perry D, Bridge JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immunodeficiency, Cincinnati
Childern's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH,
USA.

Over 90% of Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) feature an
11;22 translocation leading to an EWSR1-FLI1 fusion. Less commonly, a member of
the ETS-transcription factor family other than FLI1 is fused with EWSR1. In this 
study, cytogenetic analysis of an extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma/PNET revealed a
novel chromosomal translocation t(4;22)(q31;q12) as the sole anomaly. Following
confirmation of an EWSR1 rearrangement by the use of EWSR1 breakpoint flanking
probes, a fluorescence in situ hybridization positional cloning strategy was used
to further narrow the 4q31 breakpoint. These analyses identified the breakpoint
within RP11-481K16, a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone containing two 
gene candidates FREM and SMARCA5. Subsequent RACE, RT-PCR, and sequencing studies
were conducted to further characterize the fusion transcript. An in-frame fusion 
of the first 7 exons of EWSR1 to the last 19 exons of SMARCA5 was identified.
SMARCA5 encodes for hSNF2H, a chromatin-remodeling protein. Analogous to
EWSR1-ETS-expressing NIH3T3 cells, NIH3T3 cells expressing EWSR1-hSNF2H exhibited
anchorage-independent growth and formed colonies in soft agar, indicating
chimeric protein tumorigenic potential. Conversely, expression of EWSR1-hSNF2H in
NIH3T3 cells, unlike EWSR1-ETS fusions, did not induce EAT-2 expression. Mapping 
analysis demonstrated that deletion of the C-terminus (SLIDE or SANT motives) of 
hSNF2H impaired, and deletion of the SNF2_N domain fully abrogated NIH3T3 cell
transformation by EWSR1-SMARCA5. It is proposed that EWSR1-hSNF2H may act as an
oncogenic chromatin-remodeling factor and that its expression contributes to
Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumorigenesis. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first description of a fusion between EWSR1 and a
chromatin-reorganizing gene in Ewing sarcoma/PNET and thus expands the EWSR1
functional partnership beyond transcription factor and zinc-finger gene families.

PMID: 21113140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Head Neck Pathol. 2011 Mar;5(1):8-16. doi: 10.1007/s12105-010-0227-x. Epub 2010
Nov 25.

Ewing's family of tumors of the sinonasal tract and maxillary bone.

Hafezi S(1), Seethala RR, Stelow EB, Mills SE, Leong IT, MacDuff E, Hunt JL,
Perez-Ordoñez B, Weinreb I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The Ewing's family of tumors (EFT) are malignant neoplasms affecting children and
young adults. Most cases arise in the long bones or the pelvis. Primary EFT of
head and neck is uncommon and primary sinonasal EFT is even rarer. Previous
studies have not focused on the sinonasal region specifically, and the published 
literature on sinonasal EFT consists of sporadic case reports. Fourteen cases of 
sinonasal EFT were available and had H&Es for review and immunohistochemical
stains for CD99, S100, keratins, synaptophysin and desmin. FISH or RT-PCR was
performed for EWSR1 abnormalities on 8 cases. The 14 identified patients included
5 males and 9 females, ranging from 7-70 years of age (mean 32.4 years). Tumors
involved nasal cavity (5), sinuses (5) or both (4). Five patients had dural,
orbital or brain involvement. The majority involved bone radiologically and/or
microscopically. All cases were composed of small cells with variable cytoplasmic
clearing. Focal or prominent nesting was noted in most cases. All cases were
positive for CD99. Keratins (AE1/3 and/or CAM5.2), S100 and synaptophysin were
positive in 4, 3 and 5 cases, respectively. All cases were negative for desmin.
The 8 cases tested by FISH or RT-PCR were positive for EWSR1 abnormalities.
Follow-up in 8 patients ranged from 1-168 months (average 11.3 m) showing 1 death
due to metastatic disease, 1 death due to local disease, 1 patient alive with
metastases and 5 patients disease-free at last follow-up. Interestingly, however,
an analysis of the literature suggests a better prognosis for sinonasal EFT than 
EFT overall.

PMCID: PMC3037459
PMID: 21107767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Aug;38(6):3805-20. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0496-1. Epub 2010
Nov 24.

Analyses of porcine public SNPs in coding-gene regions by re-sequencing and
phenotypic association studies.

Li X(1), Kim SW, Do KT, Ha YK, Lee YM, Yoon SH, Kim HB, Kim JJ, Choi BH, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, 361-763, South Korea.

The Porcine SNP database has a huge number of SNPs, but these SNPs are mostly
found by computer data-mining procedures and have not been well characterized. We
re-sequenced 1,439 porcine public SNPs from four commercial pig breeds and one
Korean domestic breed (Korean Native pig, KNP) by using two DNA pools from eight 
unrelated animals in each breed. These SNPs were from 419 protein-coding genes
covering the 18 autosomes, and the re-sequencing in breeds confirmed 690 public
SNPs (47.9%) and 226 novel mutations (173 SNPs and 53 insertions/deletions).
Thus, totally, 916 variations were found from our study. Of the 916 variations,
148 SNPs (16.2%) were found across all the five breeds, and 199 SNPs (21.7%) were
breed specific polymorphisms. According to the SNP locations in the gene
sequences, these 916 variations were categorized into 802 non-coding SNPs (785 in
intron, 17 in 3'-UTR) and 114 coding SNPs (86 synonymous SNPs, 28 non-synonymous 
SNPs). The nucleotide substitution analyses for these SNPs revealed that 70.2%
were from transitions, 20.0% from transversions, and the remaining 5.79% were
deletions or insertions. Subsequently, we genotyped 261 SNPs from 180 genes in an
experimental KNP × Landrace F2 cross by the Sequenom MassARRAY system. A total of
33 traits including growth, carcass composition and meat quality were analyzed
for the phenotypic association tests using the 132 SNPs in 108 genes with minor
allele frequency (MAF)>0.2. The association results showed that five marker-trait
combinations were significant at the 5% experiment-wise level (ADCK4 for rear
leg, MYH3 for rear leg, Hunter B, Loin weight and Shearforce) and four at the 10%
experiment-wise level (DHX38 for average daily gain at live weight, LGALS9 for
crude lipid, NGEF for front leg and LIFR for pH at 24 h). In addition, 49 SNPs in
44 genes showing significant association with the traits were detected at the 1% 
comparison-wise level. A large number of genes that function as enzymes,
transcription factors or signalling molecules were considered as genetic markers 
for pig growth (RNF103, TSPAN31, DHX38, ABCF1, ABCC10, SCD5, KIAA0999 and
FKBP10), muscling (HSPA5, PTPRM, NUP88, ADCK4, PLOD1, DLX1 and GRM8), fatness
(PTGIS, IDH3B, RYR2 and NOL4) and meat quality traits (DUSP4, LIFR, NGEF, EWSR1, 
ACTN2, PLXND1, DLX3, LGALS9, ENO3, EPRS, TRIM29, EHMT2, RBM42, SESN2 and RAB4B). 
The SNPs or genes reported here may be beneficial to future marker assisted
selection breeding in pigs.

PMID: 21107721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 11;5(11):e13943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013943.

High ALDH activity identifies chemotherapy-resistant Ewing's sarcoma stem cells
that retain sensitivity to EWS-FLI1 inhibition.

Awad O(1), Yustein JT, Shah P, Gul N, Katuri V, O'Neill A, Kong Y, Brown ML,
Toretsky JA, Loeb DM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Cancer stem cells are a chemotherapy-resistant population capable of 
self-renewal and of regenerating the bulk tumor, thereby causing relapse and
patient death. Ewing's sarcoma, the second most common form of bone tumor in
adolescents and young adults, follows a clinical pattern consistent with the
Cancer Stem Cell model - remission is easily achieved, even for patients with
metastatic disease, but relapse remains frequent and is usually fatal.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have isolated a subpopulation of Ewing's
sarcoma cells, from both human cell lines and human xenografts grown in immune
deficient mice, which express high aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH(high)) activity
and are enriched for clonogenicity, sphere-formation, and tumor initiation. The
ALDH(high) cells are resistant to chemotherapy in vitro, but this can be overcome
by the ATP binding cassette transport protein inhibitor, verapamil. Importantly, 
these cells are not resistant to YK-4-279, a small molecule inhibitor of EWS-FLI1
that is selectively toxic to Ewing's sarcoma cells both in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Ewing's sarcoma contains an ALDH(high) stem-like
population of chemotherapy-resistant cells that retain sensitivity to EWS-FLI1
inhibition. Inhibiting the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein may prove to be an effective
means of improving patient outcomes by targeting Ewing's sarcoma stem cells that 
survive standard chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2978678
PMID: 21085683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Blood. 2011 Jan 27;117(4):1156-66. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-279349. Epub 2010
Oct 28.

Ewing sarcoma gene Ews regulates hematopoietic stem cell senescence.

Cho J(1), Shen H, Yu H, Li H, Cheng T, Lee SB, Lee BC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Hillman Cancer Center, 5117 Centre 
Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

The longevity of organisms is maintained by stem cells. If an organism loses the 
ability to maintain a balance between quiescence and differentiation in the
stem/progenitor cell compartment due to aging and/or stress, this may result in
death or age-associated diseases, including cancer. Ewing sarcoma is the most
lethal bone tumor in young patients and arises from primitive stem cells. Here,
we demonstrated that endogenous Ewing sarcoma gene (Ews) is indispensable for
stem cell quiescence, and that the ablation of Ews promotes the early onset of
senescence in hematopoietic stem progenitor cells. The phenotypic and functional 
changes in Ews-deficient stem cells were accompanied by an increase in
senescence-associated ß-galactosidase staining and a marked induction of
p16(INK4a) compared with wild-type counterparts. With its relevance to cancer and
possibly aging, EWS is likely to play a significant role in maintaining the
functional capacity of stem cells and may provide further insight into the
complexity of Ewing sarcoma in the context of stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3056469
PMID: 21030557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1224-6. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22355.

Evaluation of cytarabine against Ewing sarcoma xenografts by the pediatric
preclinical testing program.

Houghton PJ(1), Morton CL, Kang M, Reynolds CP, Billups CA, Favours E,
Payne-Turner D, Tucker C, Smith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. peter.houghton@stjude.org

Treatment with the nucleoside analog cytarabine has been shown to mimic changes
in gene expression associated with downregulation of the EWS-FLI1 oncogene in
Ewing sarcoma cell lines, selectively inhibit their growth in vitro, and cause
tumor regression in athymic nude mice. For this report cytarabine was studied in 
vitro against a panel of 23 pediatric cancer cell lines and in vivo against 6
Ewing sarcoma xenografts. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines were the most
sensitive to cytarabine in vitro (median IC(50) 9 nM), while Ewing sarcoma cell
lines showed intermediate sensitivity (median IC(50) 232 nM). Cytarabine at a
dose of 150 mg/kg administered daily 5× failed to significantly inhibit growth of
five xenograft models, but reduced growth rate of the A673 xenograft by 50%.
Cytarabine shows no differential in vitro activity against Ewing sarcoma cell
lines and is ineffective in vivo against Ewing sarcoma xenografts at the dose and
schedule studied.

PMCID: PMC4675330
PMID: 20979180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Curr Oncol. 2010 Oct;17(5):58-62.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma of the heart and review of current
literature.

Geyer HL, Karlin N.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMS) is a rare oncologic phenomenon
characterized by chondroid and neurogenic differentiation in extraskeletal
locations. These tumours represent fewer than 2.5% of all soft-tissue sarcomas
and are most commonly found in the lower extremities, limb girdles, distal
extremities, and trunk. Their presence in cardiac tissue is exceedingly unusual; 
just a single case of ems metastatic to the heart has been reported, and no cases
of primary cardiac EMS are known.Here, we report the case of a 26-year-old man
who presented to his physician with a chest wall mass. Further evaluation led to 
the discovery of a large intracardiac mass with multiple end-organ growths.
Complete work-up of this patient included cardiac biopsy, echocardiography,
magnetic resonance imaging, positron-emission tomography, computed tomography,
and fluorescence in situ hybridization studies for the translocation involving
the EWSR1 gene locus (22q12). Results of the foregoing studies confirmed the
diagnosis of ems, but the origin of this patient's tumours remains elusive and
the contention between a primary cardiac source and cardiac metastasis has yet to
be resolved.This article describes the histopathology, immunohistochemistry, and 
chromosomal aberrations common to ems, together with the common presenting
features, natural history, and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC2949372
PMID: 20975880  [PubMed]


473. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Nov;17(11):1358-66. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1912. Epub 2010
Oct 24.

Cotranscriptional exon skipping in the genotoxic stress response.

Dutertre M(1), Sanchez G, De Cian MC, Barbier J, Dardenne E, Gratadou L, Dujardin
G, Le Jossic-Corcos C, Corcos L, Auboeuf D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de Santé et de Recherche Médicale U590, Centre Léon Bérard, 
Lyon, France. martin.dutertre@inserm.fr

Pre-mRNA splicing is functionally coupled to transcription, and genotoxic
stresses can enhance alternative exon inclusion by affecting elongating RNA
polymerase II. We report here that various genotoxic stress inducers, including
camptothecin (CPT), inhibit the interaction between Ewing's sarcoma
proto-oncoprotein (EWS), an RNA polymerase II-associated factor, and YB-1, a
spliceosome-associated factor. This results in the cotranscriptional skipping of 
several exons of the MDM2 gene, which encodes the main p53 ubiquitin ligase. This
reversible exon skipping participates in the regulation of MDM2 expression that
may contribute to the accumulation of p53 during stress exposure and its rapid
shut-off when stress is removed. Finally, a splicing-sensitive microarray
identified numerous exons that are skipped in response to CPT and EWS-YB-1
depletion. These data demonstrate genotoxic stress-induced alteration of the
communication between the transcriptional and splicing machineries, which results
in widespread exon skipping and plays a central role in the genotoxic stress
response.

PMID: 20972445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010 Nov;32(8):e331-7. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0b013e3181ee4d16.

Establishment, characterization, and drug sensitivity of a new Ewing sarcoma cell
line (SS-ES-1).

Rajabalian S(1), Hajializadeh Z, Pooraboli I, Jangi-Aghdam H, Badinloo M.

Author information: 
(1)Kerman Neuroscience Research Center, Medical Science University of Kerman,
Kerman, Iran. Srajabalian@yahoo.com

Erratum in
    J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2011 Apr;33(3):247. Badinloo, Marziyeh [added].

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is one of the most malignant tumors in children and young
adults. We present here a new ES cell line, SS-ES-1, established from the left
thoracic tumor of a 16-year-old female patient. The SS-ES-1 cells retained
genotype, morphology, and growth rate for over 150 passages. Immunocytochemical
staining showed the strong immunoreactivity for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane 
antigen, neurofilament, CD99, P53, Ki-67, platelet-derived growth factor
receptor-ß, estrogen receptor-a (ER-a), and Bcl-2, but no reactivity for glial
fibrillary acidic protein, epidermal growth factor receptor, and HER-2/neu. The
presence of the type 1 EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts was confirmed by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. On the basis of the MTT assay results,
GW2974, a dual inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor and HER-2/neu,
exhibited only a weak cytotoxic response in SS-ES-1 cells. In contrast,
tyrphostin A9, a specific inhibitor of platelet-derived growth factor receptor,
had a high cytotoxic effect against these cells. Surprisingly, it was found that 
SS-ES-1 cells displayed a high sensitivity to 4OH-tamoxifen. In conclusion, the
SS-ES-1 cell line shows unique cellular properties, which makes it a useful model
for studying various aspects of the biology of ES. In addition, the results
suggest that ER can be a good therapeutic target for ER + ES.

PMID: 20962673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Nov 5;402(1):129-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.09.129. Epub 2010 Oct 8.

FOXO1 is a direct target of EWS-Fli1 oncogenic fusion protein in Ewing's sarcoma 
cells.

Yang L(1), Hu HM, Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A, Chansky HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, United
States. lyang@u.washington.edu

Ewing's family tumors are characterized by a specific t(11;22) chromosomal
translocation that results in the formation of EWS-Fli1 oncogenic fusion protein.
To investigate the effects of EWS-Fli1 on gene expression, we carried out DNA
microarray analysis after specific knockdown of EWS-Fli1 through transfection of 
synthetic siRNAs. EWS-Fli1 knockdown increased expression of genes such as DKK1
and p57 that are known to be repressed by EWS-Fli1 fusion protein. Among other
potential EWS-Fli1 targets identified by our microarray analysis, we have focused
on the FOXO1 gene since it encodes a potential tumor suppressor and has not been 
previously reported in Ewing's cells. To better understand how EWS-Fli1 affects
FOXO1 expression, we have established a doxycycline-inducible siRNA system to
achieve stable and reversible knockdown of EWS-Fli1 in Ewing's sarcoma cells.
Here we show that FOXO1 expression in Ewing's cells has an inverse relationship
with EWS-Fli1 protein level, and FOXO1 promoter activity is increased after
doxycycline-induced EWS-Fli1 knockdown. In addition, we have found that direct
binding of EWS-Fli1 to FOXO1 promoter is attenuated after doxycycline-induced
siRNA knockdown of the fusion protein. Together, these results suggest that
suppression of FOXO1 function by EWS-Fli1 fusion protein may contribute to
cellular transformation in Ewing's family tumors.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2981438
PMID: 20933505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2010 Dec;10(6):782-8. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2010.09.005.

Drugs for 'protein clouds': targeting intrinsically disordered transcription
factors.

Dunker AK(1), Uversky VN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Intrinsically Disordered Protein Research, The Center for
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. kedunker@iupui.edu

Transcription factors (TFs) are very attractive but difficult drug targets. The
difficulties come from several directions including the binding promiscuity of
TFs and the intrinsically disordered nature of their binding sites, which often
resemble 'protein clouds'. For a long time the targeting of proteins without
defined structures was considered infeasible. Data have now emerged showing that 
selective blocking of specific interactions of intrinsically disordered TFs with 
their protein binding partners is possible. Initial hits have been optimized to
increase their specificity and affinity. Several strategies have been elaborated 
for elucidating the mechanisms of blocking of intrinsic disorder-based
protein-protein interactions. However, challenges remain in the field of drug
development for 'protein clouds'; such development is still in its earliest
stage.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 20889377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Dec;49(12):1114-24. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20819.

EWSR1-POU5F1 fusion in soft tissue myoepithelial tumors. A molecular analysis of 
sixty-six cases, including soft tissue, bone, and visceral lesions, showing
common involvement of the EWSR1 gene.

Antonescu CR(1), Zhang L, Chang NE, Pawel BR, Travis W, Katabi N, Edelman M,
Rosenberg AE, Nielsen GP, Dal Cin P, Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York City, NY 10021, USA. antonesc@mskcc.org

The diagnosis of myoepithelial (ME) tumors outside salivary glands remains
challenging, especially in unusual clinical presentations, such as bone or
visceral locations. A few reports have indicated EWSR1 gene rearrangement in soft
tissue ME tumors, and, in one case each, the fusion partner was identified as
either PBX1 or ZNF444. However, larger studies to investigate whether these
genetic abnormalities are recurrent or restricted to tumors in soft tissue
locations are lacking. Sixty-six ME tumors mainly from soft tissue (71%), but
also from skin, bone, and visceral locations, characterized by classic
morphological features and supporting immunoprofile were studied. Gene
rearrangements in EWSR1, FUS, PBX1, and ZNF444 were investigated by fluorescence 
in situ hybridization. EWSR1 gene rearrangement was detected in 45% of the cases.
A EWSR1-POU5F1 fusion was identified in a pediatric soft tissue tumor by 3'Rapid 
Amplification of cDNA Euds (RACE) and subsequently confirmed in four additional
soft tissue tumors in children and young adults. An EWSR1-PBX1 fusion was seen in
five cases, whereas EWSR1-ZNF444 and FUS gene rearrangement was noted in one
pulmonary tumor each. In conclusion, EWSR1 gene rearrangement is a common event
in ME tumors arising outside salivary glands, irrespective of anatomical
location. EWSR1-negative tumors were more often benign, superficially located,
and showed ductal differentiation, suggesting the possibility of genetically
distinct groups. A subset of soft tissue ME tumors with clear cell morphology
harbor an EWSR1-POU5F1 fusion, which can be used as a molecular diagnostic test
in difficult cases. These findings do not support a pathogenetic relationship
between soft tissue ME tumors and their salivary gland counterparts.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3540416
PMID: 20815032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Pathol Int. 2010 Sep;60(9):608-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2010.02570.x.

Diagnostic utility of EWS break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization in
distinguishing between non-cutaneous melanoma and clear cell sarcoma.

Song JS(1), Choi J, Kim JH, Jang SJ, Cho KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical
Center, Songpa-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) is a rare soft tissue sarcoma with morphological
similarities to malignant melanoma (MM), but with a distinct genetic background
that includes the chromosomal translocation t(12;22)(q13;q12). Clear cell sarcoma
is often misdiagnosed as MM because of similarities in target locations and
immunophenotypes. Eighteen cases with MM in non-cutaneous sites were subjected to
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to assess EWS gene breakage. Tissue
microarrays were constructed using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue and
the EWSR1 (22q12) dual-color, break-apart rearrangement probe (Vysis) was used.
Two patients were classified as CCS with EWS gene rearrangement, with a mean of
67.5% positive cells per sample according to break-apart FISH. The remaining 16
patients lacked break-apart signals of the EWS gene. The presence of type 1 (EWS 
exon 8-ATF1 exon 4) fusion transcripts was confirmed in FISH-positive patients by
RT-PCR. Retrospective analysis revealed that the masses were located in the foot 
and buttock, respectively. Morphologically, tumor cells were not typical for
those of CCS or MM. Break-apart FISH is an accurate and convenient method for
differentiating between MM and CCS. Molecular detection of EWS gene
rearrangement, either by break-apart FISH or RT-PCR, is mandatory in subjects
with melanotic tumors of soft tissue.

PMID: 20712646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Sep 3;399(4):705-10. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.08.004. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

EWS-FLI1 inhibits TNFalpha-induced NFkappaB-dependent transcription in Ewing
sarcoma cells.

Lagirand-Cantaloube J(1), Laud K, Lilienbaum A, Tirode F, Delattre O, Auclair C, 
Kryszke MH.

Author information: 
(1)UMR8113 CNRS, LBPA, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Cachan, France.
julie.cantaloube@crbm.cnrs.fr

Ewing sarcoma is primarily caused by a t(11;22) chromosomal translocation
encoding the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. To exert its oncogenic function, EWS-FLI1
acts as an aberrant transcription factor, broadly altering the gene expression
profile of tumor cells. Nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkappaB) is a tightly regulated
transcription factor controlling cell survival, proliferation and
differentiation, as well as tumorigenesis. NFkappaB activity is very low in
unstimulated Ewing sarcoma cells, but can be induced in response to tumor
necrosis factor (TNF). We wondered whether NFkappaB activity could be modulated
by EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma. Using a knockdown approach in Ewing sarcoma cells, 
we demonstrated that EWS-FLI1 has no influence on NFkappaB basal activity, but
impairs TNF-induced NFkappaB-driven transcription, at least in part through
inhibition of NFkappaB binding to DNA. We detected an in vivo physical
interaction between the fusion protein and NFkappaB p65, which could mediate
these effects. Our findings suggest that, besides directly controlling the
activity of its primary target promoters, EWS-FLI1 can also indirectly influence 
gene expression in tumor cells by modulating the activity of key transcription
factors such as NFkappaB.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20691659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Nov 1;111(4):933-43. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22782.

The Ewing's sarcoma fusion protein, EWS-FLI, binds Runx2 and blocks osteoblast
differentiation.

Li X(1), McGee-Lawrence ME, Decker M, Westendorf JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas are highly aggressive round cell tumors of bone and soft tissues
that afflict children and young adults. The majority of these tumors harbor the
t(11;22) translocation and express the fusion protein EWS-FLI. Modern molecular
profiling experiments indicate that Ewing's tumors originate from mesenchymal
precursors in young individuals. EWS-FLI alters the morphology of mesenchymal
cells and prevents lineage specification; however, the molecular mechanisms for
differentiation arrest are unclear. We recently showed that EWS-FLI binds Runx2, 
a master regulator of osteoblast differentiation. In this report, we demonstrate 
that FLI sequences within EWS-FLI are responsible for interactions with Runx2.
EWS-FLI blocks the expression of osteoblastic genes in a multipotent progenitor
cell line that requires Runx2 to integrate bone morphogenic protein (Bmp)2
signaling while increasing proliferation and altering cell morphology. These
results demonstrate that EWS-FLI blocks the ability of Runx2 to induce osteoblast
specification of a mesenchymal progenitor cell. Disrupting interactions between
Runx2 and EWS-FLI1 may promote differentiation of the tumor cell.

PMCID: PMC3877924
PMID: 20665663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Int J Oncol. 2010 Sep;37(3):569-81.

Expression of ADAMTS4 in Ewing's sarcoma.

Minobe K(1), Ono R, Matsumine A, Shibata-Minoshima F, Izawa K, Oki T, Kitaura J, 
Iino T, Takita J, Iwamoto S, Hori H, Komada Y, Uchida A, Hayashi Y, Kitamura T,
Nosaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Mie University Graduate
School of Medicine, Tsu, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) is a malignant bone tumor that frequently occurs in
teenagers. Genetic mutations which cause EWS have been investigated, and the most
frequent one proved to be a fusion gene between EWS gene of chromosome 22 and the
FLI1 gene of chromosome 11. However, a limited numbers of useful biological
markers for diagnosis of EWS are available. In this study, we identified ADAMTS4 
(a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs) as a possible
tumor marker for EWS using the retrovirus-mediated signal sequence trap method.
ADAMTS4 is a secreted protein of 837 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass 
of 98-100 kDa. It is a member of metalloprotease family, is expressed mainly in
cartilage and brain, and regulates the degradation of aggrecans. ADAMTS4 has been
suggested to be involved in arthritic diseases and gliomas. Herein, we show that 
ADAMTS4 mRNA was expressed in all primary EWS samples and all EWS-derived cell
lines examined, while its expression was detected only in small subpopulations of
other solid tumors. Furthermore, ADAMTS4 expression was found to be regulated by 
EWS-FLI1 fusion gene-dependent manner. We also demonstrated that ADAMTS4 protein 
was highly expressed in tumor samples of the patients with EWS by using
immunohistochemistry. These results suggest that ADAMTS4 is a novel tumor marker 
for EWS.

PMID: 20664926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Am J Clin Pathol. 2010 Aug;134(2):323-31. doi: 10.1309/AJCPTLSM15XKPDDU.

Detection of SYT and EWS gene rearrangements by dual-color break-apart CISH in
liquid-based cytology samples of synovial sarcoma and Ewing sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumor.

Kumagai A(1), Motoi T, Tsuji K, Imamura T, Fukusato T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Kaga, Itabashi-ku,
Tokyo 173-8605, Japan.

To improve cytologic diagnostic accuracy for translocation-associated sarcomas,
we explored dual-color break-apart (dc) chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) 
on liquid-based cytology (LBC) samples of 2 prototypic sarcomas: synovial sarcoma
(SS) and Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET). LBC samples of 
10 cases of SS and 9 cases of ES/PNET were subjected to dc-CISH using probes for 
the specifically rearranged genes in each tumor entity: SYT in SS and EWS in
ES/PNET. Rearranged SYT was successfully detected in all SSs but not in any
ES/PNETs. In contrast, EWS rearrangement was identified in all ES/PNETs but not
in any SSs. These results were validated by dc-fluorescence in situ hybridization
and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. dc-CISH on LBC samples is a 
reliable modality to detect gene rearrangements in sarcomas. This system has a
clear advantage over other methods, enabling simultaneous visualization of the
genetic abnormality and well-preserved, nonoverlapping cytomorphologic features
with clear background under bright-field microscope.

PMID: 20660338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jan 1;128(1):216-26. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25564.

Synthetic siRNA targeting the breakpoint of EWS/Fli-1 inhibits growth of Ewing
sarcoma xenografts in a mouse model.

Takigami I(1), Ohno T, Kitade Y, Hara A, Nagano A, Kawai G, Saitou M, Matsuhashi 
A, Yamada K, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

The EWS/Fli-1 fusion gene, a product of the translocation t(11;22, q24;q12), is
detected in 85% of Ewing sarcomas and primitive neuroectodermal tumors. It is
thought to be a transcriptional activator that plays a significant role in
tumorigenesis. In this study, we developed a novel EWS/Fli-1 blockade system
using RNA interference and tested its application for inhibiting the
proliferation of Ewing sarcoma cells in vitro and the treatment of mouse tumor
xenografts in vivo. We designed and synthesized a small interfering RNA (siRNA)
possessing an aromatic compound at the 3'-end targeting the breakpoint of
EWS/Fli-1. As this sequence is present only in tumor cells, it is a potentially
relevant target. We found that the siRNA targeting EWS/Fli-1 significantly
suppressed the expression of EWS/Fli-1 protein sequence specifically and also
reduced the expression of c-Myc protein in Ewing sarcoma cells. We further
demonstrated that inhibition of EWS/Fli-1 expression efficiently inhibited the
proliferation of the transfected cells but did not induce apoptotic cell death.
In addition, the siRNA possessing the aromatic compound at the 3'-end was more
resistant to nucleolytic degradation than the unmodified siRNA. Administration of
the siRNA with atelocollagen significantly inhibited the tumor growth of TC-135, 
a Ewing sarcoma cell line, which had been subcutaneously xenografted into mice.
Moreover, modification of the 3'-end with an aromatic compound improved its
efficiency in vivo. Our data suggest that specific downregulation of EWS/Fli-1 by
RNA interference is a possible approach for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20648560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Aug;201(1):42-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.04.021.

Complex rearrangement of chromosomes 1, 7, 21, 22 in Ewing sarcoma.

Jinawath N(1), Morsberger L, Norris-Kirby A, Williams LM, Yonescu R, Argani P,
Griffin CA, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 600 North
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

The Ewing sarcoma (ES) family of tumors is characterized by nonrandom chromosomal
translocations involving the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 with one of the members 
of the ETS family of transcription factors. The majority of ES tumors are
characterized by a balanced translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12), which results in the
fusion of the 5' portion of EWSR1 gene with the 3'end of the FLI1 gene. Fusions
with ERG, another member of the ETS family, occur in less than 10% of ES tumors, 
and can arise through complex chromosomal rearrangements. Here, we report a case 
of a 5-year-old female with an ES tumor in the thoracic region. G-banding and
spectral karyotyping analysis demonstrated 46,XX,t(1;21;7)(q25;q22.3;q22).
Metaphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using the EWSR1 break-apart
probe demonstrated a normal signal on both apparently normal chromosomes 22, and 
an additional EWSR1-5' signal on the derivative chromosome 21.
Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis of RNA isolated from the
tumor demonstrated a EWSR1-ERG fusion transcript, fusing exon 7 of EWSR1 and exon
11 of ERG. These results are consistent with an additional copy of the 5' portion
of EWSR1, which inverted and then inserted on chromosome 21 and fused to the 3'
end of ERG. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a EWSR1-ERG fusion in
an ES tumor with an apparently duplicated 5' portion of EWSR1, and with a complex
translocation involving chromosomes 1, 7, and 21. This case adds to the spectrum 
of genetic rearrangements identified in ES tumors.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Aug;201(1):1-5. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.04.012.

Newly described translocation (18;19)(q23;q13.2) in abdominal wall soft-tissue
tumor resembling Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Riccardi GF(1), Stein C, de la Roza G, Damron TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Upstate Medical University, 750 East Adams Street, 
Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

From a morphologic standpoint, Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is one of a number of
pediatric malignancies that are characterized by sheets of small, round, blue
cells. Ewing sarcoma can usually be differentiated from other small round blue
cell tumors by the presence of a gene rearrangement having a consistent
breakpoint within the Ewing sarcoma gene (EWSR1) at 22q12. Although the most
common translocation partner is FLI1, located at 11q24, there is a growing list
of alternate rearrangements involving different loci. We describe the first
example of a soft-tissue sarcoma morphologically and immunohistochemically
similar to Ewing sarcoma, but with a novel t(18;19)(q23;q13.2).

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Future Oncol. 2010 Jul;6(7):1155-62. doi: 10.2217/fon.10.76.

Approaching Ewing sarcoma.

Dirksen U(1), Jürgens H.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology & Oncology, Albert-Schweitzer Str. 33, 48149 Münster,
Germany.

Although Ewing sarcoma represents a rare malignancy of childhood and adolescence,
it has attracted the attention of an increasing number of excellent researchers. 
With a tumor-specific EWS-ETS translocation coding for a transcription factor,
which obviously profoundly modifies the intracellular signaling network, this
rare malignancy opens insights in pathological gene and protein regulation.
Despite decades of basic and translational research, clinical improvement has not
yet been modulated by novel targeted therapies, but is produced by well-designed 
multimodal treatments. By using these multimodal treatment approaches, which
always include chemotherapy and local treatment, the prognosis has been improved 
by up to 70%. For more than 10 years, the survival curves have plateaued at a
relatively high level. However, a 30% relapse rate is still unacceptably high,
considering that the prognosis after relapse is fatal for most patients.
Therefore, novel treatment approaches are urgently required. This article
provides an overview of the Ewing sarcoma research of the past few years; while
not claiming to be complete, it offers a view on putative strategies with
translational potential.

PMID: 20624127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Virchows Arch. 2010 Sep;457(3):389-95. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-0944-2. Epub 2010 
Jul 9.

CD99-positive large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma with rearranged EWSR1 gene in
an infant: a case of prognostically favorable tumor.

Malone VS(1), Dobin SM, Jones KA, Donner LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Scott and White Memorial Hospital and Clinic, Temple,
TX 76508, USA.

The first case of large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma arising in an infant is
presented. The tumor arose at the anal verge of a 1-year-old girl. The diagnosis 
of this CD99-positive tumor was supported by expression of epithelial (keratins, 
EMA, and Ep-CAM) and neuroendocrine (chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and
neuron-specific enolase) markers and absence of immunoreactivity for Fli-1. No
fusion of EWSR1 with FLI-1 or ERG was detected by polymerase chain reaction.
However, the split of the EWSR1 gene was demonstrated by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. This case adds to the few epithelial tumors in which an EWSR1
rearrangement was demonstrated. Because the tumor was initially misclassified as 
an extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma, the patient was treated according to the
Ewing's sarcoma treatment protocol. She remains free of tumor 8 years after
initial diagnosis.

PMID: 20617339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Cytogenet. 2010 Jul 2;3:12. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-3-12.

Small blue round cell tumor of the interosseous membrane bearing a
t(2;22)(q34;q12)/EWS-CREB1 translocation: a case report.

Pacheco M(1), Horsman DE, Hayes MM, Clarkson PW, Huwait H, Nielsen TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. torsten@interchange.ubc.ca.

BACKGROUND: The group of small blue round cell tumors encompasses a heterogeneous
group of neoplasms characterized by primitive appearing round cells with few
distinguishing histologic features.
RESULTS: We report the case of a small blue round cell tumor with an EWS gene
rearrangement detected by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis that 
mimicked Ewing sarcoma, but with unusual histology and immunohistochemical
features. Multi-color karyotyping identified the presence of a t(2;22)(q34;q12)
that was initially expected to represent a variant EWSR1-FEV translocation. After
an extensive workup, the lesion is considered to represent a clear cell sarcoma
harboring an EWSR1-CREB1 fusion transcript.
CONCLUSIONS: This case appears to represent a rare variant of clear cell sarcoma 
arising in peripheral soft tissues with unusual histology and unique
immunophenotype. In this circumstance, FISH for all EWSR1 translocation partners 
or RT- PCR for a spectrum of possible transcript variants is critically important
for diagnosis, since cytogenetic analysis or clinical FISH assay using only
commercial EWSR1 probes will be misleading.

PMCID: PMC2908072
PMID: 20598147  [PubMed]


489. Mod Pathol. 2010 Oct;23(10):1307-15. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.118. Epub 2010
Jun 25.

Detection of myxoid liposarcoma-associated FUS-DDIT3 rearrangement variants
including a newly identified breakpoint using an optimized RT-PCR assay.

Powers MP(1), Wang WL, Hernandez VS, Patel KS, Lev DC, Lazar AJ, López-Terrada
DH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, Baylor College of
Medicine and Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Myxoid/round cell liposarcoma is characterized by the recurrent translocations
t(12;16)(q13;p11) and, less commonly, t(12;22)(q13;q12), which fuse FUS or EWSR1,
respectively, to DDIT3 on chromosome 12. Although a number of different variant
breakpoints have been described, greater than 90% of all cases have one of the
three different FUS-DDIT3 fusions, which may have clinical significance. To
identify the individual breakpoints, a sequence-specific assay such as reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) is needed. In this study, we optimized primer design
to develop an RT-PCR assay for the detection of the most common translocations in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue specimens. We compared our assay with
primers previously published for testing formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
specimens and achieved the most consistent results with our primers. We obtained 
RNA from 32 MLS cases, of which 27 carried one of the three common FUS-DDIT3
chimeric transcript types. Four of the negative cases were from very small
biopsies with very low RNA concentration. One case was consistently negative by
RT-PCR, but showed a FUS rearrangement by fluorescent in situ hybridization,
suggesting that it may harbor one of the rarer FUS-DDIT3 chimeric types. In
addition to the common fusions, our assay also identified a novel FUS-DDIT3
fusion between exon 9 of FUS and exon 3 of DDIT3 in one of the cases.

PMID: 20581806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Aug 15;16(16):4077-83. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2261. 
Epub 2010 Jun 14.

Oncogenic partnerships: EWS-FLI1 protein interactions initiate key pathways of
Ewing's sarcoma.

Erkizan HV(1), Uversky VN, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pediatrics, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.

Targeted therapy for cancer, which is specifically directed toward the cancer
without any potential for effects outside of controlling the tumor, is a gold
standard for treatment. Ewing's sarcoma contains the potential target EWS-FLI1,
as a result of a pathognomonic chromosomal translocation. The EWS-FLI1 fusion
protein includes the EWS domain, a potent transcriptional activator alongside the
highly conserved FLI1 ets DNA-binding domain. Because of the combination of these
domains, the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein acts as an aberrant transcription factor
whose expression results in cellular transformation. EWS-FLI1 functions by
binding to normal cellular protein partners in transcription and splicing,
similar to how a virus would corrupt normal cellular machinery for virion
production. Therefore, understanding the protein-protein interactions of EWS-FLI1
and the pathways that are regulated by these partnerships will inform both
oncogenesis and therapeutics. This review describes the known protein partners
and transcriptional targets of EWS-FLI1, while proposing strategies for
exploiting these partnerships with targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC3682924
PMID: 20547696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Oncogene. 2010 Aug 12;29(32):4504-16. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.205. Epub 2010 Jun
14.

Recent advances in the molecular pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma.

Toomey EC(1), Schiffman JD, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences and Center for Children's Cancer Research, 
Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Tumor development is a complex process resulting from interplay between mutations
in oncogenes and tumor suppressors, host susceptibility factors, and cellular
context. Great advances have been made by studying rare tumors with unique
clinical, genetic, or molecular features. Ewing's sarcoma serves as an excellent 
paradigm for understanding tumorigenesis because it exhibits some very useful and
important characteristics. For example, nearly all cases of Ewing's sarcoma
contain the (11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal translocation that encodes the EWS/FLI
oncoprotein. Besides the t(11;22), however, many cases have otherwise simple
karyotypes with no other demonstrable abnormalities. Furthermore, it seems that
an underlying genetic susceptibility to Ewing's sarcoma, if it exists, must be
rare. These two features suggest that EWS/FLI is the primary mutation that drives
the development of this tumor. Finally, Ewing's sarcoma is an aggressive tumor
that requires aggressive treatment. Thus, improved understanding of the
pathogenesis of this tumor will not only be of academic interest, but may also
lead to new therapeutic approaches for individuals afflicted with this disease.
The purpose of this review is to highlight recent advances in understanding the
molecular pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma, while considering the questions
surrounding this disease that still remain and how this knowledge may be applied 
to developing new treatments for patients with this highly aggressive disease.

PMCID: PMC3555143
PMID: 20543858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Jul 1;200(1):60-4. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.03.005.

Cryptic EWSR1-FLI1 fusions in Ewing sarcoma: potential pitfalls in the diagnostic
use of fluorescence in situ hybridization probes.

Newby R(1), Rowe D, Paterson L, Farquharson MA, MacDuff E, Coupe A, Hale J,
Dildey P, Bown N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom.

Detection of EWSR1 translocations - particularly t(11;22)(q24;q12) - is of great 
value in the differential diagnosis of the Ewing family of tumors. We report two 
cases that highlight the problems and pitfalls of identifying Ewing tumors using 
conventional chromosome analysis and a commercial EWSR1 fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) probe. In both cases, the tumor karyotype was abnormal, but 
a visible t(11;22)(q24;q12) was not present. The commercial EWSR1 "break-apart"
probe was not split in either case. Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis, however, identified EWSR1-FLI1 fusion transcripts in 
both tumors, and the gene fusions were corroborated by FISH analysis with "in
house" probes and confirmed by sequencing RT-PCR products. The occurrence of
cryptic EWSR1-FLI1 fusions mandates that RT-PCR should be performed, particularly
in those cases in which the genetic findings are not in agreement with the
histologic picture.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20513536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Med Oncol. 2011 Dec;28(4):1488-94. doi: 10.1007/s12032-010-9579-z. Epub 2010 May 
29.

Endometrial endometrioid adenocarcinoma associated with primitive neuroectodermal
tumour of the uterus: a poor prognostic subtype of uterine tumours.

Bartosch C(1), Vieira J, Teixeira MR, Lopes JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital de S. João, E.P.E., and Department of
Pathology, Medical Faculty, University of Porto, Alameda Professor Hernâni
Monteiro, 4202-451, Porto, Portugal. carlabartosch@med.up.pt

Uterine primitive neuroectodermal tumours are extremely rare tumours. They can
occur in pure form or combined with another component including endometrioid
adenocarcinoma. We aimed to review the clinical impact of neuroectodermal
phenotype in uterine tumours, after we recently diagnosed one such case. A
58-year-old female presented with irregular vaginal bleeding. Ultrasonography and
CT showed the presence of a large uterine mass with irregular contours. At
laparotomy it was found to extend to the right ureter, sigmoid colon and some
small intestinal loops. Microscopic examination revealed that the tumour
consisted of an endometrioid adenocarcinoma component merging with an extensive
neuroectodermal component. No EWSR1 or FUS rearrangement was found in the two
tumour components. The patient received two courses of chemotherapy but died
11 months after the initial diagnosis. We reviewed the morphological and
molecular criteria for the diagnosis of uterine primitive neuroectodermal tumours
published in the literature. We conclude that regardless of the detection of an
EWSR1 rearrangement, the presence of a neuroectodermal differentiation component 
in these rare uterine tumours is a marker of aggressive behaviour, and its
presence should be highlighted in the diagnosis.

PMID: 20512430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Jul;34(7):1002-6. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181e03b81.

Unusual myogenic and melanocytic differentiation of soft tissue pPNETs: an
immunohistochemical and molecular study of 3 cases.

Barisella M(1), Collini P, Orsenigo M, Aiello A, Paties CT, Dileo P, Pilotti S.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomic Pathology B Unit, Department of Pathology, IRCCS Istituto Nazionale
Tumori of Milan, Milan, Italy. marta.barisella@istitutotumori.mi.it

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Mar;35(3):464; author reply 464-5.

All of the members of the peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor family
(Ewing sarcomas, neuroectodermal tumors of bone, peripheral neuroepitheliomas,
and Askin tumors) have similar morphologic and immunophenotypical features (ie,
the proliferation of small and medium-sized round cells in a fibrous background
showing strong and diffuse immunohistochemical positivity for CD99), and the
common cytogenetic abnormality of a nonrandom translocation involving the EWS
gene and one of several members of the erythroblastosis virus transforming
sequence family of transcription factors. The combination of clinical information
and morphologic/immunophenotypical characteristics is usually sufficient for a
correct diagnosis, but there are rare cases in which an unusual predominant or
multidirectional immunophenotypical differentiation makes diagnosis a challenge
and requires the use of molecular cytogenetic or molecular techniques. We
describe 3 such cases in which we employed fluorescence in-situ hybridization
analysis to detect translocation involving the EWS gene and reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction followed by sequencing to detect the fusion transcript 
EWS-FLI1.

PMID: 20495444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2010 Apr 23;3(4):416-28.

Molecular classification of soft tissue sarcomas and its clinical applications.

Jain S(1), Xu R, Prieto VG, Lee P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY,
USA.

Sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors that are traditionally classified
according to the morphology and type of tissue that they resemble, such as
rhabdomyosarcoma, which resembles skeletal muscle. However, the cell of origin is
unclear in numerous sarcomas. Molecular genetics analyses have not only assisted 
in understanding the molecular mechanism in sarcoma pathogenesis but also
demonstrated new relationships within different types of sarcomas leading to a
more proper classification of sarcomas. Molecular classification based on the
genetic alteration divides sarcomas into two main categories: (i) sarcomas with
specific genetic alterations; which can further be subclassified based on a)
reciprocal translocations resulting in oncogenic fusion transcripts (e.g.
EWSR1-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma) and b) specific oncogenic mutations (e.g. KIT and
PDGFRA mutations in gastrointestinal stromal tumors) and (ii) sarcomas displaying
multiple, complex karyotypic abnormalities with no specific pattern, including
leiomyo-sarcoma, and pleomorphic liposarcoma. These specific genetic alterations 
are an important adjunct to standard morphological and immunohistochemical
diagnoses, and in some cases have a prognostic value, e. g., Ewing family tumors,
synovial sarcoma, and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. In addition, these studies may
also serve as markers to detect minimal residual disease and can aid in staging
or monitor the efficacy of therapy. Furthermore, sarcoma-specific fusion genes
and other emerging molecular events may also represent potential targets for
novel therapeutic approaches such as Gleevec for dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
Therefore, increased understanding of the molecular biology of sarcomas is
leading towards development of newer and more effective treatment regimens. The
review focuses on recent advances in molecular genetic alterations having an
impact on diagnostics, prognostication and clinical management of selected
sarcomas.

PMCID: PMC2872748
PMID: 20490332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2010 Mar 19;3(4):338-47.

Ewing Sarcoma, an enigmatic malignancy of likely progenitor cell origin, driven
by transcription factor oncogenic fusions.

Jedlicka P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA. paul.jedlicka@ucdenver.edu

Since its first description by James Ewing in 1921, Ewing Sarcoma has been a
cryptic malignancy. A poorly differentiated tumor of uncertain histogenesis and
aggressive biologic behavior, it is the second most common malignancy of bone and
soft tissue affecting adolescents and young adults. Some two decades ago, the
understanding of Ewing Sarcoma biology took a leap forward with the
identification of recurrent EWS/Ets fusions, which drive onco-genesis in this
disease. A further leap forward occurred over the last half decade with the
application of gene silencing, global expression profiling and primary cell
culture technologies to the study of this disease. Resulting work has revealed
EWS/Ets fusions to be surprisingly versatile regulators of gene expression, and
has narrowed the search for the elusive cell of origin. Improved understanding of
EWS/Ets biology and relevant oncogenic pathways has in turn led to the
development of targeted therapies, including, recently, small molecules targeting
key complexes involving the oncogenic fusion itself. In many respects still
remaining an enigma, Ewing Sarcoma is an important model for cancers originating 
in progenitor-type cells or manifesting progenitor-type cell features, and
cancers containing recurrent oncogenic fusions, the latter a surprisingly
expanding number.

PMCID: PMC2872742
PMID: 20490326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Int J Cancer. 2011 Mar 1;128(5):1139-50. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25424.

Clinicopathological significance of cell cycle regulation markers in a large
series of genetically confirmed Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors.

López-Guerrero JA(1), Machado I, Scotlandi K, Noguera R, Pellín A, Navarro S,
Serra M, Calabuig-Fariñas S, Picci P, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Fundación Instituto Valenciano de Oncología, 
Valencia, Spain. antonio.llombart@uv.es

More than 90% of all Ewing's Sarcoma Family of Tumors (ESFT) exhibit specific
chromosomal rearrangements between the EWS gene on chromosome 22 and various
members of the ETS gene family of transcription factors. The gene fusion type and
other secondary genetic alterations, mainly involving cell cycle regulators, have
been shown to be of prognostic relevance in ESFT. However, no conclusive results 
have been reported. We analyzed the clinicopathological significance of relevant 
cell cycle regulators in genetically confirmed ESFT. A total of 324 cases were
analyzed for the immunohistochemical expression of p53, p21(Waf1/Cip1) ,
p27(Kip1) and Ki67 and the chromosomal alterations of the p53 and 9p21 locus by
fluorescent in situ hybridization. We observed that expression of p53 (p =
0.025), p21(Waf1/Cip1) (p = 0.015) and p27(Kip1) (p = 0.013) was higher in
disseminated than in localized disease. Furthermore, a cohort of 217 patients
with localized disease was considered for studying the prognosis involvement of
these factors on patient follow-up. The median follow-up was 39 months (range:
0.17-452) with an overall survival (OS) of 55%. Ki67 was expressed in 34% of
cases and constituted an independent prognostic factor for progression free
survival and OS independently of the type of treatment [hazard ratio of 2.0 (95% 
CI: 1.3-3.1; p = 0.003) and 1.9 (95% IC: 1.3-2.9; p = 0.007) for progression free
survival and OS, respectively, being especially relevant in the group of patients
which incorporated radiotherapy in their regimen schedules. In conclusion, this
study demonstrates that Ki67 expression constitutes a valuable indicator of poor 
prognosis in localized ESFT.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20473914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Int J Cancer. 2011 Feb 15;128(4):778-86. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25390.

Oncogenesis and classification of mixed-type liposarcoma: a radiological,
histopathological and molecular biological analysis.

de Vreeze RS(1), de Jong D, Koops W, Nederlof PM, Ariaens A, Haas RL, van
Coevorden F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. r.d.vreeze@nki.nl

Liposarcomas are separated into clinicopathological entities with a
characteristic morphological spectrum and mutually exclusive genetic alterations.
Therefore, the rare occurrence of cases with combined patterns of
well-differentiated liposarcoma and myxoid liposarcoma designated as mixed-type
liposarcoma pose a conceptual problem. Moreover, this feature may have
consequences for treatment choice and prognosis. Here, we have dissected the
molecular relation of tumor components in cases of mixed-type liposarcoma. On the
basis of heterogeneous preoperative magnetic resonance image (MRI) features,
eight cases of mixed-type liposarcoma were selected. Preoperative biopsy samples 
and resection specimens were analyzed including molecular and immunohistochemical
analysis on all components. As controls, cases with homogeneous MRI features and 
uniform aspects of myxoid liposarcoma (n = 5), round cell liposarcoma (n = 5) and
well-differentiated liposarcoma (n = 5) were studied. All patients with
heterogeneous MRI features showed morphological components of myxoid liposarcoma 
and well-differentiated liposarcoma. Real-time polymerase chain reaction showed
FUS-DDIT3 fusion in both components in five of eight cases in the absence (zero
of five) of MDM2 and CDK4 amplification. In three of eight patients, MDM2 and/or 
CDK4 were overexpressed, and amplification was shown by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) in the absence of myxoid
liposarcoma translocations. All control patients showed a molecular pattern
consistent with their morphological features. Therefore, mixed-type liposarcomas 
should not be regarded as collision tumors, but as an extreme variant of the
morphological spectrum within a single biological entity, explaining the
biological contradiction of mixed-type liposarcoma. For treatment stratification,
detailed classification including molecular support should be performed in tumors
with heterogeneous MRI features.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20473880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Hum Reprod. 2010 Jul;25(7):1708-12. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deq121. Epub 2010 May 15.

Occasional involvement of the ovary in Ewing sarcoma.

Abir R(1), Feinmesser M, Yaniv I, Fisch B, Cohen IJ, Ben-Haroush A, Meirow D,
Felz C, Avigad S.

Author information: 
(1)Infertility and IVF Unit, Helen Schneider Hospital for Women, Rabin Medical
Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel. ronita@clalit.org.il

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is a highly metastatic malignancy in young
patients. Ovarian cryopreservation is often an option for fertility preservation 
in cancer patients of reproductive age, specifically in minors. Thus, the
possibility of ovarian involvement in EWS needs to be elucidated.
METHODS: Eight patients aged 13-20 years with EWS participated in the study.
Ovarian samples were fixed and prepared for light microscopy, and frozen in
liquid nitrogen for RNA extraction followed by RT-PCR. Histological studies,
including immunostaining for the adhesion receptor CD99, were used to detect
histopathological features. Sensitive molecular methods were used to detect
translocations causing the formation of tumor-specific EWS-Friend leukemia virus 
integration site 1 fusion gene (EWS-FLI1).
RESULTS: In seven patients, there was no evidence of EWS in the ovaries from
pathological/molecular studies. However, in one patient, the RT-PCR showed the
EWS translocation, although there was no pathological evidence.
CONCLUSIONS: Ovarian involvement is possible in EWS. Therefore, in patients with 
EWS ovarian tissue should be examined for traces of malignancy at both the
pathological and molecular levels prior to the grafting of cryopreserved tissue
in order to minimize the risk of reseeding the cancer.

PMID: 20472912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Cancer Res. 2010 May 15;70(10):4015-23. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4333. Epub 
2010 May 4.

Hypoxia modulates EWS-FLI1 transcriptional signature and enhances the malignant
properties of Ewing's sarcoma cells in vitro.

Aryee DN(1), Niedan S, Kauer M, Schwentner R, Bennani-Baiti IM, Ban J,
Muehlbacher K, Kreppel M, Walker RL, Meltzer P, Poremba C, Kofler R, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria. dave.aryee@ccri.at

Hypoxia is an important condition in the tumor cell microenvironment and
approximately 1% to 1.5% of the genome is transcriptionally responsive to hypoxia
with hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) as a major mediator of transcriptional
activation. Tumor hypoxia is associated with a more aggressive phenotype of many 
cancers in adults, but data on pediatric tumors are scarce. Because, by
immunohistochemistry, HIF-1alpha expression was readily detectable in 18 of 28
primary Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), a group of highly malignant
bone-associated tumors in children and young adults, we studied the effect of
hypoxia on ESFT cell lines in vitro. Intriguingly, we found that EWS-FLI1 protein
expression, which characterizes ESFT, is upregulated by hypoxia in a
HIF-1alpha-dependent manner. Hypoxia modulated the EWS-FLI1 transcriptional
signature relative to normoxic conditions. Both synergistic as well as
antagonistic transcriptional effects of EWS-FLI1 and of hypoxia were observed.
Consistent with alterations in the expression of metastasis-related genes,
hypoxia stimulated the invasiveness and soft agar colony formation of ESFT cells 
in vitro. Our data represent the first transcriptome analysis of hypoxic ESFT
cells and identify hypoxia as an important microenvironmental factor modulating
EWS-FLI1 expression and target gene activity with far-reaching consequences for
the malignant properties of ESFT.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2884367
PMID: 20442286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Genes Dev. 2010 May;24(9):916-32. doi: 10.1101/gad.1899710. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

EWS-FLI-1 modulates miRNA145 and SOX2 expression to initiate mesenchymal stem
cell reprogramming toward Ewing sarcoma cancer stem cells.

Riggi N(1), Suvà ML, De Vito C, Provero P, Stehle JC, Baumer K, Cironi L,
Janiszewska M, Petricevic T, Suvà D, Tercier S, Joseph JM, Guillou L, Stamenkovic
I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne CH-1011, Switzerland.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) display plasticity and self-renewal properties
reminiscent of normal tissue stem cells, but the events responsible for their
emergence remain obscure. We recently identified CSCs in Ewing sarcoma family
tumors (ESFTs) and showed that they retain mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
plasticity. In the present study, we addressed the mechanisms that underlie ESFT 
CSC development. We show that the EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene, associated with 85%-90% 
of ESFTs and believed to initiate their pathogenesis, induces expression of the
embryonic stem cell (ESC) genes OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG in human pediatric MSCs
(hpMSCs) but not in their adult counterparts. Moreover, under appropriate culture
conditions, hpMSCs expressing EWS-FLI-1 generate a cell subpopulation displaying 
ESFT CSC features in vitro. We further demonstrate that induction of the ESFT CSC
phenotype is the result of the combined effect of EWS-FLI-1 on its target gene
expression and repression of microRNA-145 (miRNA145) promoter activity. Finally, 
we provide evidence that EWS-FLI-1 and miRNA-145 function in a mutually
repressive feedback loop and identify their common target gene, SOX2, in addition
to miRNA145 itself, as key players in ESFT cell differentiation and
tumorigenicity. Our observations provide insight for the first time into the
mechanisms whereby a single oncogene can reprogram primary cells to display a CSC
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2861191
PMID: 20382729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jun;38(11):e126. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq217. Epub 2010 Apr
7.

De novo motif identification improves the accuracy of predicting transcription
factor binding sites in ChIP-Seq data analysis.

Boeva V(1), Surdez D, Guillon N, Tirode F, Fejes AP, Delattre O, Barillot E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, Paris, France.

Dramatic progress in the development of next-generation sequencing technologies
has enabled accurate genome-wide characterization of the binding sites of
DNA-associated proteins. This technique, baptized as ChIP-Seq, uses a combination
of chromatin immunoprecipitation and massively parallel DNA sequencing. Other
published tools that predict binding sites from ChIP-Seq data use only positional
information of mapped reads. In contrast, our algorithm MICSA (Motif
Identification for ChIP-Seq Analysis) combines this source of positional
information with information on motif occurrences to better predict binding sites
of transcription factors (TFs). We proved the greater accuracy of MICSA with
respect to several other tools by running them on datasets for the TFs NRSF,
GABP, STAT1 and CTCF. We also applied MICSA on a dataset for the oncogenic TF
EWS-FLI1. We discovered >2000 binding sites and two functionally different
binding motifs. We observed that EWS-FLI1 can activate gene transcription when
(i) its binding site is located in close proximity to the gene transcription
start site (up to approximately 150 kb), and (ii) it contains a microsatellite
sequence. Furthermore, we observed that sites without microsatellites can also
induce regulation of gene expression--positively as often as negatively--and at
much larger distances (up to approximately 1 Mb).

PMCID: PMC2887977
PMID: 20375099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Jun 15;45(1):82-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2010.03.002.
Epub 2010 Apr 1.

TEThered to Runx: novel binding partners for runx factors.

Li X(1), Decker M, Westendorf JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

RUNX transcription factors reside in the nuclear matrix where they integrate
numerous signaling pathways to regulate gene expression and affect tissue
development, regeneration, and tumorigenesis. An affinity purification and
proteomic experiment was performed to identify novel Runx2 binding partners. The 
interactions between Runx2 and two nuclear factors (Ddx5 and CoAA) identified in 
this screen were previously described. Coactivator activator (CoAA) bound the DNA
binding domain of Runx2 and prevented Runx-driven gene expression. The YxxQ motif
in CoAA was required for Runx2 interactions. Members of the FET/TET family of
proteins, including FUS/TLS and EWSR1, contain a similar motif and were
hypothesized to interact with Runx2. Here, we provide evidence that FUS/TLS,
EWSR1, and the Ewing's sarcoma t(12;21) fusion protein EWS-FLI bind Runx2 and
alter its transcriptional activity. Potential roles of protein complexes
containing FET/TET and RUNX family members during tumor formation and mesenchymal
progenitor cell differentiation are discussed.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2878890
PMID: 20362478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Oncogene. 2010 May 27;29(21):3134-45. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.72. Epub 2010 Mar 29.

EWS/ETS proteins promote expression and regulate function of the homeodomain
transcription factor BRN3A.

Gascoyne DM(1), Dunne J, Behjati S, Sebire NJ, Anderson J, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology and Cancer Biology Unit, University College London
Institute of Child Health, London, UK. duncan.gascoyne@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs or EFTs) express neuronal markers, which
indicates they may originate from cells at least partly committed to neuronal
lineage. However, recent publications suggest EFT originates in mesenchymal stem 
cells, and EWS/ETS fusion proteins characteristic of EFT activate neuronal marker
expression to confer a neural phenotype on EFT. Here we show that the neuronal
marker BRN3A/POU4F1 is expressed abundantly at the protein level in primary EFT
but not in rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma, and EFT cells exhibit high
activity of the BRN3A proximal autoregulatory region. EWS/FLI-1 siRNA reduces
BRN3A expression and promoter activity and EWS/ETS proteins are bound to the
BRN3A locus, suggesting a direct function for EWS/ETS proteins in control of
BRN3A expression. Differentiation-associated and autoregulatory activities of
BRN3A are respectively impaired and altered in EFT cells, and EWS/FLI-1 siRNA can
restore some BRN3A function. A potentially novel function for BRN3A in EFT cells 
is identified. These results extend the hypothesis that EWS/ETS proteins induce
expression of neuronal markers such as BRN3A in EFT by showing that the function 
of those same markers may be restricted or controlled in an EWS/ETS-dependent
manner.

PMID: 20348952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Anticancer Res. 2010 Feb;30(2):661-4.

Specificity of fusion genes in adipocytic tumors.

Kubo T(1), Matsui Y, Naka N, Araki N, Myoui A, Endo K, Yasui N, Ohtani O, Suzuki 
K, Kimura T, Yoshikawa H, Ueda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Institute of Health Biosciences, University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In subsets of adipocytic tumors, specific chromosomal translocations 
lead to the generation of fusion genes. The high mobility group A2 (HMGA2)-lipoma
preferred partner (LPP) and the reciprocal LPP-HMGA2 represent such fusion genes 
in lipoma, while the human translocation liposarcoma (TLS)-CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP) and the Ewing sarcoma (EWS)-CHOP in
liposarcoma. However, the specificity of these fusion genes has not been
established in a variety of adipocytic tumors.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: One hundred and seventy-two cases of adipocytic tumors,
comprising 98 cases of lipoma and 74 cases of liposarcoma, were analyzed for the 
possible expression of HMGA2-LPP, LPP-HMGA2, TLS-CHOP and EWS-CHOP fusion genes, 
using a reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction method.
RESULTS: In lipoma, twenty-two cases (22.4%) were associated with either
HMGA2-LPP or LPP-HMGA2, while neither TLS-CHOP nor EWS-CHOP transcript was
detectable. On the contrary, in liposarcoma, neither HMGA2-LPP nor LPP-HMGA2
transcript was detectable, although twenty-five cases (33.8%) were related to
either TLS-CHOP or EWS-CHOP.
CONCLUSION: HMGA2-LPP and LPP-HMGA2 were specific to lipoma, and TLS-CHOP and
EWS-CHOP were specific to liposarcoma.

PMID: 20332486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1982-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.23.3585. Epub 2010
Mar 22.

Impact of EWS-ETS fusion type on disease progression in Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor: prospective results from the 
cooperative Euro-E.W.I.N.G. 99 trial.

Le Deley MC(1), Delattre O, Schaefer KL, Burchill SA, Koehler G, Hogendoorn PC,
Lion T, Poremba C, Marandet J, Ballet S, Pierron G, Brownhill SC, Nesslböck M,
Ranft A, Dirksen U, Oberlin O, Lewis IJ, Craft AW, Jürgens H, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung,
Zimmermannplatz 10, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1973-4.

PURPOSE EWS-ETS fusion genes are the driving force in Ewing's sarcoma
pathogenesis. Because of the variable breakpoint locations in the involved genes,
there is heterogeneity in fusion RNA and protein architecture. Since previous
retrospective studies suggested prognostic differences among patients expressing 
different EWS-FLI1 fusion types, the impact of fusion RNA architecture on disease
progression and relapse was studied prospectively within the Euro-E.W.I.N.G. 99
clinical trial. PATIENTS AND METHODS Among 1,957 patients who registered before
January 1, 2007, 703 primary tumors were accessible for the molecular biology
study. Fusion type was assessed by polymerase chain reaction on frozen (n = 578) 
or paraffin-embedded materials (n = 125). The primary end point was the time to
disease progression or relapse. Results After exclusion of noninformative
patients, 565 patients were entered into the prognostic factor analysis comparing
type 1 (n = 296), type 2 (n = 133), nontype 1/nontype 2 EWS-FLI1 (n = 91) and
EWS-ERG fusions (n = 45). Median follow-up time was 4.5 years. The distribution
of sex, age, tumor volume, tumor site, disease extension, or histologic response 
did not differ between the four fusion type groups. We did not observe any
significant prognostic value of the fusion type on the risk of progression or
relapse. The only slight difference was that the risk of progression or relapse
associated with nontype 1/nontype 2 EWS-FLI1 fusions was 1.38 (95% CI, 0.96 to
2.0) times higher than risk associated with other fusion types, but it was not
significant (P = .10). CONCLUSION In contrast to retrospective studies, the
prospective evaluation did not confirm a prognostic benefit for type 1 EWS-FLI1
fusions.

PMID: 20308673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1989-94. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.24.5845. Epub
2010 Mar 22.

Current treatment protocols have eliminated the prognostic advantage of type 1
fusions in Ewing sarcoma: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.

van Doorninck JA(1), Ji L, Schaub B, Shimada H, Wing MR, Krailo MD, Lessnick SL, 
Marina N, Triche TJ, Sposto R, Womer RB, Lawlor ER.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, 4650 Sunset Blvd, MS#57, Los Angeles, CA
90027, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1973-4.

PURPOSE Ewing sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs) exhibit chromosomal translocations
that lead to the creation of chimeric fusion oncogenes. Combinatorial diversity
among chromosomal breakpoints produces varying fusions. The type 1 EWS-FLI1
transcript is created as a result of fusion between exons 7 of EWS and 6 of FLI1,
and retrospective studies have reported that type 1 tumors are associated with an
improved outcome. We have re-examined this association in a prospective cohort of
patients with ESFT treated according to current Children's Oncology Group (COG)
treatment protocols. METHODS Frozen tumor tissue was prospectively obtained from 
patients diagnosed with ESFT, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was used to determine translocation status. Analysis was confined to
patients with localized tumors who were diagnosed after 1994 and treated
according to COG protocols. Translocation status was correlated with disease
characteristics, event-free survival (EFS), and overall survival (OS). Results
RT-PCR identified chimeric fusion oncogenes in 119 of 132 ESFTs. Eighty-nine
percent of identified transcripts were EWS-FLI1, and of these, 58.8% were type 1.
Five-year EFS and OS rates for patients with type 1 and non-type 1 fusions
diagnosed between 2001 and 2005 were equivalent (type 1: EFS, 63% +/- 7%; OS, 83%
+/- 6%; non-type 1: EFS, 71% +/- 9%; OS, 79% +/- 8%). CONCLUSION Current
intensive treatment protocols for localized ESFT have erased the clinical
disadvantage that was formerly observed in patients with non-type 1 EWS-FLI1
fusions.

PMCID: PMC2860404
PMID: 20308669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1973-4. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.27.2161. Epub 2010
Mar 22.

Role of fusion subtype in Ewing sarcoma.

Barr FG, Meyer WH.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1989-94.
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1982-8.

PMID: 20308653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Oncol. 2010;2010:397632. doi: 10.1155/2010/397632. Epub 2010 Mar 15.

Is There a Predisposition Gene for Ewing's Sarcoma?

Randall RL(1), Lessnick SL, Jones KB, Gouw LG, Cummings JE, Cannon-Albright L,
Schiffman JD.

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Services, Department of Orthopaedics, Huntsman Cancer Institute and
Primary, Children's Medical Center, The University of Utah, Utah, UT 84112, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a highly malignant tumor of children and young adults. The
molecular mechanisms that underlie Ewing's Sarcoma development are beginning to
be understood. For example, most cases of this disease harbor somatic chromosomal
translocations that fuse the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 with members of the ETS 
family. While some cooperative genetic events have been identified, such as
mutations in TP53 or deletions of the CDKN2A locus, these appear to be absent in 
the vast majority of cases. It is therefore uncertain whether EWS/ETS
translocations are the only consistently present alteration in this tumor, or
whether there are other recurrent abnormalities yet to be discovered. One method 
to discover such mutations is to identify familial cases of Ewing's sarcoma and
to then map the susceptibility locus using traditional genetic mapping
techniques. Although cases of sibling pairs with Ewing's sarcoma exist, familial 
cases of Ewing's sarcoma have not been reported. While Ewing's sarcoma has been
reported as a 2nd malignancy after retinoblastoma, significant associations of
Ewing's sarcoma with classic tumor susceptibility syndromes have not been
identified. We will review the current evidence, or lack thereof, regarding the
potential of a heritable condition predisposing to Ewing's sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC2838402
PMID: 20300555  [PubMed]


10. J Med Case Rep. 2010 Mar 17;4:88. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-4-88.

Primary vaginal Ewing's sarcoma or primitive neuroectodermal tumor in a
17-year-old woman: a case report.

Rekhi B(1), Qureshi S, Basak R, Desai SB, Medhi S, Kurkure P, Menon S, Maheshwari
A, Jambhekar NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Centre, Dr EB Road, Parel, Mumbai,
400012, India. rekhi.bharat@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Primary Ewing's sarcoma or primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the
genital tract of women is uncommon. Rarer still is its occurrence in the vagina, 
with only five cases described so far. Out of these, only one case was confirmed 
using molecular analysis.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present an extremely rare case of Ewing's sarcoma or
primitive neuroectodermal tumor in a 17-year-old Indian girl. She presented with 
a vaginal mass that was initially diagnosed as a malignant round cell tumor.
Immunohistochemistry showed diffuse positivity for vimentin, membranous
positivity for MIC2, and positivity for BCL2 and FLI-1. On the other hand, she
was negative for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, desmin, Myo D-1,
myogenin and smooth muscle actin. A diagnosis of primitive neuroectodermal tumor 
was thus offered. Furthermore, a molecular analysis of our patient using reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction technique showed positivity for t(11; 22)
(q24; q12) (EWSR1-FLI1), thus confirming the diagnosis of a Ewing's
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor. Our patient was offered chemotherapy on 
Institutional protocol EFT 2001.
CONCLUSION: This is a rare case of primary vaginal Ewing's sarcoma or primitive
neuroectodermal tumor, which was confirmed with molecular analysis, in the
youngest patient known so far. This study reinforces the value of integrating
morphological features with membranous MIC2 positivity, along with application of
molecular techniques in objective identification of an Ewing's sarcoma or
primitive neuroectodermal tumor at uncommon sites.

PMCID: PMC2848680
PMID: 20233457  [PubMed]


11. J Biochem. 2010 Jun;147(6):885-93. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq025. Epub 2010 Mar 7.

Identification of a self-association domain in the Ewing's sarcoma protein: a
novel function for arginine-glycine-glycine rich motifs?

Shaw DJ(1), Morse R, Todd AG, Eggleton P, Lorson CL, Young PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Neurobiology, institute of biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula
College of Medicine and Dentistry, Exeter EX1 2LU, UK.

The Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) protein is a ubiquitously expressed RNA chaperone. The 
EWS protein localizes predominantly to the nucleus. Previous reports have
suggested that the EWS protein is capable of dimerizing. However, to date this
has not been confirmed. Here, using a novel panel of recombinant proteins, we
have performed an in vitro biomolecular interaction analysis of the EWS protein. 
We have demonstrated that all three arginine-glycine-glycine (RGG) motifs are
capable of binding directly to the survival motor neuron protein, a Tudor domain 
containing EWS binding partner. We have also confirmed EWS is capable of
self-associating, and we have mapped this binding domain to the RGG motifs. We
have also found that self-association may be required for EWS nuclear import.
This is the first direct evidence of RGG domains being involved in
self-association and has implications on all RGG-containing proteins.

PMCID: PMC2912030
PMID: 20211855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Pathol Oncol Res. 2010 Dec;16(4):601-8. doi: 10.1007/s12253-010-9249-7. Epub 2010
Mar 5.

Uterine tumors with neuroectodermal differentiation. A report of 4 cases.

Dundr P(1), Fischerová D, Povýšil C, Berková A, Bauerová L, Cibula D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Studnickova 2, Prague 128 00,
Czech Republic. pdundr@seznam.cz

We report four cases of uterine tumors with neuroectodermal differentiation. One 
tumor had neuroectodermal component only; in the three other tumors, the
neuroectodermal component was admixed with another component, namely
rhabdomyosarcoma (1 case), and endometrioid adenocarcinoma (2 cases).
Histologically, the neuroectodermal component consisted of small to medium sized 
cells arranged in diffuse sheets. The tumor cells had round nuclei with stippled 
to coarsely granular chromatin, mostly with non-prominent nucleoli, and scant
eosinophilic or amphophilic cytoplasm. Immunohistochemically, 4/4 tumors showed
expression of vimentin, synaptophysin and CD56; 3/4 tumors were CD99 and NSE
positive; 2/4 tumors showed focal expression of S-100 protein; and 1/4 tumors had
focal dot-like cytoplasmic positivity for cytokeratin AE1/AE3. FLI-1 was negative
in all cases. FISH examination was performed and none of the tumors showed
rearrangement of EWSR1 gene. Uterine tumors with neuroectodermal differentiation 
are rare; to the best of our knowledge only 44 cases have been reported in the
literature to date, referred to as Ewing sarcoma, peripheral PNET (pPNET), PNET
(not otherwise specified) and uterine tumors with neuroendocrine differentiation.

PMID: 20204716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Am J Pathol. 2010 Apr;176(4):1973-82. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090486. Epub 2010 
Mar 4.

Function of EWS-POU5F1 in sarcomagenesis and tumor cell maintenance.

Fujino T(1), Nomura K, Ishikawa Y, Makino H, Umezawa A, Aburatani H, Nagasaki K, 
Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.

POU5F1 is a transcription factor essential for the self-renewal activity and
pluripotency of embryonic stem cells and germ cells. We have previously reported 
that POU5F1 is fused to EWSR1 in a case of undifferentiated sarcoma with
chromosomal translocation t(6;22)(p21;q12). In addition, the EWS-POU5F1 chimeras 
have been recently identified in human neoplasms of the skin and salivary glands.
To clarify the roles of the EWS-POU5F1 chimera in tumorigenesis and tumor cell
maintenance, we used small-interfering RNA-mediated gene silencing. Knockdown of 
EWS-POU5F1 in the t(6;22) sarcoma-derived GBS6 cell line resulted in a
significant decrease of cell proliferation because of G1 cell cycle arrest
associated with p27(Kip1) up-regulation. Moreover, senescence-like morphological 
changes accompanied by actin polymerization were observed. In contrast,
EWS-POU5F1 down-regulation markedly increased the cell migration and invasion as 
well as activation of metalloproteinase 2 and metalloproteinase 14. The results
indicate that the proliferative activity of cancer cells and cell motility are
discrete processes in multistep carcinogenesis. These findings reveal the
functional role of the sarcoma-related chimeric protein as well as POU5F1 in the 
development and progression of human neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC2843485
PMID: 20203285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Clin Pathol. 2010 Feb;63(2):124-8. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2009.072256.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma including cases with pleomorphic features
analysed by fluorescence in situ hybridisation.

Matsumura T(1), Yamaguchi T, Tochigi N, Wada T, Yamashita T, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft-tissue tumour
of uncertain differentiation and low metastatic potential. Cytogenetics and/or
molecular genetics have revealed that most have a rearrangement of the EWSR1
gene, whereas a FUS gene rearrangement is present in a minority of cases.
Although some cases of AFH display striking pleomorphism and mitotic activity,
there are no known clinical, morphological or genetic factors that predict
metastasis. The authors present clinicopathological features of AFH, including
cases showing a pleomorphic histological appearance, and results of fluorescence 
in situ hybridisation analysis of EWSR1 and FUS rearrangements.
METHODS: Tumour samples from 10 patients were subjected to clinicopathological
and immunohistochemical analysis and dual-colour fluorescence in situ
hybridisation for EWSR1 and FUS with split-signal probes.
RESULTS: All cases showed clinical features (sites: extremities followed by
trunk; age: adolescent to young adult), morphology (multinodular proliferation of
spindle cells, lymphoid cuffs and pseudovascular spaces) and immunohistochemical 
results (more than half were positive for CD68, CD99, desmin and epithelial
membrane antigen) typical of AFH. There were two local recurrences in each of two
patients. Two patients developed distant metastases and died from the disease;
tumours of these two patients showed focal proliferation of large pleomorphic
cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and high proliferative activity (>10/10
high-power field and Ki-67 labelling index >10%). There were no clinical,
histological or immunohistochemical differences between the nine cases with EWSR1
rearrangement and one case with FUS rearrangement.
CONCLUSIONS: Wide surgical excision and careful follow-up are necessary for
patients with AFH in view of its risk of local recurrence and metastasis leading 
to a fatal outcome.

PMID: 20154033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cancer Lett. 2010 Aug 1;294(1):57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.01.022. Epub
2010 Feb 12.

Inhibition of the transcriptional function of p53 by EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein in
Ewing Family Tumors.

Li Y(1), Tanaka K, Fan X, Nakatani F, Li X, Nakamura T, Takasaki M, Yamamoto S,
Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

The chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) generates the EWS-Fli1 fusion
gene, which contributes to the development of Ewing Family Tumors (EFTs).
Although p53 mutations are found only in 5-20% of EFTs, the p53 pathway is
thought to be abrogated in EFTs. The role of EWS-Fli1 in the p53 pathway in the
tumor is still poorly understood. In this study, using immunoprecipitation and
co-localization, we show that EWS-Fli1 interacts with p53 within the nucleus in
vivo. The introduction of EWS-Fli1 resulted in significant reduction of promoter 
activities and mRNA levels of p21 and mdm2, meanwhile it canceled p53-dependent
growth suppression. In contrast, knockdown of EWS-Fli1 expression mediated by
small interfering RNAs (siRNA) also augmented the induction of p21 and mdm2 in
response to DNA damage. Furthermore, using serial deletion constructs of the
EWS-Fli1 fusion protein, we determined that EWS-Fli1 binding to p53 as well as
inhibition of p21 and mdm2 promoter activities was mediated by its N-terminal
domain (amino acid residues 65-109). These observations suggest that the
N-terminal region of EWS-Fli1 might associate with p53 and impair its
transcriptional activity, subsequently inhibiting the expression of its
downstream genes. These results might provide new insight into the oncogenesis of
EFTs by EWS-Fli1 via the inhibition of p53 function.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20153576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Arkh Patol. 2009 Nov-Dec;71(6):41-3.

[Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney in children; its differential
diagnosis with Wilms tumor].

[Article in Russian]

Popov SD, Sebire NJ, Popova ED, Vujanic GM.

There may be a number of tumors made up by small round blue cells in the kidneys 
of children. One of them is primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). The
differences in therapeutic approaches determine the need to establish an accurate
diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of PNET and the blastemal component of
Wilms tumor can be difficult due to the similar histological pattern. There is a 
need for a close analysis of morphological manifestations, by keeping in mind the
age of patients, and supplementary studies. A strong CD99 membrane expression and
nuclear FLI1 expression in tumor cells are the signs of PNET. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and fluorescence in situ hybridization
can determine PNET-specific translocations [t(11;22)(q24;q12), by involving the
EWS gene.

PMID: 20131507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 1;70(3):1154-63. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1993. Epub
2010 Jan 26.

EWS/FLI1 oncogene activates caspase 3 transcription and triggers apoptosis in
vivo.

Sohn EJ(1), Li H, Reidy K, Beers LF, Christensen BL, Lee SB.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

EWS/FLI1 is a fusion gene product generated by a chromosomal translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12) found in Ewing sarcoma. EWS/FLI1 encodes an aberrant
transcription factor with oncogenic properties in vitro. Paradoxically,
expression of EWS/FLI1 in nontransformed primary cells results in apoptosis, but 
the exact mechanism remains unclear. In primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts
derived from conditional EWS/FLI1 knock-in embryos, expression of EWS/FLI1
resulted in apoptosis with concomitant increase in the endogenous Caspase 3
(Casp3) mRNA. EWS/FLI1 directly bound and activated the CASP3 promoter, whereas
small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of EWS/FLI1 led to a marked decrease in 
CASP3 transcripts in Ewing sarcoma cell lines. Ectopic expression of EWS/FLI1
resulted in an increased expression of CASP3 protein in heterologous cell lines. 
Importantly, expression of EWS/FLI1 in the mouse triggered an early onset of
apoptosis in kidneys and acute lethality. These findings suggest that EWS/FLI1
induces apoptosis, at least partially, through the activation of CASP3 and show
the cell context-dependent roles of EWS/FLI1 in apoptosis and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2818579
PMID: 20103643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Mol Diagn. 2010 Mar;12(2):238-43. doi: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.090117. Epub 2010
Jan 21.

Multifocal myxoid liposarcoma--metastasis or second primary tumor?: a molecular
biological analysis.

de Vreeze R(1), de Jong D, Nederlof P, Ruijter HJ, Boerrigter L, Haas R, van
Coevorden F.

Author information: 
(1)Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands. r.d.vreeze@nki.nl

The classification of multifocal myxoid/round cell liposarcoma, which is defined 
as tumor presentation in at least two separate sites before manifestation in the 
lungs, as either metastasis or as a second primary tumor, has essential clinical 
consequences. Genetically, myxoid/round cell liposarcoma is characterized by
t(12;16)(q13;p11) or t(12;22)(q13;q12), and various exon fusion transcripts are
described with varying incidences, which permits their use as markers for
clonality. Moreover, in solid tumors, analysis of loss of heterozygozity is
valuable for clonality analysis. Therefore, fifteen multifocal myxoid/round cell 
liposarcoma patients with two to five metachronous (n = 12) or synchronous (n =
3) localizations were investigated. Using RT-PCR, the detailed molecular
characteristics of the FUS-CHOP and EWS-CHOP breakpoints were determined. Loss of
heterozygozity analysis at twelve loci was then used to further analyze clonal
relationships. In all patients, tumor sites showed identical FUS-CHOP fusion
products. In six patients, identical rare fusion transcripts were found,
supporting a clonal relationship. Nine patients had the common
exon5-FUS/exon2-CHOP fusion transcript, and two of these were identified as
clonally related by loss of heterozygozity analysis. In all other patients, loss 
of heterozygozity analysis was highly suggestive of a clonal relationship, and no
evidence for interpretation of a second primary tumor was found. This study
supports the metastatic nature of apparent multifocal myxoid/round cell
liposarcoma.

PMCID: PMC2871731
PMID: 20093386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Feb;34(2):279-85. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181cb4017.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma of bone: a calcifying sclerosing variant
mimicking osteosarcoma.

Mangham DC(1), Williams A, Lalam RK, Brundler MA, Leahy MG, Cool WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Musculoskeletal Pathology, Robert Jones & Agnes hunt Orthopaedic
Hospital NHS Trust, Oswestry, Shropshire SY10 7AG, UK. chas.mangham@rjah.nhs.uk

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is a neoplasm of uncertain histogenesis, which
most commonly arises in the subcutaneous tissue of the extremities of children
and young adults. We report the first case of a calcifying sclerosing variant of 
this entity. This case arose in bone-a site where there has been just 1
previously published case of typical (nonsclerosing/mineralizing) angiomatoid
fibrous histiocytoma. The patient presented with the classical paraneoplastic
syndrome that can occur with this tumor type and, apart from the described
extracellular matrical features, displayed typical histologic features. Due to
the rarity of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma at this site and the presence of
matrical sclerosis/mineralization, this case raised the important differential
diagnosis of osteosarcoma, both histologically and radiologically. The diagnosis 
was confirmed by molecular analysis; fluorescence in situ hybridization for EWSR1
gene disruption, and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction using newly 
designed primers on both frozen and decalcified, paraffin-embedded tissue samples
showing an EWSR1-ATF1 translocation. It is important to recognize that this
relatively indolent tumor can arise in bone and that it can contain focally
mineralized hyalinized sclerotic matrix to avoid making the serious misdiagnosis 
of high-grade osteosarcoma and administering aggressive systemic chemotherapeutic
treatment.

PMID: 20090505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Feb;34(2):216-22. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181c7d8b2.

Cutaneous clear cell sarcoma: a clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and
molecular analysis of 12 cases emphasizing its distinction from dermal melanoma.

Hantschke M(1), Mentzel T, Rütten A, Palmedo G, Calonje E, Lazar AJ, Kutzner H.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatopathologie Fried richshafen, Siemensstrasse 6/1, D-88048
Friedrichshafen, Germany. hantschke@dermpath.de

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) of tendons and aponeuroses/malignant melanoma (MM) of
soft parts is a rare tumor and in the majority of cases presents a characteristic
reciprocal translocation t(12;22)(q13;q12) that results in fusion of the EWS and 
ATF1 genes. Although the melanocytic differentiation of CCS is indisputable, its 
precise lineage remains unclear. Typically, the slowly growing tumor affects the 
extremities of adolescents or young adults, especially around the ankle and foot.
CCS is classically regarded as a deep soft tissue tumor associated with tendons
or aponeuroses. This traditional view is put into perspective by the description 
of primary CCS of the gastrointestinal tract that may have a variant fusion gene 
EWSR1-CREB1. We describe 12 cases of cutaneous CCS and discuss the differential
diagnoses. These 12 cases share an identical immunohistochemical profile with MM 
and thus can easily be confused with a dermal variant of spindle cell MM or
metastasis of MM. The patients' ages ranged from 6 to 74 years (median: 25 y),
and there was a female predominance (10 females, 2 males). Most tumors (n = 9)
were located on the extremities, 2 tumors arose on the back, and 1 on the
abdomen. The mean tumor size was 0.97 cm (range, 0.4 to 1.7 cm). Six cases showed
invasion of the subcutis, the other 6 cases were entirely dermal. Tumor necrosis 
was evident in 2 cases, melanin pigment in 2 cases, and ulceration in 1 tumor.
All cases showed uniform nests and fascicles of pale spindled or slightly
epitheloid cells with finely granular eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm. There was 
fair pleomorphism with plump spindled nuclei and significantly prominent
nucleoli. Multinucleated wreath-like tumor giant cells were observed in
two-thirds of cases, but were usually present only focally. The dense cellular
aggregates were encased by delicate fibrous septa. The stroma showed a sclerotic 
reticulated pattern. Partly, the nests of spindle cells bordered the epidermis,
prima vista mimicking junctional nests of melanocytes. The specific translocation
pattern was confirmed in all cases by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Local
recurrences and metastases developed in 2 and 3 patients, respectively, and 1
patient died of the disease.

PMID: 20087159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Pol J Pathol. 2009;60(4):151-62.

Differential diagnosis of small round cell tumours (SRCT), fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and immunohistochemical (IHC) study.

Ptaszynski K(1), Szumera-Cieckiewicz A, Pekul M, Nowecki Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Warsaw.

INTRODUCTION: Small round cell tumours (SRCT) of bone and soft tissue constitute 
a heterogeneous group of neoplasms with similar histological and cytological
features. Immunohistochemical studies with panels of antibodies are necessary in 
order to make the diagnosis. A molecular testing is helpful in many cases.
AIM OF THE STUDY: To assess the value of IHC and FISH tests in the differential
diagnosis of SRCT.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The material was obtained from patients diagnosed and
treated at the Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center-Institute in Warsaw 
between February 2003 and March 2009. One hundred and thirty one patients with
the initial diagnosis of SRCT of bone or soft tissue were qualified to the
investigation. The material from the primary tumour was obtained by an open or
core biopsy in all the patients. During the treatment the patients were
monitored, the local recurrence and the distant metastases were reported. The IHC
study was performed routinely using wide panels of antibodies. FISH tests: EWSR1,
SS18 (SYT), FKHR (F0X01A) and FUS were carried out using dual colour, break-apart
probes.
RESULTS: IHC tests for CD99 and FLI-1 showed low specificity, had low
sensitivity, myogenin staining revealed high specificity and sensitivity. A
"lymphoma" panel with LCA, CD20, CD79a, TdT, CD3 showed acceptable specificity
and sensitivity. There were 28 (21.37%) uninformative FISH results showing no
acceptable signals.
CONCLUSIONS: Diagnostic assessment of SRCT requires IHC studies as an
introductory method. FISH is necessary in many cases of SRCT for the final
diagnosis but it requires well-fixed and processed tissue, otherwise there is a
high percentage of uninformative results. A diagnostic algorithm including IHC
and FISH tests has been proposed.

PMID: 20072948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Oncol Res. 2009;18(2-3):117-25.

VEGF165 promotes the osteolytic bone destruction of ewing's sarcoma tumors by
upregulating RANKL.

Guan H(1), Zhou Z, Cao Y, Duan X, Kleinerman ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether vascular endothelial growth
factor-165 (VEGF165) contributed to the osteolytic process in Ewing's sarcoma.
VEGF165 induced osteoclast formation from murine bone marrow cells.
Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining demonstrated significantly
fewer osteoclasts in VEGF-inhibited TC/siVEGF7-1 tumors compared to TC71 parental
or TC/si-control tumors. Receptor activator NF-kappaB (RANKL), a critical
osteoclastogenic factor, was decreased in TC/siVEGF7-1 cells. Incubation of these
cells with recombinant VEGF165 upregulated RANKL in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. The induction of (RANKL) by VEGF165 was also demonstrated in MC3T3-E1
mouse osteoblast cells and bone marrow stromal cells. This upregulation was
transcriptionally mediated by an effect on the RANKL promoter. Both VEGF and
EWS/FLI-1 increased RANKL promoter activity. Taken together, these data suggest
that modulation of RANKL by VEGF165 may be one of the mechanisms responsible for 
the osteolytic process induced by Ewing's sarcoma cells. VEGF165 may, therefore, 
play an important role in modulating RANKL gene expression in the bone marrow
microenvironment during the metastatic process, thereby contribution to tumor
induced bone lysis.

PMCID: PMC2875875
PMID: 20066901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2010 Feb;14(2):169-77. doi: 10.1517/14728220903531454.

Targeting DAX-1 in embryonic stem cells and cancer.

Lalli E(1), Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire CNRS UMR 6097, Valbonne,
France. ninino@ipmc.cnrs.fr

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: DAX-1 (NR0B1) is an unusual orphan nuclear receptor
whose function is essential for the development of the human adrenal cortex and
onset of puberty. Recent data have implicated this transcription factor also in
embryonic stem cell and cancer biology.
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: The role of DAX-1 in the regulation of development 
and function of the adrenal cortex, reproductive axis, embryonic stem cells and a
few types of cancer.
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: Here we review the past and present milestones in
DAX-1 research and try to provide hints about the development and fields of
application of DAX-1-targeted drugs in the future.
TAKE HOME MESSAGE: The unusual structure and restricted expression pattern of
DAX-1 may offer unique opportunities for drug discovery.

PMID: 20055716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Br J Cancer. 2010 Jan 19;102(2):436-46. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605516. Epub 2010
Jan 5.

EWS-Oct-4B, an alternative EWS-Oct-4 fusion gene, is a potent oncogene linked to 
human epithelial tumours.

Kim S(1), Lim B, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science,
Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Characterisation of EWS-Oct-4 translocation fusion product in bone
and soft-tissue tumours revealed a chimeric gene resulting from an in-frame
fusion between EWS (Ewing's sarcoma gene) exons 1-6 and Oct-4 exons 1-4.
Recently, an alternative form of the fusion protein between the EWS and Oct-4
genes, named EWS-Oct-4B, was reported in two types of epithelial tumours, a
hidradenoma of the skin and a mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the salivary glands. As
the N-terminal and POU domains of the EWS-Oct-4 and EWS-Oct-4B proteins are not
structurally identical, we decided to investigate the functional consequences of 
the EWS-Oct-4B fusion.
METHODS: In this report, we have characterised the EWS-Oct-4B fusion protein. To 
investigate how the EWS-Oct-4B protein contributes to tumourigenesis in human
cancers, we analysed its DNA-binding activity, subcellular localisation,
transcriptional activation behaviour, and oncogenic properties.
RESULTS: We found that this new chimeric gene encodes a nuclear protein that
binds DNA with the same sequence specificity as the parental Oct-4 protein or the
fusion EWS-Oct-4 protein. We show that the nuclear localisation signal of
EWS-Oct-4B is dependent on the POU DNA-binding domain, and we identified a
cluster of basic amino acids, (269)RKRKR(273), in the POU domain that
specifically mediates the nuclear localisation of EWS-Oct-4B. Comparison of the
properties of EWS-Oct-4B and EWS-Oct-4 indicated that EWS-Oct-4B is a less-potent
transcriptional activator of a reporter construct carrying the Oct-4-binding
sites. Deletion analysis of the functional domains of EWS-Oct-4B revealed that
the EWS N-terminal domain (NTD)(B), POU, and C-terminal domain (CTD) are
necessary for its full transactivation potential. Despite its reduced activity as
a transcriptional activator, EWS-Oct-4B regulated the expression of fgf-4
(fibroblast growth factor-4) and nanog, which are potent mitogens, as well as of 
Oct-4 downstream target genes, the promoters of which contain potential
Oct-4-binding sites. Finally, ectopic expression of EWS-Oct-4B in Oct-4-null
ZHBTc4 ES cells resulted in increased tumourigenic growth potential in nude mice.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the oncogenic effect of the t(6;22)
translocation is due to the EWS-Oct-4B chimeric protein, and that alternative
fusion of the EWS amino terminal domain to the Oct-4 DNA-binding domain produces 
another transforming chimeric product in human epithelial tumours.

PMCID: PMC2816667
PMID: 20051954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Apr;54(4):606-9. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22365.

Pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia with bulk extramedullary disease and
chromosome 22 (EWSR1) rearrangement masquerading as Ewing sarcoma.

Jakovljevic G(1), Nakic M, Rogosic S, Kardum-Skelin I, Mrsic-Davidovic S, Zadro
R, Kruslin B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Pediatric Clinic, Children's Hospital
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. gordanajakovljevic@yahoo.com

We report a 2-year-old female with a subcutaneous tumor who was initially
misdiagnosed as suffering from Ewing sarcoma with a positive EWSR1 rearrangement 
and EWS/FLI1 transcript. After finding lymphoblasts in peripheral blood, the
diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia was established. This necessitated
further analysis of the subcutaneous tumor. The tissue was positive for immature 
B-cell markers and an immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangement, which
confirmed the final diagnosis of common type acute lymphoblastic leukemia with
bulk extramedullary disease. The patient was treated with chemotherapy and was in
remission 30 months after the diagnosis.

PMID: 20049929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Anticancer Res. 2009 Nov;29(11):4489-96.

Development and characterization of HAT-sensitive Ewing tumour cells for
immunotherapy.

Pfeifle C(1), Reinhardt K, Heins S, Burdach S, Staege MS.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Klinikum der 
Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Ernst Grube Str. 40, D-06097 Halle,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Despite improvements in the treatment of patients with Ewing family
tumours (EFT) during the past decades, the prognosis for patients with advanced
disease is still unsatisfying. New treatment strategies have to be developed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A hypoxanthine/aminopterin/thymidine (HAT)-sensitive EFT
cell line was developed by repetitive treatment of the EFT cell line SK-N-MC with
8'-azaguanine (8AG). By using DNA microarrays, the gene expression profile of
this cell line was characterized. Immunostimulatory activity was assessed by
mixed lymphocyte/tumour cell culture (MLTC). Artificial fusion of tumour cells
and dendritic cells was visualized by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: After selection of 8AG-resistant cells, a cell line with high
sensitivity for treatment with HAT was obtained. Expression of the X chromosome
inactivation specific transcript XIST was higher in HAT-sensitive cells.
Nevertheless, HAT-sensitive cells retained the EFT-associated gene expression
profile. Moreover, in the presence of HAT, it was possible to use these cells
without irradiation as stimulatory cells in MLTC or as fusion partner for
dendritic cells.
CONCLUSION: HAT-sensitive EFT cells might be an interesting tool for the
development of new immunotherapeutic approaches for the treatment of EFT.

PMID: 20032396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Mar;31(3):394-401. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp317. Epub 2009 Dec
17.

The EWS/FLI1 oncogenic protein inhibits expression of the Wnt inhibitor
DICKKOPF-1 gene and antagonizes beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription.

Navarro D(1), Agra N, Pestaña A, Alonso J, González-Sancho JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas
Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4, E-28029, Madrid, Spain.

Tumours of the Ewing family, which comprise Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumours, are highly aggressive and mostly affect
children and adolescents. They are characterized by chromosomal translocations
leading to the generation of fusion proteins between EWS (or very rarely FUS) and
members of the E-twenty-six (ETS) family of transcription factors that are
capable of transforming cells. EWS/FLI1, the most frequent fusion, is thought to 
cause transformation through activation or repression of specific target genes.
We present evidence demonstrating that the Wnt inhibitor and beta-catenin/T-cell 
factor (TCF)-responsive gene DICKKOPF-1 (DKK-1) is a transcriptional target of
EWS/FLI1, which can inhibit both basal and beta-catenin-induced transactivation
of the DKK-1 promoter. Moreover, our data indicate that EWS/FLI1 has a more
general effect on beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription since it can block
transactivation of a consensus beta-catenin/TCF reporter construct. Consistently,
Ewing tumour cells expressing different EWS/ETS translocations cannot engage
beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription, whereas silencing of EWS/FLI1 restores 
beta-catenin responsiveness in A673 and RD-ES Ewing tumour cells. Accordingly,
gene set enrichment analysis shows that beta-catenin/TCF target genes are
significantly enriched among genes downregulated by EWS/FLI1 in the Ewing cell
line A673. Mechanistically, the inhibitory effect of EWS/FLI1 can be overcome by 
a constitutively active TCF4 protein (TCF4-VP16). Moreover, EWS/FLI1 binds
lymphoid enhancer factor 1, a TCF family member, and interferes with its binding 
to beta-catenin, which could explain its negative effect on
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription. Our results show that EWS/FLI1 inhibits 
both DKK-1 expression as well as beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription, which 
could contribute to progression of tumours of the Ewing family.

PMID: 20019092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Arkh Patol. 2009 Sep-Oct;71(5):32-5.

[Molecular diagnosis of liposarcomas: identification of the chimeric genes
FUS/CHOP and EWS/CHOP].

[Article in Russian]

Kekeeva TV, Riazantseva AA, Anreeva IuIu, Zavalishina LE, Babenko OV, Zaletaev
DV, Petrov AN, Frank GA.

This paper presents the results of an analysis the chimeric genes FUS/CHOP and
EWS/CHOP in patients diagnosed as having liposarcoma in order to make a
differential diagnosis in both soft tissue tumors and various variants of
liposarcoma. Liposarcomas were found in 5 of 7 cases of primary tumors: 4
chimeric transcripts of the FUS/CHOP type (5-2), a variant of alternative
splicing of the FUS/CHOP type (5-2) with depletion in 14 p.n. anda rare variant
of the EWS/CHOP type (7-2). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) confirmed
translocations in the tumor samples with the chimeric genes being detected.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and FISH revealed no chimeric
genes specific to myxoid sarcoma in a group of patients with other variants of
liposarcoma. Thus, the findings support the strict specificity of the chimeric
genes FUS/CHOP and EWS/CHOP for myxoid liposarcoma and the expression of these
genes in most tumors of this type.

PMID: 19938700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Virchows Arch. 2010 Feb;456(2):219-34. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0854-3.

Soft tissue tumors associated with EWSR1 translocation.

Romeo S(1), Dei Tos AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, General Hospital of Treviso, Piazza Ospedale 1,
Treviso, Italy.

The Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1; also known as EWS) represents one
of the most commonly involved genes in sarcoma translocations. In fact, it is
involved in a broad variety of mesenchymal lesions which includes Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor, desmoplastic small round cell
tumor,clear cell sarcoma, angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, extraskeletal myxoid 
chondrosarcoma, and a subset of myxoid liposarcoma. The fusion products between
EWSR1 and partners usually results in fusion of the N-terminal
transcription-activating domain of EWSR1 and the C-terminal DNA-binding domain of
the fusion partner, eventually generating novel transcription factors. EWSR1
rearrangement can be visualized by the means of fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). As soft tissue sarcomas represent a diagnostically
challenging group, FISH analysis is an extremely useful confirmatory diagnostic
tool. However, as in most instances a split-apart approach is used, the results
of molecular genetics must be evaluated in context with morphology.

PMID: 19936782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Res. 2009 Dec 1;69(23):9047-55. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1540. Epub
2009 Nov 17.

EWS/FLI and its downstream target NR0B1 interact directly to modulate
transcription and oncogenesis in Ewing's sarcoma.

Kinsey M(1), Smith R, Iyer AK, McCabe ER, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Most Ewing's sarcomas harbor chromosomal translocations that encode fusions
between EWS and ETS family members. The most common fusion, EWS/FLI, consists of 
an EWSR1-derived strong transcriptional activation domain fused, in-frame, to the
DNA-binding domain-containing portion of FLI1. EWS/FLI functions as an aberrant
transcription factor to regulate genes that mediate the oncogenic phenotype of
Ewing's sarcoma. One of these regulated genes, NR0B1, encodes a corepressor
protein, and likely plays a transcriptional role in tumorigenesis. However, the
genes that NR0B1 regulates and the transcription factors it interacts with in
Ewing's sarcoma are largely unknown. We used transcriptional profiling and
chromatin immunoprecipitation to identify genes that are regulated by NR0B1, and 
compared these data to similar data for EWS/FLI. Although the transcriptional
profile overlapped as expected, we also found that the genome-wide localization
of NR0B1 and EWS/FLI overlapped as well, suggesting that they regulate some genes
coordinately. Further analysis revealed that NR0B1 and EWS/FLI physically
interact. This protein-protein interaction is likely to be relevant for the
development of Ewing's sarcoma because mutations in NR0B1 that disrupt the
interaction have transcriptional consequences and also abrogate oncogenic
transformation. Taken together, these data suggest that EWS/FLI and NR0B1
physically interact, coordinately modulate gene expression, and mediate the
transformed phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC2789197
PMID: 19920188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 25;390(4):1197-201. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.120. Epub 2009 Oct 29.

Identification of a tripartite import signal in the Ewing Sarcoma protein (EWS).

Shaw DJ(1), Morse R, Todd AG, Eggleton P, Lorson CL, Young PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Neurobiology, IBCS, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry,
Exeter EX1 2LU, UK.

The Ewing Sarcoma (EWS) protein is a ubiquitously expressed RNA processing factor
that localises predominantly to the nucleus. However, the mechanism through which
EWS enters the nucleus remains unclear, with differing reports identifying three 
separate import signals within the EWS protein. Here we have utilized a panel of 
truncated EWS proteins to clarify the reported nuclear localisation signals. We
describe three C-terminal domains that are important for efficient EWS nuclear
localization: (1) the third RGG-motif; (2) the last 10 amino acids (known as the 
PY-import motif); and (3) the zinc-finger motif. Although these three domains are
involved in nuclear import, they are not independently capable of driving the
efficient import of a GFP-moiety. However, collectively they form a complex
tripartite signal that efficiently drives GFP-import into the nucleus. This study
helps clarify the EWS import signal, and the identification of the involvement of
both the RGG- and zinc-finger motifs has wide reaching implications.

PMID: 19879242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 27;4(10):e7608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007608.

GLI1 is a central mediator of EWS/FLI1 signaling in Ewing tumors.

Joo J(1), Christensen L, Warner K, States L, Kang HG, Vo K, Lawlor ER, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Childrens Hospital 
Los Angeles and the Saban Research Institute, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

The Ewing Sarcoma Family Tumors (ESFT) consist of the classical pathologic
entities of Ewing Sarcoma and peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor.
Occurring largely in the childhood through young adult years, these tumors have
an unsurpassed propensity for metastasis and have no defined cell of origin. The 
biology of these aggressive malignancies centers around EWS/FLI1 and related
EWS/ETS chimeric transcription factors, which are largely limited to this tumor
class. Much progress has been made in the identification of a network of loci
whose expression is modulated by EWS/FLI1 and its congeners. To date, little
progress has been made in reconstructing the sequence of direct and indirect
events that produce this network of modulated loci. The recent identification of 
GLI1 as an upregulated target of EWS/ETS transcription factors suggests a target 
which may be a more central mediator in the ESFT signaling network. In this
paper, we further define the relationship of EWS/FLI1 expression and GLI1
upregulation in ESFT. This relationship is supported with data from primary tumor
specimens. It is consistently observed across multiple ESFT cell lines and with
multiple means of EWS/FLI1 inhibition. GLI1 inhibition affects tumor cell line
phenotype whether shRNA or endogenous or pharmacologic inhibitors are employed.
As is seen in model transformation systems, GLI1 upregulation by EWS/FLI1 appears
to be independent of Hedgehog stimulation. Consistent with a more central role in
ESFT pathogenesis, several known EWS/FLI1 targets appear to be targeted through
GLI1. These findings further establish a central role for GLI1 in the
pathogenesis of Ewing Tumors.

PMCID: PMC2763206
PMID: 19859563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Adv Anat Pathol. 2009 Nov;16(6):383-91. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e3181bb6b86.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization in the diagnosis of soft tissue neoplasms: a
review.

Tanas MR(1), Goldblum JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute,
The Cleveland Clinic and The Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case 
Western Reserve University, OH, USA.

This paper presents an overview of the role of fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) in the diagnosis of soft tissue neoplasms. Many soft tissue neoplasms
harbor characteristic translocations or amplification of gene regions, which can 
be assessed by FISH, and can be used to assist in their diagnosis. We discuss the
major morphologic categories in which FISH has come to be used including
high-grade round cell sarcomas, spindle cell sarcomas, low-grade myxoid
neoplasms, adipocytic neoplasms, and malignant melanocytic neoplasms on the basis
of a recent review of soft tissue neoplasms which were analyzed by FISH. We also 
review the molecular alterations (translocations and amplification of gene
regions), which have come to define many of these diagnostic entities and the
most effective way to evaluate them with FISH with attention to potential
pitfalls. Finally, we discuss the advantages and disadvantages of FISH as a
technique when appraising soft tissue neoplasms.

PMID: 19851129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Nov;195(1):12-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.06.011.

Fusion of EWSR1 with the DUX4 facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy region
resulting from t(4;22)(q35;q12) in a case of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.

Sirvent N(1), Trassard M, Ebran N, Attias R, Pedeutour F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Solid Tumor Genetics, Nice University Hospital, 06107 Nice,
France. sirvent.n@chu-nice.fr

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common pediatric soft tissue sarcoma and
rarely occurs in adults. There are six main subtypes, each histologically,
clinically, and cytogenetically distinct. Embryonal RMS is characterized by
chromosomal gains, usually not associated with any consistent structural anomaly.
We describe here a case of embryonal RMS in a 19-year-old female patient. The
conventional cytogenetic analysis showed a t(4;22)(q35;q12) translocation as the 
sole cytogenetic change. Complementary fluorescence in situ hybridization
analysis showed that the translocation breakpoints were located in the EWSR1 gene
at 22q12 and the region of the DUX4 and FSHMD1A at 4q35. This constitutes a novel
example of the high frequency of EWSR1 rearrangements in various types of
sarcomas as well as of its ability to fuse with a large variety of partner genes.
Because DUX4 is involved in myogenic differentiation and cell-cycle control, the 
striated muscle differentiation observed in the present case might be a direct
consequence of the alteration of the DUX4 region generated by the t(4;22). The
involvement of the DUX4 region might represent the genetic hallmark of a novel
subclass of small round cell tumors.

PMID: 19837262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jan;23(1):93-7. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.138. Epub 2009 Oct
2.

Utility of FISH in the diagnosis of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: a series of
18 cases.

Tanas MR(1), Rubin BP, Montgomery EA, Turner SL, Cook JR, Tubbs RR, Billings SD, 
Goldblum JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute,
The Cleveland Clinic and The Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is a mesenchymal neoplasm of intermediate
malignancy and uncertain histogenesis/line of differentiation, which occurs most 
commonly in the extremities of children to young adults. It has a characteristic 
appearance characterized by a proliferation of histiocytoid cells with a lymphoid
cuff and fibrous pseudocapsule, simulating the appearance of a neoplasm occurring
within a lymph node. However, these classic histological features are not always 
present. Given the variable appearance of the neoplastic cells and the lack of
consistently positive immunohistochemical markers, diagnosis can be problematic. 
Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma has been found to harbor three related
translocations, a t(12;16)(q13;p11) resulting in a FUS/ATF1 fusion gene,
t(12;22)(q13;q12) resulting in a EWSR1/ATF1 fusion, and t(2;22)(q33;q12)
resulting in a EWSR1/CREB1 fusion. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
probes to EWSR1 and FUS, in theory, should detect all three translocations/gene
fusions. We evaluated 18 cases of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma for
rearrangements of EWSR1 and FUS by FISH, the largest series to date. We found
that 13 of 17 (76%) cases of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma harbored
rearrangements of EWSR1; rearrangements of FUS were not detected in any of the
cases. This study affirms that the rearrangement of EWSR1 is a common genetic
event in angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, and is thus useful diagnostically.
This study supports the fact that the rearrangement of FUS is present in only a
small minority of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytomas. Interestingly, 24% of the
cases were translocation negative, and did not contain rearrangements of EWSR1 or
FUS by FISH. Although it is possible that these cases contained cryptic
rearrangements of EWSR1 or FUS that were not detectable by our FISH probes, it
also raises the possibility that another translocation/gene fusion may be present
in angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma. Finally, we discuss some of the potential
pitfalls of this technique, including confusion with other mesenchymal neoplasms 
containing rearrangement of EWSR1, in particular Ewing's sarcoma/PNET.

PMID: 19801966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Oct;62(10):915-9. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.064014.

Primary cutaneous Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumour: a
clinicopathological analysis of seven cases highlighting diagnostic pitfalls and 
the role of FISH testing in diagnosis.

Shingde MV(1), Buckland M, Busam KJ, McCarthy SW, Wilmott J, Thompson JF, Scolyer
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, 
NSW, Australia.

AIMS: To perform a clinicopathological analysis of a series of primary cutaneous 
Ewing sarcomas/primitive neuroectodermal tumours (ES/PNET) to highlight the
pathological features, discuss the differential diagnosis, emphasise the role of 
molecular testing (particularly fluorescence in situ hybridisation, FISH) in
diagnosis and outline the patients' clinical course.
METHODS: Seven cases of primary cutaneous ES/PNET were identified from the
authors' consultation files.
RESULTS: The patients were aged 16-61 years (median 25). Five were female and two
were male. Five cases involved the limbs and two the trunk. Five were initially
misdiagnosed (three as carcinoma and two as melanoma). All cases were
characterised histologically by sheet-like growth of small round cells with
little cytoplasm and showed strong membranous staining for CD99 and positive but 
variable staining for FLI-1. Six patients showed an EWS rearrangement (five on
FISH analysis and one on RT-PCR). All tumours were completely excised. Three
patients received adjuvant chemotherapy, one of whom also received radiotherapy. 
Follow-up was available in all cases (range 11-57 months; median 41). No
recurrences or metastases occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Although rare, primary cutaneous ES/PNET should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of cutaneous "small blue cell tumours". Immunostaining for
FLI-1 and molecular testing for evidence of an EWS rearrangement are useful
ancillary investigations to confirm the diagnosis. The prognosis of primary
cutaneous ES/PNET appears to be more favourable than extracutaneous ES/PNET.

PMID: 19783720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Hum Pathol. 2010 Mar;41(3):336-42. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.04.028. Epub 2009 
Sep 22.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcomas using EWSR1 and NR4A3 probes.

Noguchi H(1), Mitsuhashi T, Seki K, Tochigi N, Tsuji M, Shimoda T, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMCs) are characterized histologically by a
cord-like or lace-like arrangement of small round cells or short spindle cells
with eosinophilic cytoplasm distributed in a rich myxoid matrix. Atypical cases
of EMC have also been described, with areas of poor mucus production and high
cellularity and a transition to typical EMC. Most cases of EMC harbor the
chromosomal reciprocal translocation t(9;22) (q22;q12) and the resultant fused
gene, Ewing sarcoma region 1-nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 3
(EWSR1-NR4A3). Other translocations, such as those involving the NR4A3 gene, have
also been noted, although these occur at a lower frequency. On this basis, we
conducted a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of 18 cases of EMC
in which patients presented with typical or atypical (areas of high cellularity) 
histologic features of EMC. We used an EWSR1 probe and a newly prepared NR4A3
probe to evaluate the usefulness of FISH in the pathologic diagnosis of EMC. FISH
analysis using the EWSR1 or NR4A3 probe showed split signals in 83% (15/18) of
the cases, regardless of the presence of typical/atypical histologic features.
Gene rearrangement of EWSR1 was noted in 72% (13/18) of the cases, and
rearrangement of NR4A3 was noted in 61% (11/18) of the cases. The NR4A3
rearrangement was detected in 2 cases not carrying any EWSR1 rearrangement, as
determined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. These results
suggest that FISH analysis of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens using
EWSR1 and NR4A3 probes is useful and convenient and may provide an ancillary
method for the diagnosis of EMC.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19775727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2010 Mar;18(2):150-8. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181b91a51.

Immunohistochemical study as a tool in differential diagnosis of pediatric
malignant rhabdoid tumor.

Machado I(1), Noguera R, Santonja N, Donat J, Fernandez-Delgado R, Acevedo A,
Baragaño M, Navarro S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Valencia and University Clinic
Hospital, Valencia, Spain.

Malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) are aggressive childhood neoplasms, occurring
mainly in the kidney and brain. We describe 2 unusual cases of extrarenal and
noncranial location (liver and soft tissue with dissemination) mimicking
hepatoblastoma, neuroblastoma or Ewing sarcoma. Both cases revealed a
polyphenotypic profile, combined with cytokeratin, vimentin, and CD99 expression.
INI1/BAF-47 showed negative protein nuclear expression in both cases, suggesting 
a diagnosis of MRT. An extensive immunohistochemical panel was performed to
exclude pediatric tumors reminiscent of MRT. The genetic studies failed to
detected MYCN amplification, 11q23 deletion, and EWS break-apart positivity. No
alterations of 22q integrity were demonstrated with the probes used for the study
(N25 Di George/22q11.2, 22qter, and EWS/22q12). We discuss the differential
diagnosis in pediatric polyphenotypic tumors (Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma,
desmoplastic small round cell tumor, and Ewing sarcoma). Analysis of INI1/BAF-47 
expression can offer important clues in the diagnosis of pediatric tumors with
rhabdoid phenotype. The integration of clinical, morphologic,
immunohistochemical, and genetic data is required to approach a correct diagnosis
of pediatric tumor in unusual location with atypical or undifferentiated
morphology.

PMID: 19770707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Dec;48(12):1051-6. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20706.

t(19;22)(q13;q12) Translocation leading to the novel fusion gene EWSR1-ZNF444 in 
soft tissue myoepithelial carcinoma.

Brandal P(1), Panagopoulos I, Bjerkehagen B, Heim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine and Radiotherapy, The
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, Oslo, Norway.
petter.brandal@klinmed.uio.no

Myoepithelial neoplasms of soft tissue have only recently been acknowledged as a 
separate diagnostic entity. To know based on histological appearance whether
these tumors are benign or malignant is often difficult, and their tumorigenic
mechanisms remain poorly understood. We report a myoepithelial carcinoma with an 
aberrant near-diploid karyotype, 43 approximately
47,XX,add(1)(p34)x2,add(3)(q27)x2,del(12)(q22),+add(18)(p11)x2,del(22)(q11),+r,
found in cells cultured from a lung metastasis. The deletion in 22q led us to
search by molecular cytogenetic means for possible EWSR1 rearrangements, and
eventually a novel chimeric gene consisting of the 5'-end of EWSR1 (22q12) and
the 3'-end of ZNF444 (19q13) was found. How the new fusion gene contributes to
tumorigenesis is unknown, but the finding of an EWSR1 rearrangement suggests that
this, possibly even the EWSR1-ZNF444, is a defining pathogenetic feature of at
least a subset of these tumors.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19760602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 15;69(18):7140-50. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4041. Epub 
2009 Sep 8.

Advances in Ewing's sarcoma research: where are we now and what lies ahead?

Ordóñez JL(1), Osuna D, Herrero D, de Alava E, Madoz-Gúrpide J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology of Sarcomas, Centro de Investigación del
Cáncer-Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer (IBMCC), Universidad 
de Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (EFT) are characterized by specific chromosomal
translocations, which lead to EWS/ETS transcription factors. Elucidation of
EWS/ETS target gene networks within the context of other signaling pathways,
together with the identification of the initiating cell, and the development of
genetically engineered mice will hopefully lead to biology-based therapeutic
strategies for these tumors.

PMID: 19738075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Oct;194(1):53-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.06.002.

Ewing sarcoma-peripheral neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney with a FUS-ERG
fusion transcript.

Berg T(1), Kalsaas AH, Buechner J, Busund LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Northern Norway, Tromsø,
Norway. Thomas.Berg@unn.no

The Ewing family of tumors (EFTs) represents a neoplastic entity characterized by
specific chromosomal rearrangements. The most commonly detected translocation
involves fusion of EWSR1 to one of the genes encoding ETS family of transcription
factors, usually FLI1 or ERG. In rare cases, FUS or FEV has been shown to
substitute for EWSR1. The detection of specific translocations by fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH), reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), or both has become a diagnostic hallmark for the EFTs. We report here a
case of small round blue cell tumor detected in the kidney of a 3-year-old girl. 
The use of FISH in combination with RT-PCR led to identification of a novel
FUS-ERG fusion transcript in the tumor, with FUS exons 1-5 fused in-frame to ERG 
exons 6-9. The results from the molecular analyses were critical for reaching a
final diagnostic conclusion of Ewing tumor-peripheral neuroectodermal tumor and
hence had important therapeutic implications for the patient.

PMID: 19737655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Brain Pathol. 2010 Mar;20(2):441-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00314.x. Epub 
2009 Jun 25.

Central nervous system primitive neuroectodermal tumors: a clinicopathologic and 
genetic study of 33 cases.

Behdad A(1), Perry A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cedar Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, Calif, USA.

Central nervous system (CNS) primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) include
supratentorial, brain stem, and spinal cord tumors with medulloblastoma-like
histopathology. The prognostic impact of various pathologic and genetic features 
has not been thoroughly investigated. After re-diagnosis of three infantile cases
as atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT), 33 remaining CNS PNETs were
retrieved for clinicopathologic and fluorescence in situ hybridization studies.
Anaplastic and/or large cell features were seen in 18 of 33 (55%) examples and
survival was decreased in these patients (P = 0.036). MYCN or MYCC gene
amplifications were noted in about half, with a trend towards decreased survival 
(P = 0.112). Polysomies of chromosomes 2 and 8 were each individually associated 
with decreased survival in children, with an even stronger association when
combined (P = 0.013). Neither EWS gene rearrangements, nor AT/RT-like 22q
deletions were encountered. We conclude that in CNS PNET: (i) routine application
of INI1 immunohistochemistry helps rule out AT/RT, particularly in infants; (ii) 
MYC gene amplifications (especially MYCN) are common; (iii) involvement of CNS
parenchyma by Ewing sarcoma/peripheral PNET is rare enough that EWS gene testing 
is not necessary unless significant dural involvement is present; and (iv) both
anaplastic/large cell features and polysomies of 2 and 8 are associated with more
aggressive clinical behavior.

PMID: 19725831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2009 Sep;133(9):1391-402. doi: 10.1043/1543-2165-133.9.1391.

Rare nerve lesions of non-nerve sheath origin: a 17-year retrospective series.

Strom T(1), Kleinschmidt-Demasters BK, Donson A, Foreman NK, Lillehei KO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

CONTEXT: Peripheral nerve masses are frequently encountered in surgical pathology
practice. However, once a peripheral nerve mass is determined not to be a nerve
sheath neoplasm, differential diagnostic considerations drop off sharply.
OBJECTIVE: To review our experience with surgically resected nerve masses.
DESIGN: Retrospective search of pathology database. Rare neoplasms were studied
by cytogenetic analysis or gene microarray.
RESULTS: Four hundred fifty-eight cases were identified. After elimination of
common lesions (mostly nerve sheath tumors), 37 cases (8%) remained, almost all
of which were of non-nerve sheath origin: for example, hemangioma, metastatic
neuroendocrine pancreatic carcinoma, meningiomas invading nerve fascicles, and
primary extrarenal rhabdoid tumor and Ewing sarcoma of nerve. The latter showed
rearrangement of the EWSR1 locus (22q12). The gene expression pattern of an
undifferentiated sarcoma, presenting as ropelike nerve enlargement, clustered
with malignant peripheral nerve sheath neoplasms but not other sarcomas or
neuroepithelial tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Diverse benign and malignant conditions can affect peripheral nerve.

PMID: 19722745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncogene. 2009 Nov 19;28(46):4126-32. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.262. Epub 2009 Aug
31.

GSTM4 is a microsatellite-containing EWS/FLI target involved in Ewing's sarcoma
oncogenesis and therapeutic resistance.

Luo W(1), Gangwal K, Sankar S, Boucher KM, Thomas D, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a malignant bone-associated tumor of children and young
adults. Most cases of Ewing's sarcoma express the EWS/FLI fusion protein. EWS/FLI
functions as an aberrant ETS-type transcription factor and serves as the master
regulator of Ewing's sarcoma-transformed phenotype. We recently showed that
EWS/FLI regulates one of its key targets, NR0B1, through a GGAA-microsatellite in
its promoter. Whether other critical EWS/FLI targets are also regulated by
GGAA-microsatellites was unknown. In this study, we combined transcriptional
analysis, whole genome localization data, and RNA interference knockdown to
identify glutathione S-transferase M4 (GSTM4) as a critical EWS/FLI target gene
in Ewing's sarcoma. We found that EWS/FLI directly binds the GSTM4 promoter, and 
regulates GSTM4 expression through a GGAA-microsatellite in its promoter.
Reduction of GSTM4 levels caused a loss of oncogenic transformation. Furthermore,
reduction of GSTM4 resulted in an increased sensitivity of Ewing's sarcoma cells 
to chemotherapeutic agents, suggesting a role for this protein in drug
resistance. Consistent with this hypothesis, patients with Ewing's sarcoma whose 
tumors had higher levels of GSTM4 expression had worse outcomes than those with
lower expression levels. These data show that GSTM4 contributes to the cancerous 
behavior of Ewing's sarcoma and define a wider role for GGAA-microsatellites in
EWS/FLI function than previously appreciated. These data also suggest a novel
therapeutic resistance mechanism, in which the central oncogenic abnormality
directly regulates a resistance gene.

PMID: 19718047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2009 Jul;7(7):476-8.

Review: desmoplastic small round cell tumor: current treatment approach and role 
of targeted therapy.

Sankhala KK(1), Chawla SP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Drug Development, Cancer Therapy and Research Center, The
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.
sankhala@uthscsa.edu

PMID: 19701156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Proteome Res. 2009 Oct;8(10):4455-65. doi: 10.1021/pr900235t.

Analysis of Ewing sarcoma (EWS)-binding proteins: interaction with hnRNP M, U,
and RNA-helicases p68/72 within protein-RNA complexes.

Pahlich S(1), Quero L, Roschitzki B, Leemann-Zakaryan RP, Gehring H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
8057 Zürich, Switzerland.

The human Ewing Sarcoma (EWS) protein belongs to the TET family of RNA-binding
proteins and consists of an N-terminal transcriptional activation domain (EAD)
and a C-terminal RNA-binding domain (RBD), which is extensively methylated at
arginine residues. This multifunctional protein acts in transcriptional
co-activation, DNA-recombination, -pairing and -repair, in splicing, and mRNA
transport. The role of arginine methylation in these processes as well as the
time and place of methylation within cells is still unclear. In this study, we
show that methylation of recombinant EWS protein in HEK cells occurs immediately 
after or even during translation. Pull-down experiments with recombinant EWS
protein as bait, followed by mass spectrometric analysis identified more than 30 
interacting proteins independent of whether the EWS protein was methylated or
not. The EWS protein interacts via its RBD with RNase-sensitive protein complexes
consisting of mainly heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) and RNA
helicases. HnRNP M and U, the RNA-helicases p68 and p72, but also actin and
tubulin were found to interact directly with the EWS protein. Co-precipitation
experiments with recombinant proteins confirmed the interaction of the EWS
protein with p68 via its RBD. Colocalization of the EWS protein and the
RNA-helicases in the nucleus of HEK cells was visualized by expressing labeled
EWS protein and p68 or p72. When co-expressed, the labeled proteins relocated
from the nucleoplasm to nucleolar capping structures. As arginine methylation
within the RBD of the EWS protein are neither needed for its subcellular
localization nor for its protein-protein interaction, a role of EWS protein
methylation in RNA-binding and affecting the activation/repression activity or
even in the stabilization of the EWS protein seems very likely.

PMID: 19673543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Semin Oncol. 2009 Aug;36(4):338-46. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2009.06.006.

Small round cell sarcomas.

Lessnick SL(1), Dei Tos AP, Sorensen PH, Dileo P, Baker LH, Ferrari S, Hall KS.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Small round cell sarcomas are the most aggressive of the tumors morphologically
and clinically encountered in children and adults, and in some ways the most
leukemia- or lymphoma-like of sarcomas. Small round cell sarcomas often are
associated with chromosomal translocations, like hematologic malignancies, and
are usually more sensitive to chemotherapy than other sarcoma subtypes. They have
a high risk of mortality, but chemotherapy (in addition to surgery and often
radiation therapy) provides a good cure rate, although treatment is often long
and intensive. The biology of these tumors is very telling in terms of some of
the mechanisms of cancer cell survival and proliferation. Although there is some 
overlap of the discussion below with the section on translocation associated
sarcomas, we have highlighted some of the key issues with these sarcomas below,
with some ideas that may bear fruit both in terms of the management of these,
other sarcomas, and other cancers alike.

PMID: 19664494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Pathol Res Pract. 2010 Jul 15;206(7):476-9. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2009.07.006. Epub 
2009 Aug 4.

Primary vulvar Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in a
post-menopausal woman: a case report.

Boldorini R(1), Riboni F, Cristina S, Allegrini S, Valentini S, Muscarà M, Ruspa 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Maggiore Hospital, University School of Medicine
Amedeo Avogadro, Novara, Italy.

Ewing's sarcomas/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/pPNETs) are
high-grade malignant neoplasms rarely found outside the skeletal system. Only 12 
cases of vulvar ES/pPNET have so far been reported, all involving children or
women of child-bearing age. We describe the case of a 52-year-old woman who was
admitted to our hospital for the local excision of a 4cm vulvar mass, originally 
thought to be a Bartholin's gland cyst. It was subsequently found to consist of
small round cells positive for anti-CD99 antibody, thus suggesting a diagnosis of
ES/pPNET. The demonstration of EWSR1 gene translocations by means of fluorescent 
in situ hybridization excluded small-cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of
the small type, Merkel cell carcinoma, and lymphoblastic lymphoma. After surgery,
the patient received six cycles of polychemotherapy and radiotherapy; she is
still alive and well after 1 year of follow-up. Our findings underline the
crucial role of molecular biology techniques in the differential diagnosis of
small round cell tumors in these unusual locations.

Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier GmbH.

PMID: 19656640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Intern Med. 2009;48(15):1267-72. Epub 2009 Aug 3.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor as a differential diagnosis of CD56-positive
tumors in adults.

Nagaya T(1), Tanaka N, Kamijo A, Joshita S, Nakazawa K, Miyabayashi H, Yoneda S, 
Ito T, Komatsu M, Tanaka E, Kitano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Matsumoto Medical Center, Matsumoto.

A 33-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital after a huge intrapelvic 
tumor with bilateral hydronephrosis was found following persistent lumbago.
Natural killer/T-cell lymphoma was suspected due to positive immunostaining for
CD56, but CHOP therapy was ineffective. Re-evaluation of the tumor cells showed
that they were positive for CD99, neuron-specific enolase, and synaptophysin and 
had a t(11 ; 22) (q24 ; q12) translocation, leading to the revised diagnosis of
primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). Systemic chemotherapies and radiation
therapy were added to surgical resection, and no recurrence has been detected for
3 years. Taken together, PNET may be considered in adult patients with
CD56-positive tumors.

PMID: 19652428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2009 May;28(3):234-8. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31818d10a8.

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue metastatic to the ovaries: a heretofore
unreported occurrence.

Nugent SL(1), Dim DC, Bridge JA, Ioffe OB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201, USA.

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue (CCSST) is a rare soft tissue neoplasm with
marked variable tumor progression and prognosis. Although morphologically similar
to malignant melanoma, CCSST can be distinguished by the presence of a t(12;
22)(q13; q12) and/or associated EWSR1-ATF1 chimeric gene. CCSST has an affinity
for the extremities and is capable of metastasizing to a wide variety of sites
including bone, lung, and lymph nodes and rarely to skin, liver, heart, muscle,
and brain. Metastases have been known to occur as late as 29 years after initial 
presentation. We report a case of a 33-year-old woman who presented with
bilateral ovarian cystic tumors, ascites, and pulmonary nodules. Her past medical
history was significant for clear cell sarcoma of the left foot 2 years earlier. 
Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed and the light microscopic and
immunohistochemical findings coupled with the detection of an EWSR1 rearrangement
by fluorescence in situ hybridization were compatible with a diagnosis of CCSST
metastases to the ovaries. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
reported case of CCSST metastatic to the ovaries.

PMID: 19620941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nat Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):750-6. doi: 10.1038/nm.1983. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

A small molecule blocking oncogenic protein EWS-FLI1 interaction with RNA
helicase A inhibits growth of Ewing's sarcoma.

Erkizan HV(1), Kong Y, Merchant M, Schlottmann S, Barber-Rotenberg JS, Yuan L,
Abaan OD, Chou TH, Dakshanamurthy S, Brown ML, Uren A, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown University, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of
Oncology, Washington, DC, USA.

Many sarcomas and leukemias carry nonrandom chromosomal translocations encoding
tumor-specific mutant fusion transcription factors that are essential to their
molecular pathogenesis. Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs) contain a
characteristic t(11;22) translocation leading to expression of the oncogenic
fusion protein EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1 is a disordered protein that precludes standard
structure-based small-molecule inhibitor design. EWS-FLI1 binding to RNA helicase
A (RHA) is important for its oncogenic function. We therefore used surface
plasmon resonance screening to identify compounds that bind EWS-FLI1 and might
block its interaction with RHA. YK-4-279, a derivative of the lead compound from 
the screen, blocks RHA binding to EWS-FLI1, induces apoptosis in ESFT cells and
reduces the growth of ESFT orthotopic xenografts. These findings provide proof of
principle that inhibiting the interaction of mutant cancer-specific transcription
factors with the normal cellular binding partners required for their oncogenic
activity provides a promising strategy for the development of uniquely effective,
tumor-specific anticancer agents.

PMCID: PMC2777681
PMID: 19584866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mod Pathol. 2009 Sep;22(9):1201-9. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.85. Epub 2009 Jun 
26.

Detection and characterization of EWSR1/ATF1 and EWSR1/CREB1 chimeric transcripts
in clear cell sarcoma (melanoma of soft parts).

Wang WL(1), Mayordomo E, Zhang W, Hernandez VS, Tuvin D, Garcia L, Lev DC, Lazar 
AJ, López-Terrada D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030-2313, USA.

Unlike melanoma, clear cell sarcoma harbors either a t(12;22)(q13;q12) recurrent 
translocation, resulting in an EWSR1/ATF1 chimeric gene, or less commonly a
t(2;22)(q34;q12) translocation fusing EWSR1 and CREB1. Few studies have examined 
the prevalence of all chimeric types and variants to assess the usage of
ancillary genetic testing in routine diagnosis. We investigated rearrangement
prevalence in 17 clear cell sarcomas, two positive control cell lines, and two
melanomas (negative controls). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis
using the LSI EWSR1 break-apart probe and a reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay optimized for formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue to detect all four reported EWSR1/ATF1 clear cell sarcoma chimeric types
and the EWSR1/CREB1 variant was performed. All 15 cases available for testing by 
FISH were positive for EWSR1 rearrangement including two cases with insufficient 
RNA for RT-PCR. Thirteen of 15 cases successfully tested by RT-PCR harbored a
type 1 chimeric transcript (EWSR1 exon 8/ATF1 exon 4), of which five tumors
simultaneously carried a type 2 chimeric transcript (EWSR1 exon 7/ATF1 exon 5).
One case carried a type 2 transcript alone and one case contained an EWSR1/CREB1 
transcript. Both control cases were positive by both techniques with one case
carrying both types 1 and 2 chimeric transcripts and the other types 2 and 3
(EWSR1 exon 10/ATF1 exon 5). Consequently, both techniques are equally effective 
in assessing for an EWSR1 rearrangement and are useful ancillary diagnostic tests
for clear cell sarcoma. They also reinforce the prevalence of this translocation 
in these tumors. In addition, EWSR1-CREB1 was identified in a clear cell sarcoma 
of soft tissue providing further evidence that this chimeric variant is not
exclusive to gastrointestinal clear cell sarcomas and should be included in
RT-PCR assays of soft tissue clear cell sarcomas.

PMID: 19561568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Oct 1;315(16):2727-40. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.06.016. Epub 
2009 Jun 24.

Mesenchymal to embryonic incomplete transition of human cells by chimeric OCT4/3 
(POU5F1) with physiological co-activator EWS.

Makino H(1), Toyoda M, Matsumoto K, Saito H, Nishino K, Fukawatase Y, Machida M, 
Akutsu H, Uyama T, Miyagawa Y, Okita H, Kiyokawa N, Fujino T, Ishikawa Y,
Nakamura T, Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, National Institute for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan.

POU5F1 (more commonly known as OCT4/3) is one of the stem cell markers, and
affects direction of differentiation in embryonic stem cells. To investigate
whether cells of mesenchymal origin acquire embryonic phenotypes, we generated
human cells of mesodermal origin with overexpression of the chimeric OCT4/3 gene 
with physiological co-activator EWS (product of the EWSR1 gene), which is driven 
by the potent EWS promoter by translocation. The cells expressed embryonic stem
cell genes such as NANOG, lost mesenchymal phenotypes, and exhibited embryonal
stem cell-like alveolar structures when implanted into the subcutaneous tissue of
immunodeficient mice. Hierarchical analysis by microchip analysis and cell
surface analysis revealed that the cells are subcategorized into the group of
human embryonic stem cells and embryonal carcinoma cells. These results imply
that cells of mesenchymal origin can be traced back to cells of embryonic
phenotype by the OCT4/3 gene in collaboration with the potent cis-regulatory
element and the fused co-activator. The cells generated in this study with
overexpression of chimeric OCT4/3 provide us with insight into cell plasticity
involving OCT4/3 that is essential for embryonic cell maintenance, and the
complexity required for changing cellular identity.

PMID: 19559696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Bioconjug Chem. 2009 Jul;20(7):1307-14. doi: 10.1021/bc900005j.

Synthesis and studies on cell-penetrating peptides.

Bertrand JR(1), Malvy C, Auguste T, Tóth GK, Kiss-Ivánkovits O, Illyés E, Hollósi
M, Bottka S, Laczkó I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute Gustave Roussy, CNRS UMR 8121, University Paris 11, Villejuif,
France.

The ability of different synthetic cell penetrating peptides, as Antennapedia
(wild and Phe(6) mutated penetratins), flock house virus, and integrin peptides
to form complexes with a 25mer antisense oligonucleotide was compared and their
conformation was determined by circular dichroism spectroscopy. The efficiency
for oligonucleotide delivery into cells was measured using peptides labeled with 
a coumarin derivative showing blue fluorescence and the fluorescein-labeled
antisense oligonucleotide showing green fluorescence. Fluorescence due to the
excitation energy transfer confirmed the interaction of the antisense
oligonucleotide and cell-penetrating peptides. The most efficient oligonucleotide
delivery was found for penetratins. Comparison of the two types of penetratins
shows that the wild-type penetratin proved to be more efficient than mutated
penetratin. The paper also emphasizes that the attachment of a fluorescent label 
may have an effect on the conformation and flexibility of cell-penetrating
peptides that must be taken into consideration when evaluating biological
experiments.

PMID: 19552459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2009 Apr;10(1-2):126-40. doi:
10.1007/s11864-009-0104-6. Epub 2009 Jun 17.

Ewing's sarcoma: standard and experimental treatment options.

Subbiah V(1), Anderson P, Lazar AJ, Burdett E, Raymond K, Ludwig JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine, Labortory
of Sarcoma Molecular Therapeutics, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

OPINION STATEMENT: Ewing sarcoma family tumors (EWS), which include classic
Ewing's sarcoma in addition to primitive neuroectodermal tumor and Askin tumor,
are the second most common variety of primary bone cancer to afflict adolescents 
and young adults. Multi-disciplinary care incorporating advances in diagnosis,
surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation has substantially improved the survival rate
of patients with localized Ewing sarcoma to nearly 70%. Unfortunately, those
advances have not significantly changed the long-term outcome for those with
metastatic or recurrent disease; 5-year survival remains less than 25%. This
apparent therapeutic plateau exists despite extensive effort during the last four
decades to optimize the efficacy of cytotoxic chemotherapy through combination of
chemotherapies of mechanistically diverse action, dose-dense scheduling (provided
as frequently as every 2 weeks), increased adjuvant treatment duration, and
higher dosage per cycle (facilitated with parallel strides in supportive care
incorporating growth factors). As has already occurred for malignancies such as
breast or colon cancer, the "-omics-based" revolution has enhanced our
understanding of the molecular changes responsible for Ewing's tumor formation
and identified a number of potential targets (such as IGF-1R or mTOR) amenable to
biological therapy. It has also created both a challenge and an opportunity to
develop predictive biomarkers capable of selecting patients most likely to
benefit from targeted therapy. In this review, we discuss current
standard-of-care for patients with Ewing's sarcoma and highlight the most
promising experimental therapies in early-phase clinical trials.

PMID: 19533369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Anticancer Res. 2009 Jun;29(6):1901-8.

Cleavage of the Ewing tumour-specific EWSR1-FLI1 mRNA by hammerhead ribozymes.

Hühn R(1), Staege MS, Hesse M, Liebig B, Burdach SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Children's Cancer Research Centre,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, D-06097 Halle, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Ewing family tumours (EFT) are the second most common bone tumours in
children and adolescents. In the majority of EFT, EWSR1-FLI1 (Ewing sarcoma
breakpoint region 1-Friend leukaemia virus integration 1) fusion proteins can be 
detected and EWSR1-FLI1 substantially contributes to the malignant phenotype of
EFT. Therefore, inactivation of EWSR1-FLI1 is an interesting strategy for EFT
therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A ribozyme with specificity for EWSR1-FLI1 was developed
and the activity in vitro was investigated. Synthetic RNAs corresponding to
EWSR1-FLI1 were used as substrates. In addition, the total RNA from EFT cells was
used as substrate and the rapid amplification of cDNA ends method for the
detection of the cleavage products was used.
RESULTS: The ribozyme cleaved the synthetic RNA in a sequence specific manner
with high efficiency in vitro. Furthermore, the expected cleavage products were
detected after digestion of the total cellular RNA with this ribozyme. A point
mutation in the catalytic centre of the ribozyme abolished enzymatic activity.
CONCLUSION: The RNA corresponding to EWSR1-FLI1 is accessible for ribozyme
mediated inactivation and ribozymes are able to cleave EWSR1-FLI1 specific RNA in
the presence of a high background of normal cellular RNAs.

PMID: 19528446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):1991-6. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

Epigenetic maintenance of stemness and malignancy in peripheral neuroectodermal
tumors by EZH2.

Burdach S(1), Plehm S, Unland R, Dirksen U, Borkhardt A, Staege MS, Müller-Tidow 
C, Richter GH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics and Children's Cancer Research Center, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany. somagene@lrz.tum.de

Chromatin modifications are increasingly recognized as a key mechanism in cancer.
The histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste, Drosophila, Homolog 2 (EZH2),
the enzymatic subunit of the polycomb PRC2 complex methylates histone H3K27,
thereby, mediating gene silencing. EZH2 is overexpressed in a variety of tumor
tissue including breast and prostate. Ewing tumors (ET), alias peripheral
neuroectodermal tumors (PNET), are highly malignant tumors molecularly defined by
ews/ets translocations. We found EWS-FLI1 bound to the EZH2 promoter in vivo.
Other components of the PRC2 complex, like EED or SUZ12 were not deregulated in
ET. Downregulation of EZH2 by RNA interference suppressed tumor development and
metastasis in vivo and microarray analysis of EZH2 knock down revealed an
EZH2-maintained, undifferentiated, reversible phenotype in ET. EZH2 suppression
resulted in a generalized loss of H3K27me3 as well as increase in H3 acetylation.
ChIP-Chip assays for H3K27me3 verified such genes that had specifically lost
H3K27me3 upon EZH2 silencing, suggesting that stemness features are preserved via
epigenetic mechanisms. Taken together, the genetic EWS-FLI1 translocation is
intimately linked to global and gene specific epigenetic alterations in ET
biology. EZH2 mediates neuroectodermal and endothelial embryonal tumor stem cell 
growth and metastatic spread induced by a translocation derived chimeric
transcription factor.

PMID: 19502792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2009 Oct;53(4):683-4. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22089.

Low frequency of EWSR1 rearrangements in neoplasms classified as high-risk Wilms 
tumors.

Frigyesi I, Möller E, Stewénius Y, Isaksson M, Bras J, Alumets J, Øra I,
Sandstedt B, Gisselsson D.

PMID: 19492315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jul 7;101(1):80-90. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605104. Epub 2009 Jun 
2.

Stable interference of EWS-FLI1 in an Ewing sarcoma cell line impairs
IGF-1/IGF-1R signalling and reveals TOPK as a new target.

Herrero-Martín D(1), Osuna D, Ordóñez JL, Sevillano V, Martins AS, Mackintosh C, 
Campos M, Madoz-Gúrpide J, Otero-Motta AP, Caballero G, Amaral AT, Wai DH, Braun 
Y, Eisenacher M, Schaefer KL, Poremba C, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Program, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer-IBMCC
(USAL-CSIC), Campus Unamuno s/n, Salamanca, Spain. david.herrero@kispi.uzh.ch

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma is a paradigm of solid tumour -bearing chromosomal
translocations resulting in fusion proteins that act as deregulated transcription
factors. Ewing sarcoma translocations fuse the EWS gene with an ETS transcription
factor, mainly FLI1. Most of the EWS-FLI1 target genes still remain unknown and
many have been identified in heterologous model systems.
METHODS: We have developed a stable RNA interference model knocking down EWS-FLI1
in the Ewing sarcoma cell line TC71. Gene expression analyses were performed to
study the effect of RNA interference on the genetic signature of EWS-FLI1 and to 
identify genes that could contribute to tumourigenesis.
RESULTS: EWS-FLI1 inhibition induced apoptosis, reduced cell migratory and
tumourigenic capacities, and caused reduction in tumour growth. IGF-1 was
downregulated and the IGF-1/IGF-1R signalling pathway was impaired. PBK/TOPK
(T-LAK cell-originated protein kinase) expression was decreased because of
EWS-FLI1 inhibition. We showed that TOPK is a new target gene of EWS-FLI1. TOPK
inhibition prompted a decrease in the proliferation rate and a dramatic change in
the cell's ability to grow in coalescence.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report of TOPK activity in Ewing sarcoma and
suggests a significant role of this MAPKK-like protein kinase in the Ewing
sarcoma biology.

PMCID: PMC2694277
PMID: 19491900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2009 Jun;13(3):197-200. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2008.02.014.
Epub 2008 Jun 26.

Clear cell sarcoma of the mediastinum.

Tirabosco R(1), Lang-Lazdunski L, Diss TC, Amary MF, Rodriguez-Justo M, Landau D,
Lorenzi W, Flanagan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, The Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital,
Stanmore, Middlesex, UK. roberto.tirabosco@rnoh.nhs.uk

A 59-year-old woman presented with a large mediastinal mass. At thoracotomy, the 
mass was found tightly adherent to the esophageal wall and right lower lobe of
the lung. Histological examination showed a solid tumor composed of closely
packed nests of cells with clear and eosinophilic cytoplasm, which were strongly 
and diffusely positive for S100 protein but negative for HMB45 and Melan-A. The
diagnosis of clear cell sarcoma was supported by demonstrating the presence of an
EWS gene rearrangement by fluorescence in situ hybridization. There was no
evidence that this lesion represented metastatic disease. To the best of our
knowledge, primary mediastinal clear cell sarcoma has not been previously
reported in the literature. We present the case and discuss the differential
diagnosis.

PMID: 19433300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;69(10):4363-71. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3229. Epub 
2009 May 5.

Ewing sarcoma fusion protein EWSR1/FLI1 interacts with EWSR1 leading to mitotic
defects in zebrafish embryos and human cell lines.

Embree LJ(1), Azuma M, Hickstein DD.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The mechanism whereby the fusion of EWSR1 with the ETS transcription factor FLI1 
contributes to malignant transformation in Ewing sarcoma remains unclear. We show
that injection of human or zebrafish EWSR1/FLI1 mRNA into developing zebrafish
embryos leads to mitotic defects with multipolar and disorganized mitotic
spindles. Expression of human EWSR1/FLI1 in HeLa cells also results in mitotic
defects, along with mislocalization of Aurora kinase B, a key regulator of
mitotic progression. Because these mitotic abnormalities mimic those observed
with the knockdown of EWSR1 in zebrafish embryos and HeLa cells, we investigated 
whether EWSR1/FLI1 interacts with EWSR1 and interferes with its function. EWSR1
coimmunoprecipitates with EWSR1/FLI1, and overexpression of EWSR1 rescues the
mitotic defects in EWSR1/FLI1-transfected HeLa cells. This interaction between
EWSR1/FLI1 and EWSR1 in Ewing sarcoma may induce mitotic defects leading to
genomic instability and subsequent malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC2766243
PMID: 19417137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2009 Aug;38(8):891-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ijom.2009.03.711. Epub 2009 May 2.

Unusual histological variant of Ewing's sarcoma of mandible.

Makary R(1), Tucker M, Fernandes RP, Shuja S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Florida-Jacksonville Campus,
Jacksonville, FL, USA.

Ewing family of tumors (EFTs) comprise highly malignant, nearly undifferentiated 
neoplasms including Ewing's sarcoma (ES), primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) 
and a spectrum of other unusual variants. In general, EFTs are included among
small blue cell tumors. Establishing histological diagnosis can be difficult;
CD99 and FLI1 immunohistochemical staining has improved diagnosis, but these
markers are not specific for EFTs. The diagnosis of EFTs is confirmed by
molecular diagnostic testing showing the presence of established rearrangements
of the EWS gene. The use of this molecular signature in EFTs revealed rare
variants in the histomorphologic spectrum of these tumors. The authors report an 
unusual variant of EFT in the mandible of a 17-year-old patient, which was
confirmed by translocation rearrangement in EWR1 gene at 22q12 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. The unusual histologic features, with prominent spindling of 
tumor cells and deviation from the classic features of Ewing's sarcoma posed a
diagnostic challenge for the medical centers involved in the diagnosis and
treatment of this patient. This highlights the importance of the genetic study of
undifferentiated sarcomas to identify rare morphologic variants of ES, in view of
the chemosensitivity of EFTs and how this affects patient management.

PMID: 19411158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5415. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005415. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

A molecular function map of Ewing's sarcoma.

Kauer M(1), Ban J, Kofler R, Walker B, Davis S, Meltzer P, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria.

BACKGROUND: EWS-FLI1 is a chimeric ETS transcription factor that is, due to a
chromosomal rearrangement, specifically expressed in Ewing's sarcoma family
tumors (ESFT) and is thought to initiate the development of the disease. Previous
genomic profiling experiments have identified EWS-FLI1-regulated genes and genes 
that discriminate ESFT from other sarcomas, but so far a comprehensive analysis
of EWS-FLI1-dependent molecular functions characterizing this aggressive cancer
is lacking.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, a molecular function map of ESFT
was constructed based on an integrative analysis of gene expression profiling
experiments following EWS-FLI1 knockdown in a panel of five ESFT cell lines, and 
on gene expression data from the same platform of 59 primary ESFT. Out of 80
normal tissues tested, mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPC) were found to fit the
hypothesis that EWS-FLI1 is the driving transcriptional force in ESFT best and
were therefore used as the reference tissue for the construction of the molecular
function map. The interrelations of molecular pathways were visualized by
measuring the similarity among annotated gene functions by gene sharing. The
molecular function map highlighted distinct clusters of activities for EWS-FLI1
regulated genes in ESFT and revealed a striking difference between EWS-FLI1 up-
and down-regulated genes: EWS-FLI1 induced genes mainly belong to cell cycle
regulation, proliferation, and response to DNA damage, while repressed genes were
associated with differentiation and cell communication.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study revealed that EWS-FLI1 combines by distinct 
molecular mechanisms two important functions of cellular transformation in one
protein, growth promotion and differentiation blockage. By taking MPC as a
reference tissue, a significant EWS-FLI1 signature was discovered in ESFT that
only partially overlapped with previously published EWS-FLI1-dependent gene
expression patterns, identifying a series of novel targets for the chimeric
protein in ESFT. Our results may guide target selection for future ESFT specific 
therapies.

PMCID: PMC2671847
PMID: 19404404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Neurol Sci. 2009 Sep 15;284(1-2):186-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.03.031. Epub
2009 Apr 24.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors mimicking primary central nervous system neoplasms.

Theeler BJ(1), Keylock J, Yoest S, Forouhar M.

Author information: 
(1)United States Army, Department of Medicine/Neurology Service, United States.
btheeler@hotmail.com

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs) and embyronal tumors of the central nervous
system are malignant primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) that can arise in
the central nervous system, bones, or soft tissues. When ESFTs involve the
central nervous system or nearby structures the diagnosis depends on cytogenetics
and immunohistochemistry as these tumors can appear otherwise histologically
identical to central PNETs. Correct diagnosis is essential as the treatment
paradigms for both entities differ. We present two cases of isolated central
nervous system presentations of ESFTs mimicking primary central nervous system
neoplasms.

PMID: 19394051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 1;15(7):2259-68. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2184.
Epub 2009 Mar 24.

The NFATc2 gene is involved in a novel cloned translocation in a Ewing sarcoma
variant that couples its function in immunology to oncology.

Szuhai K(1), Ijszenga M, de Jong D, Karseladze A, Tanke HJ, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive sarcoma and is the second most common
bone sarcoma in childhood. Disease-specific t(11;22) ( approximately 85-90%),
t(21;22) ( approximately 5-10%), or rarer variant translocations with the
involvement of chromosome 22 ( approximately 5%) are present. At the gene level, 
the EWSR1 gene fuses with FLI1, ERG, or other ETS transcription factor family
members. Thus far, no Ewing sarcoma has been identified with a fusion to
transcription factors other than ETS.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using molecular tools such as multicolor fluorescence in
situ hybridization and array comparative genomic hybridization, a ring chromosome
containing chromosomes 20 and 22 was identified in four Ewing sarcoma cases. The 
breakpoint was mapped with (fiber-) fluorescence in situ hybridization and
reverse transcription-PCR followed by sequencing of the fusion partners.
RESULTS: Molecular karyotyping showed the translocation and amplification of
regions of chromosomes 20q13 and 22q12. Cloning of the breakpoint showed an
in-frame fusion between the EWSR1 and NFATc2 genes, resulting in loss of the
NH(2)-terminal, calcineurin-dependent control region and an intact active domain 
of NFATc2 controlled by the transactivation domains of EWSR1.
CONCLUSION: A new translocation involving EWSRI and NFATc2 was cloned. NFATc2 is 
a transcription factor that is not a member of the ETS family and functions in
T-cell differentiation and immune response. Direct involvement of NFATc2 has not 
yet been observed in oncogenesis. We show that due to the shared sequence
recognition of NFATc2 and the ETS family, shared transcriptional control is
possible using activating protein complex 1.

PMID: 19318479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4932. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004932. Epub 2009 Mar 23.

The oncogenic EWS-FLI1 protein binds in vivo GGAA microsatellite sequences with
potential transcriptional activation function.

Guillon N(1), Tirode F, Boeva V, Zynovyev A, Barillot E, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Paris, France.

The fusion between EWS and ETS family members is a key oncogenic event in Ewing
tumors and important EWS-FLI1 target genes have been identified. However, until
now, the search for EWS-FLI1 targets has been limited to promoter regions and no 
genome-wide comprehensive analysis of in vivo EWS-FLI1 binding sites has been
undertaken. Using a ChIP-Seq approach to investigate EWS-FLI1-bound DNA sequences
in two Ewing cell lines, we show that this chimeric transcription factor
preferentially binds two types of sequences including consensus ETS motifs and
microsatellite sequences. Most bound sites are found outside promoter regions.
Microsatellites containing more than 9 GGAA repeats are very significantly
enriched in EWS-FLI1 immunoprecipitates. Moreover, in reporter gene experiments, 
the transcription activation is highly dependent upon the number of repeats that 
are included in the construct. Importantly, in vivo EWS-FLI1-bound
microsatellites are significantly associated with EWS-FLI1-driven gene
activation. Put together, these results point out the likely contribution of
microsatellite elements to long-distance transcription regulation and to
oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2654724
PMID: 19305498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2009 Apr;67(4):910-4. doi: 10.1016/j.joms.2008.06.092.

Clear cell sarcoma of the temporal region: case report, review of the literature,
and genetic analysis.

García de Marcos JA(1), del Castillo-Pardo de Vera JL, Poblet E, Galdeano-Arenas 
M, Arroyo-Rodríguez S, Calderón-Polanco J, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon, Albacete University Hospital, Albacete, Spain.
pepio2@hotmail.com

PMID: 19304057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Aktuelle Urol. 2009 Aug;40(4):247-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1098827. Epub 2009 Mar
17.

Ewing's sarcoma / primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney.

Funahashi Y(1), Hattori R, Yamamoto T, Mizutani K, Yoshino Y, Matsukawa Y, Sassa 
N, Okumura K, Gotoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. funa418@yahoo.co.jp

A 42-year-old female presented with right back pain. The CT scan revealed a 72-mm
space-occupying lesion in the middle portion of the right kidney. No metastasis
was proven. She underwent laparoscopic radical nephrectomy and lymph node
disection. The histopathological examination revealed a high-grade primitive
small round tumor the cells of which were strongly positive for CD99 and
vimentin. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis using a DNA probe for the
Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR 1) on chromosome 22g12 revealed a
rearrangement of the EWSR 1 locus. The diagnosis was Ewing's sarcoma / primitive 
neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney. She underwent 13 cycles of chemotherapy, and
has no evidence of recurrence 19 months after surgery.

PMID: 19294616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochemistry. 2009 Apr 7;48(13):2849-57. doi: 10.1021/bi802366h.

In vitro activity of the EWS oncogene transcriptional activation domain.

Ng KP(1), Li KK, Lee KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, SAR China.

Aberrant chromosomal fusion of the Ewings sarcoma oncogene (EWS) to several
different cellular partners gives rise to the Ewing's family of oncogenic
proteins [EWS fusion proteins (EFPs)] and associated tumors (EFTs). EFPs are
potent transcriptional activators dependent on the N-terminal region of EWS [the 
EWS activation domain (EAD)], and this function is thought to be central to EFT
oncogenesis and maintenance. Thus, EFPs are promising therapeutic targets, and
detailed molecular studies of the EAD will be pivotal for exploring this
potential. For many reasons, the molecular mechanism of EAD action is poorly
understood and one major obstacle to progress is the lack of an in vitro
transcription assay. Using well-characterized EAD-dependent activators and
soluble nuclear extracts, we have attempted to recapitulate EAD transcriptional
activity in vitro. We report that while the EAD activates transcription strongly 
in vitro, the effect of EAD mutations is strikingly different from that observed 
in vivo. Our results therefore suggest that crude soluble extracts do not support
bona fide EAD activity in vitro, and we discuss our findings in relation to
future assay development and potential mechanisms of EAD action.

PMID: 19290668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 31;106(13):5324-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0810759106. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

EZH2 is a mediator of EWS/FLI1 driven tumor growth and metastasis blocking
endothelial and neuro-ectodermal differentiation.

Richter GH(1), Plehm S, Fasan A, Rössler S, Unland R, Bennani-Baiti IM, Hotfilder
M, Löwel D, von Luettichau I, Mossbrugger I, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Kovar H,
Staege MS, Müller-Tidow C, Burdach S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Technische Universität München and Pediatric Oncology Center, 81664
Munich, Germany.

Ewing tumors (ET) are highly malignant, localized in bone or soft tissue, and are
molecularly defined by ews/ets translocations. DNA microarray analysis revealed a
relationship of ET to both endothelium and fetal neural crest. We identified
expression of histone methyltransferase enhancer of Zeste, Drosophila, Homolog 2 
(EZH2) to be increased in ET. Suppressive activity of EZH2 maintains stemness in 
normal and malignant cells. Here, we found EWS/FLI1 bound to the EZH2 promoter in
vivo, and induced EZH2 expression in ET and mesenchymal stem cells.
Down-regulation of EZH2 by RNA interference in ET suppressed oncogenic
transformation by inhibiting clonogenicity in vitro. Similarly, tumor development
and metastasis was suppressed in immunodeficient Rag2(-/-)gamma(C)(-/-) mice.
EZH2-mediated gene silencing was shown to be dependent on histone deacetylase
(HDAC) activity. Subsequent microarray analysis of EZH2 knock down,
HDAC-inhibitor treatment and confirmation in independent assays revealed an
undifferentiated phenotype maintained by EZH2 in ET. EZH2 regulated stemness
genes such as nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR), as well as genes involved in
neuroectodermal and endothelial differentiation (EMP1, EPHB2, GFAP, and GAP43).
These data suggest that EZH2 might have a central role in ET pathology by shaping
the oncogenicity and stem cell phenotype of this tumor.

PMCID: PMC2656557
PMID: 19289832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Intern Med. 2009;48(5):329-33. Epub 2009 Mar 2.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the pancreas.

Doi H(1), Ichikawa S, Hiraoka A, Ichiryu M, Nakahara H, Ochi H, Tanabe A, Kodama 
A, Hasebe A, Miyamoto Y, Ninomiya T, Horiike N, Takamura K, Kawasaki H, Kameoka
C, Kan M, Doi S, Soga Y, Tamura H, Maeda T, Asaki A, Seno S, Iguchi H, Hasegawa
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ehime Prefectural Central Hospital, Matsuyama.

The primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) of the pancreas, a member of Ewing's
sarcoma family of tumors, is extremely rare. We treated a 37-year-old Japanese
man who had a solitary pancreatic tumor 40 mm in diameter and multiple hepatic
tumors with surgical resection. The PNET was positive for CD99 on
immunohistochemical staining. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was also 
performed, which revealed a Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) 22q12
rearrangement. According to the Japan-Ewing protocol, chemotherapy with Ifomide
(ifosfamide), etoposide, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide was given after
surgery. To the best of our knowledge, to date 13 PNET cases have been reported
with a mean age for all patients of 19.3 years old. Surgical resection was
performed in most cases and some patients received postoperative chemotherapy.
The clinicopathologic characteristics and management of this extremely rare
disease are also discussed.

PMID: 19252356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4634. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004634. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

EWS/ETS regulates the expression of the Dickkopf family in Ewing family tumor
cells.

Miyagawa Y(1), Okita H, Itagaki M, Toyoda M, Katagiri YU, Fujimoto J, Hata J,
Umezawa A, Kiyokawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The Dickkopf (DKK) family comprises a set of proteins that function
as regulators of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and has a crucial role in
development. Recent studies have revealed the involvement of this family in
tumorigenesis, however their role in tumorigenesis is still remained unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found increased expression of DKK2 but
decreased expression of DKK1 in Ewing family tumor (EFT) cells. We showed that
EFT-specific EWS/ETS fusion proteins enhance the DKK2 promoter activity, but not 
DKK1 promoter activity, via ets binding sites (EBSs) in the 5' upstream region.
EWS/ETS-mediated transactivation of the promoter was suppressed by the deletion
and mutation of EBSs located upstream of the DKK2 gene. Interestingly, the
inducible expression of EWS/ETS resulted in the strong induction of DKK2
expression and inhibition of DKK1 expression in human primary mesenchymal
progenitor cells that are thought to be a candidate of cell origin of EFT. In
addition, using an EFT cell line SK-ES1 cells, we also demonstrated that the
expression of DKK1 and DKK2 is mutually exclusive, and the ectopic expression of 
DKK1, but not DKK2, resulted in the suppression of tumor growth in
immuno-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results suggested that DKK2 could not functionally 
substitute for DKK1 tumor-suppressive effect in EFT. Given the mutually exclusive
expression of DKK1 and DKK2, EWS/ETS regulates the transcription of the DKK
family, and the EWS/ETS-mediated DKK2 up-regulation could affect the
tumorigenicity of EFT in an indirect manner.

PMCID: PMC2644785
PMID: 19247449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Pathol Res Pract. 2009;205(7):451-7. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2009.01.003. Epub 2009
Feb 24.

Pediatric extra-renal rhabdoid tumors with unusual morphology: a diagnostic
pitfall for small biopsies.

Alaggio R(1), Boldrini R, Di Venosa B, Rosolen A, Bisogno G, Magro G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chirurgiche e Oncologiche, Sezione Anatomia
Patologica, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy.

The diagnosis of malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT) is straightforward if the
typical, large eosinophilic rhabdoid cells are identified. We report on two
diagnostically challenging cases of pediatric extra-renal MRTs which, when
evaluated at incisional biopsy, were composed exclusively of small- to
medium-sized round cells with focal spindling, lacking rhabdoid phenotype. This
morphology, along with a polyphenotypic immunoprofile, including the expression
of vimentin/CD99/cytokeratins/alpha-smooth muscle actin and vimentin/CD99/S-100
protein in case 1 and case 2, respectively, suggested the possibility of Ewing
sarcoma (EWS)/PNET. However, molecular analyses failed to show the presence of
the EWS/FLI-1 and EWS/ERG fusion transcripts, indicative of the most common
translocations, i.e., t(11;22)(q24;q12) and t(22;21)(q22;q12), occurring in this 
tumor family. The revision of both cases included an immunohistochemical analysis
with a commercially available anti-INI1 protein antibody. Immunohistochemistry,
showing the absence of INI1 expression in neoplastic cells, strongly supported
the diagnosis of MRT. Ultrastructural studies, performed on formalin-fixed
tissues, were consistent with the diagnosis of MRT. This study suggests including
anti-INI1 protein antibody in the immunohistochemical panel when evaluating
pediatric tumors with ambiguous morphological and immunohistochemical features,
particularly from small biopsies. A careful evaluation of clinical, pathological,
and molecular findings is the key to a correct diagnostic approach of pediatric
tumors.

PMID: 19243895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2009 Mar;18(1):1-10. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e318181fa05.

A rational approach to genetic testing for sarcoma.

Gulley ML(1), Kaiser-Rogers KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7525, USA. margaret_gulley@med.unc.edu

Diagnosis of sarcoma increasingly relies on identifying genetic defects using
modern molecular technologies. Each analytic method has unique advantages and
specimen requirements that should be considered when allocating tissue for
downstream testing. Karyotype on fresh tissue represents a genome-wide screen of 
gross chromosomal alterations, whereas fluorescence in situ hybridization and
polymerase chain reaction detect specific defects that are characteristic of a
given tumor type such as t(11;22) EWSR1-FLI1 in Ewing family tumors, t(X;18)
SS18-SSX1 in synovial sarcoma, t(2;13) PAX3-FOXO1A in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, 
and MYCN gene amplification in neuroblastoma. Identifying a clonal genetic defect
also provides a tumor marker that could help stage the extent of spread of the
neoplasm or monitor the efficacy of therapy. In research laboratories,
array-based methods identify genes and biochemical pathways contributing to tumor
growth and maintenance, opening avenues for pharmacogenetic tests that predict
which therapy is likely to overcome the biochemical defects with minimal
toxicity. Array-based discoveries are also spurring validation of smaller test
panels that rely on conventional technologies such as immunohistochemistry and
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The pathologist's expertise is
critical in: (1) consulting with clinicians about specimen collection and
handling; (2) preserving tissue for immediate testing and for any downstream
testing that is indicated once morphology and immunophenotype are known; (3)
performing tests that maximize outcome on the basis of the strengths and
limitations of each assay in each available specimen type; and (4) conveying
results to the rest of the healthcare team using proper gene nomenclature and
interpreting the findings in a way that facilitates optimal clinical management.

PMID: 19214114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oncol Rep. 2009 Mar;21(3):641-8.

Bidirectionality and transcriptional activity of the EWSR1 promoter region.

Möller E(1), Mandahl N, Iliszko M, Mertens F, Panagopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund,
Sweden. emely.moller@med.lu.se

EWSR1 is involved in chimeric proteins which play crucial roles in the
development of a variety of bone and soft tissue tumors. Many of the chimeric
genes involving EWSR1 have been extensively studied, whereas less is known about 
the wild-type (wt) gene and its regulation. As the expression of the chimeric
gene is driven by the EWSR1 promoter, it is of importance to study the mechanisms
regulating wt EWSR1 expression. We estimated the transcriptional activity of the 
EWSR1 promoter through deletion fragments driving reporter gene expression. This 
assay identified the 100-bp region immediately downstream of the EWSR1
transcriptional start site (+1) and the downstream region from +100 to +300 as
important regions for transcriptional regulation. We also found that EWSR1 and
RHBDD3, a gene located directly upstream of EWSR1 that is likely to share
regulatory elements with EWSR1, were co-expressed in the tissue panels, Ewing
tumor biopsies and cell lines. Thus, our results show that the EWSR1 promoter
functions in a bidirectional manner, thereby regulating also RHBDD3, and
identifies specific regions that strongly influence promoter activity.

PMID: 19212622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2009 Aug;135(8):1125-36. doi: 10.1007/s00432-009-0554-z.
Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Simultaneous inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinase and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways augment the sensitivity to actinomycin D
in Ewing sarcoma.

Yamamoto T(1), Ohno T, Wakahara K, Nagano A, Kawai G, Saitou M, Takigami I,
Matsuhashi A, Yamada K, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

PURPOSE: Ewing sarcoma cells, of which over 85% retain chimeric fusion gene
EWS/Fli-1, are by and large more resistant to chemotherapeutics compared to
nonneoplastic cells. The purpose of this study is to determine the role of
EWS/Fli-1 fusion and its downstream targets regarding the cells' resistance
against actinomycin D (ActD), which is one of the most commonly used antitumor
agents in combination chemotherapy of Ewing sarcomas.
METHODS: Cytotoxicity was measured by WST-8 assay. Caspase-dependent and
-independent cell death was examined by fluorescence microscope. Protein
expression was analyzed by western blotting. Caspase activity was determined by
Caspase-Glo assay.
RESULTS: ActD-induced caspase-dependent apoptotic cell death to Ewing sarcoma
TC-135 cells in a dose- and time- dependent manner. Knockdown of EWS/Fli-1 fusion
by siRNA resulted in enhancement of ActD-induced apoptosis. ActD treatment
activated both mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK)/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
pathways although in a distinctive manner. Combined administration of U0126 (MEK 
inhibitor) and LY294002 (PI3K inhibitor) significantly enhanced ActD-induced
apoptosis in vitro and suppressed xenograft tumor growth in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated for the first time that combination
of U0126 and LY294002 can augment the cytotoxicity of ActD against Ewing sarcoma 
cells in vitro and in vivo. Our results indicate that further study on
combination of conventional chemotherapies with MEK and PI3K inhibitors may be
considered for innovative treatments of Ewing sarcoma patients.

PMID: 19205734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 May;33(5):645-58. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181963c9c.

Liposarcomas in young patients: a study of 82 cases occurring in patients younger
than 22 years of age.

Alaggio R(1), Coffin CM, Weiss SW, Bridge JA, Issakov J, Oliveira AM, Folpe AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

Liposarcomas typically occur in middle aged to older adults. Altogether,
approximately 50 bona fide liposarcomas have been reported in children and
adolescents, most of which have represented myxoid liposarcomas, with a good
prognosis. We undertook a retrospective study of 82 liposarcomas occurring in
patients below 22 years of age. Clinicopathologic and follow-up information was
obtained. Fluorescence in situ hybridization for FUS, EWSR1, CHOP (DDIT3), and
MDM2 was performed in 30 cases. The tumors occurred in 28 males and 54 females (5
to 22 y of age) and involved many locations. Fifty-six cases were typical myxoid 
liposarcomas, including 2 with round cell areas. The tumors were grade 1 (56
cases) and grade 3 (2 cases). Thirty-seven of 38 patients with follow-up are
alive without disease and 1 is alive with disease (median 59 mo follow-up
duration, range: 8 to 108 mo). Six cases showed myxoid liposarcoma with spindled 
growth ("spindle cell myxoid liposarcoma"); these arose in 5 females and 1 male
(median age 14 y) and involved the thigh in 40% of cases. All were grade 1.
Follow-up (4 of 6 patients) showed local recurrences in 2 cases and metastases in
1 case. Twelve tumors consisted of conventional myxoid liposarcoma and
pleomorphic liposarcoma ("pleomorphic myxoid liposarcoma"); these arose in 4
males and 8 females (10 to 22 y of age) and often involved the mediastinum. Tumor
grades were 2 (4 cases) and 3 (8 cases). Follow-up (10 patients) showed 7 dead of
disease, 1 alive with disease, and 2 disease free. Four atypical lipomatous
tumors were seen including 2 with low-grade dedifferentiation. Two local
recurrences were seen; all patients are disease free. Two conventional
pleomorphic liposarcomas were seen; 1 patient with follow-up is disease free.
FUS-CHOP and EWSR1-CHOP rearrangements were identified by fluorescence in situ
hybridization in 15/23 and 2/23 conventional myxoid liposarcomas, respectively,
and in no other tumors. Amplification for MDM2 was absent in all cases. We
conclude that conventional myxoid liposarcoma is by far the most common subtype
of liposarcoma in young patients, with an excellent prognosis. Two apparently
novel subtypes of liposarcoma, termed pleomorphic myxoid liposarcoma and spindle 
cell myxoid liposarcoma comprise considerable percentages of liposarcomas in this
age group and should be distinguished from conventional myxoid liposarcoma and
conventional pleomorphic liposarcoma. Pleomorphic myxoid liposarcoma and spindle 
cell myxoid liposarcoma most likely represent high-grade and low-grade variants
of myxoid liposarcoma, respectively. Additional study of such cases will be
necessary for definitive classification.

PMID: 19194281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Feb;8(2):449-57. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0848. Epub
2009 Feb 3.

Trabectedin (ET-743) promotes differentiation in myxoid liposarcoma tumors.

Forni C(1), Minuzzo M, Virdis E, Tamborini E, Simone M, Tavecchio M, Erba E,
Grosso F, Gronchi A, Aman P, Casali P, D'Incalci M, Pilotti S, Mantovani R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomolecolari e Biotecnologie, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Differentiation is a complex set of events that can be blocked by rearrangements 
of regulatory genes producing fusion proteins with altered properties. In the
case of myxoid liposarcoma (MLS) tumors, the causative abnormality is a fusion
between the CHOP transcription factor and the FUS or EWS genes. CHOP belongs to
and is a negative regulator of the large CAAT/enhancer binding protein family
whose alpha, beta, and delta members are master genes of adipogenesis. Recent
clinical data indicate a peculiar sensitivity of these tumors to the natural
marine compound trabectedin. One hypothesis is that the activity of trabectedin
is related to the inactivation of the FUS-CHOP oncogene. We find that trabectedin
causes detachment of the FUS-CHOP chimera from targeted promoters. Reverse
transcription-PCR and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis in a MLS line and
surgical specimens of MLS patients in vivo show activation of the CAAT/enhancer
binding protein-mediated transcriptional program that leads to morphologic
changes of terminal adipogenesis. The activity is observed in cells with type 1
but not type 8 fusions. Hence, the drug induces maturation of MLS lipoblasts in
vivo by targeting the FUS-CHOP-mediated transcriptional block. These data provide
a rationale for the specific activity of trabectedin and open the perspective of 
combinatorial treatments with drugs acting on lipogenic pathways.

PMID: 19190116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 3;284(14):9074-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806233200. Epub 2009
Feb 3.

GLI1 is a direct transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein.

Beauchamp E(1), Bulut G, Abaan O, Chen K, Merchant A, Matsui W, Endo Y, Rubin JS,
Toretsky J, Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, D C 20057, USA.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) is an undifferentiated neoplasm of the bone
and soft tissue. ESFT is characterized by a specific chromosomal translocation
occurring between chromosome 22 and (in most cases) chromosome 11, which
generates an aberrant transcription factor, EWS-FLI1. The function of EWS-FLI1 is
essential for the maintenance of ESFT cell survival and tumorigenesis. The
Hedgehog pathway is activated in several cancers. Oncogenic potential of the
Hedgehog pathway is mediated by increasing the activity of the GLI family of
transcription factors. Recent evidence suggests that EWS-FLI1 increases
expression of GLI1 by an unknown mechanism. Our data from chromatin
immunoprecipitation and promoter reporter studies indicated GLI1 as a direct
transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1. Expression of EWS-FLI1 in non-ESFT cells
increased GLI1 expression and GLI-dependent transcription. We also detected high 
levels of GLI1 protein in ESFT cell lines. Pharmacological inhibition of GLI1
protein function decreased proliferation and soft agar colony formation of ESFT
cells. Our results establish GLI1 as a direct transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1 
and suggest a potential role for GLI1 in ESFT tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2666556
PMID: 19189974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Int J Cancer. 2009 May 15;124(10):2312-22. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24228.

Mutation in the DNA-binding domain of the EWS-Oct-4 oncogene results in dominant 
negative activity that interferes with EWS-Oct-4-mediated transactivation.

Kim S(1), Lee J, Kim JY, Lim B, Shin EK, Han YM, Kim SS, Song JH, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science,
Sogang University, Seoul, Korea.

The EWS-Oct-4 protein is a chimeric molecule in which the amino terminal domain
(NTD) of the EWS becomes fused to the carboxy terminal domain (CTD) of the Oct-4 
transcription factor. It was identified in human bone and soft-tissue tumors
associated with t(6;22)(p21;q12). Using in vitro and in vivo systems, we found
that the EWS-Oct-4 protein self-associates. The major domains required for
self-association mapped to the EWS NTD (amino acids 70-163) and the POU
DNA-binding domain. EWS-Oct-4 protein also associated with EWS-Oct-4 (V351P),
which contains a mutation in the POU DNA-binding domain. Using electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, we found that the EWS-Oct-4 (V351P) mutant interfered with
wild-type EWS-Oct-4 DNA-binding activity. In addition, we found that
EWS-Oct-4-mediated transcriptional activation was inhibited by EWS-Oct-4 (V351P) 
protein in vivo. Thus, this mutation in the POU DNA-binding domain results in a
dominant negative protein. These findings suggest that the biological functions
of the EWS-Oct-4 oncogene can be modulated by the dominant negative mutant
EWS-Oct-4 (V351P).

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19170206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Oncogene. 2009 Mar 5;28(9):1280-4. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.484. Epub 2009 Jan 19.

O-GlcNAcylation is involved in the transcriptional activity of EWS-FLI1 in
Ewing's sarcoma.

Bachmaier R(1), Aryee DN, Jug G, Kauer M, Kreppel M, Lee KA, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria.

The oncogene EWS-FLI1 encodes a chimeric transcription factor expressed in
Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs). EWS-FLI1 target gene expression is thought
to drive ESFT pathogenesis and, therefore, inhibition of EWS-FLI1 activity holds 
high therapeutic promise. As the activity of many transcription factors is
regulated by post-translational modifications, we studied the presence of
modifications on EWS-FLI1. The immuno-purified fusion-protein was recognized by
an antibody specific for O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosaminylation, and bound
readily to a phosphoprotein-specific dye. Inhibition of Ser/Thr-specific
phophatases increased EWS-FLI1 molecular weight and reduced its O-GlcNAc content,
suggesting that phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation of EWS-FLI1 interact
dynamically. By mutation analysis, O-GlcNAcylation was delineated to Ser/Thr
residues of the amino-terminal EWS transcriptional-activation domain. Metabolic
inhibition of the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway abrogated O-GlcNAcylation of
EWS-FLI1 and interfered specifically with transcriptional activation of the
EWS-FLI1 target Id2. These results suggest that drugs modulating glycosylation of
EWS-FLI1 interfere functionally with its activity and might, therefore,
constitute promising additions to the current ESFT chemotherapy.

PMID: 19151750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Hum Pathol. 2009 Mar;40(3):283-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.07.019. Epub 2009 
Jan 15.

Molecular and phenotypic analysis of poorly differentiated sinonasal neoplasms:
an integrated approach for early diagnosis and classification.

Cordes B(1), Williams MD, Tirado Y, Bell D, Rosenthal DI, Al-Dhahri SF, Hanna EY,
El-Naggar AK.

Author information: 
(1)Bobby R. Alford Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Primary poorly differentiated (small round and non-small) sinonasal neoplasms
comprise histogenetically and biologically diverse entities with overlapping
morphologic features. Because of the limited initial biopsy tissue materials,
differential diagnostic difficulties may arise and complicate timely management
of some cases. We used immunohistochemical and molecular marker analyses in a
large cohort of these tumors to optimize their early diagnosis and
classification. Fifty-two tumors of the skull base and sinonasal regions and, for
comparison, 19 poorly differentiated neoplasms of other head and neck sites were 
analyzed by a panel of immunohistochemical markers including those of epithelial,
mesenchymal, melanocytic, and neuroectodermal origin using tissue microarray.
Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of messenger RNA for
EWS-FLI1 and PAX-FKHR fusion transcripts and the human achaete-scute homolog-1
gene was performed on 24 of the 52 sinonasal tumors and the 19 tumors of other
sites for comparison. The immunohistochemical results substantiated the
phenotypic assessment and the initial diagnosis in 49 of the 52 tumors. In 4
instances the integrated markers and phenotypic analyses led to reclassification 
of 3 tumors and confirmed the histogenesis of a mesenchymal tumor with aberrant
cytokeratin expression. Molecular analysis of the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene transcript
revealed 4 (9.3%) of the 43 tumors to be positive; all were Ewing sarcomas. The
human achaete-scute homolog-1 gene transcript was identified in 10 (23.8%) of 42 
tumors: 3 of 6 neuroblastomas, all 4 neuroendocrine carcinomas, and 1 each in
sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and melanoma. The
PAX-FKHR fusion transcript was not detected in any tumors. We conclude that (1)
an integrated morphologic and biomarker algorithm may better optimize the early
diagnosis of poorly differentiated sinonasal and skull-base tumors; (2) molecular
analysis may assist in future biological stratification of certain classes of
these tumors; and (3) the human achaete-scute homolog-1 gene transcript is a
nonspecific marker for the diagnosis of neuroblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4573623
PMID: 19150107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jan 14;9:17. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-17.

Combined use of expression and CGH arrays pinpoints novel candidate genes in
Ewing sarcoma family of tumors.

Savola S(1), Klami A, Tripathi A, Niini T, Serra M, Picci P, Kaski S, Zambelli D,
Scotlandi K, Knuutila S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute and HUSLAB, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. suvi.savola@helsinki.fi

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT), characterized by
t(11;22)(q24;q12), is one of the most common tumors of bone in children and young
adults. In addition to EWS/FLI1 gene fusion, copy number changes are known to be 
significant for the underlying neoplastic development of ESFT and for patient
outcome. Our genome-wide high-resolution analysis aspired to pinpoint genomic
regions of highest interest and possible target genes in these areas.
METHODS: Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and expression arrays were
used to screen for copy number alterations and expression changes in ESFT patient
samples. A total of 31 ESFT samples were analyzed by aCGH and in 16 patients DNA 
and RNA level data, created by expression arrays, was integrated. Time of the
follow-up of these patients was 5-192 months. Clinical outcome was statistically 
evaluated by Kaplan-Meier/Logrank methods and RT-PCR was applied on 42 patient
samples to study the gene of the highest interest.
RESULTS: Copy number changes were detected in 87% of the cases. The most
recurrent copy number changes were gains at 1q, 2, 8, and 12, and losses at 9p
and 16q. Cumulative event free survival (ESFT) and overall survival (OS) were
significantly better (P < 0.05) for primary tumors with three or less copy number
changes than for tumors with higher number of copy number aberrations. In three
samples copy number imbalances were detected in chromosomes 11 and 22 affecting
the FLI1 and EWSR1 loci, suggesting that an unbalanced t(11;22) and subsequent
duplication of the derivative chromosome harboring fusion gene is a common event 
in ESFT. Further, amplifications on chromosomes 20 and 22 seen in one patient
sample suggest a novel translocation type between EWSR1 and an unidentified
fusion partner at 20q. In total 20 novel ESFT associated putative oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes were found in the integration analysis of array CGH and
expression data. Quantitative RT-PCR to study the expression levels of the most
interesting gene, HDGF, confirmed that its expression was higher than in control 
samples. However, no association between HDGF expression and patient survival was
observed.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that array CGH and integration analysis proved to be
effective methods to identify chromosome regions and novel target genes involved 
in the tumorigenesis of ESFT.

PMCID: PMC2633345
PMID: 19144156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Mol Biol. 2009 Feb 13;386(1):1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.12.039. Epub 2008
Dec 24.

Dynamic subcellular localization of the Ewing sarcoma proto-oncoprotein and its
association with and stabilization of microtubules.

Leemann-Zakaryan RP(1), Pahlich S, Sedda MJ, Quero L, Grossenbacher D, Gehring H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

The Ewing sarcoma (EWS) protein is a member of a large family of RNA-binding
proteins. Chimeric EWS oncoproteins generated by chromosomal translocations
between the EWS protein and several transcription factors cause various malignant
tumors. Due to its multifunctional properties, the EWS protein is involved in
such processes as meiotic DNA pairing/recombination, cellular senescence, gene
expression, RNA processing and transport, and cell signaling. The EWS protein is 
predominantly located in the nucleus. It was found in the cytoplasm and
associated with the cell membrane. In this study, analysis of the localization of
endogenous and fluorescently labeled recombinant EWS protein in different phases 
of the cell cycle in different cell lines revealed a very dynamic subcellular
distribution of the EWS protein. In Cos7 and HeLa cells, an association of the
EWS protein with the centrosomal compartments was shown. Furthermore, in HEK
(human embryonic kidney)-293 (T) cells, an interaction of the overexpressed
recombinant EWS-yellow fluorescent protein fusion protein with microtubules,
leading to their stabilization and cell cycle arrest, was demonstrated. As an
outlook, the present findings provide an important insight into temporally and
spatially regulated functions of the EWS protein and, particularly, into its role
in the regulation of the cell cycle and possibly cell differentiation.

PMID: 19133275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Mol Sci. 2008 Aug;9(8):1504-14. doi: 10.3390/ijms9081504. Epub 2008 Aug 25.

TFIP11, CCNL1 and EWSR1 Protein-protein Interactions, and Their Nuclear
Localization.

Tannukit S(1), Wen X, Wang H, Paine ML.

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California, School of Dentistry, Center for
Craniofacial Molecular Biology, 2250 Alcazar Street, CSA room 103, Los Angeles,
California 90033-1004, USA. E-mail: paine@usc.edu.

Previous studies using the yeast two-hybrid assay (Y2H) have identified cyclin L1
(CCNL1) and Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 protein (EWSR1) as being
interacting partners of tuftelin-interacting protein 11 (TFIP11). All three
proteins are functionally related to the spliceosome and involved in pre-mRNA
splicing activities. The spliceosome is a dynamic ribonucleoprotein complex
responsible for pre-mRNA splicing of intronic regions, and is composed of five
small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) and µ140 proteins. TFIP11 appears to play a role in
spliceosome disassembly allowing for the release of the bound lariat-intron. The 
roles of CCNL1 and EWSR1 in the spliceosome are poorly understood. Using
fluorescently-tagged proteins and confocal microscopy we show that TFIP11, CCNL1 
and EWSR1 frequently co-localize to speckled nuclear domains. These data would
suggest that all three proteins participate in a common cellular activity related
to RNA splicing events.

PMCID: PMC2605624
PMID: 19122807  [PubMed]


86. Biochem J. 2009 Mar 15;418(3):625-34. doi: 10.1042/BJ20082097.

Phosphorylation of Ewing's sarcoma protein (EWS) and EWS-Fli1 in response to DNA 
damage.

Klevernic IV(1), Morton S, Davis RJ, Cohen P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, The Sir James Black Centre, University of
Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, U.K.

In Ewing's sarcomas, chromosomal translocations cause the N-terminal domain of
the EWS (Ewing's sarcoma protein) to fuse with the DNA-binding domains of the Ets
(E26 transformation-specific) family of transcription factors. Here we show that 
EWS and EWS-Fli1 (Friend leukaemia virus integration 1), the fusion most
frequently found in Ewing's sarcomas, become phosphorylated at Thr(79) in
response to either mitogens or DNA-damaging agents. The much weaker
mitogen-induced phosphorylation of EWS is catalysed by the MAPKs
(mitogen-activated protein kinases) ERK1 (extracellular signal-regulated kinase
1) and ERK2, whereas the much stronger phosphorylation of EWS induced by the DNA 
alkylating agent MMS (methyl methanesulphonate) can be catalysed by JNK (c-Jun
N-terminal kinase) and at least one other protein kinase distinct from ERK1/ERK2.
In contrast, the phosphorylation of EWS-Fli1 induced by MMS was largely mediated 
by p38alpha/p38beta MAPKs. MMS induced a much stronger phosphorylation of
EWS-Fli1 than EWS in heterodimers comprising both proteins.

PMID: 19076070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Dec;6(12):1937-45. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0054.

EWS-Fli1 up-regulates expression of the Aurora A and Aurora B kinases.

Wakahara K(1), Ohno T, Kimura M, Masuda T, Nozawa S, Dohjima T, Yamamoto T,
Nagano A, Kawai G, Matsuhashi A, Saitoh M, Takigami I, Okano Y, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu, Japan.

EWS-Fli1, a fusion gene resulting from the chromosomal translocation t(11;22,
q24;q12), encodes a transcriptional activator, promotes cellular transformation, 
and is often found in Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor. The
Aurora A and Aurora B kinases belong to a highly conserved family of
serine/threonine protein kinases, are tightly regulated during the cell cycle,
and are overexpressed in many carcinomas. Because the relationship between the
Aurora A and/or Aurora B genes and the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene is unknown, we
investigated the regulatory mechanism(s) by which Aurora kinases are controlled. 
Knockdown of EWS-Fli1 by small interfering RNA reduced mRNA levels not only of
EWS-Fli1 but also of Aurora A and Aurora B. Luciferase assay using Aurora A and
Aurora B promoters showed up-regulated activities compared with those of an empty
vector. Experiments with deletion and point mutants showed positive regulatory
Ets-binding sites located -84 and -71 bp upstream of the transcription initiation
sites in Aurora A and Aurora B, respectively. Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay revealed that EWS-Fli1 gene products interact with both
the Aurora A and Aurora B promoters. These results strongly suggest that the
mitotic kinases Aurora A and Aurora B are regulated by EWS-Fli1 fusion protein in
Ewing sarcoma cells.

PMID: 19074838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Ann Pathol. 2008 Nov;28 Spec No 1(1):S33-4. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2008.09.006.
Epub 2008 Oct 11.

[Stem cells and connective-tissue tumors: Ewing's sarcoma].

[Article in French]

Tirode F(1), Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)U830 Inserm, institut Curie, 26, rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris, France.
franck.tirode@curie.fr

PMID: 18984293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Neurooncol. 2009 Apr;92(2):211-7. doi: 10.1007/s11060-008-9744-9. Epub 2008 Dec
3.

Dumbbell-shaped peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the spine--case
report and review of the literature.

Hrabálek L(1), Kalita O, Svebisova H, Ehrmann J Jr, Hajduch M, Trojanec R, Kala
M.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. lumir.hrabalek@seznam.cz

Primary spinal peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs) are extremely
rare. Here, we present a case study of a 29-year-old male with a dumbbell-shaped 
pPNET at the T9-10 spine level, including details of his examination, surgical
procedures applied, histological and genetic findings, and his subsequent
treatment. We discuss the clinical course, the pathology and treatment for this
disease, the surgical approach to thoracic dumbbell tumors and we review the
literature. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a case of a
dumbbell-shaped intradural and spinal peripheral PNET.

PMID: 19050994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Sci. 2009 Jan;100(1):82-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.01008.x. Epub
2008 Nov 24.

Analysis of CHOP rearrangement in pleomorphic liposarcomas using fluorescence in 
situ hybridization.

Sugita S(1), Seki K, Yokozawa K, Tochigi N, Furuta K, Hisaoka M, Hashimoto H,
Shimoda T, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Pleomorphic liposarcoma (PLS) is an aggressive subtype of liposarcoma composed of
high-grade sarcoma with pleomorphic lipoblasts. PLS usually exhibits a
heterogeneous histology and sometimes has a myxoid or round cell area similar to 
myxoid/round cell liposarcomas (MLS/RCs). Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis, we investigated the existence of CHOP split
signals in various histological areas of PLS including the MLS/RC-like feature
and also estimated the distribution of various signals with polyploidy and
amplification. Moreover, to detect CHOP fusion transcripts we performed nested
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Seven PLSs and three
MLS/RCs were selected for FISH analysis using the locus-specific indicator CHOP
(12q13) dual color, break apart probe (Vysis, USA). The FISH analysis was applied
to formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections of representative areas in
all cases. Six of seven PLS cases showed the CHOP split signal ranging from 0.5% 
to 3% of counted nuclei, while all cases of MLS/RC exhibited CHOP rearrangement
in more than 50% of counted nuclei. All cases of PLS showed a varied distribution
of extra signals with polyploidy and amplification in each histological area. No 
CHOP fusion transcript was found in any case of PLS by nested RT-PCR. A CHOP
rearrangement in PLS should be recognized only as a representative part of
complex karyotypes, because the number of cells with split signals was minute
compared with that of MLS/RC, and the signals were found in any area despite
their histological differences. The cytogenetic background of PLS and that of
MLS/RC are obviously different despite histological similarity.

PMID: 19037998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Endod. 2008 Dec;34(12):1549-53. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2008.08.028. Epub 2008 Sep 
26.

Loss of pulp sensitivity and pain as the first symptoms of a Ewing's sarcoma in
the right maxillary sinus and alveolar process: report of a case.

Bornstein MM(1), von Arx T, Altermatt HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Stomatology, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. michael.bornstein@zmk.unibe.ch

This case report describes the diagnosis and treatment of a Ewing's sarcoma in
the right maxillary sinus and alveolar bone of a 19-year-old female patient. The 
first clinical symptoms were a loss of sensitivity of the premolars and first
molar in the right maxilla and acute pain located in the area of these teeth.
Initially, the referring dentist had treated these findings as an acute apical
periodontitis with root canal medication. Because swellings on the palatal and
buccal aspects of the teeth occurred and could not be treated with incision and
drainage, the dentist referred the patient. Cone-beam computed tomography
revealed a proliferation of soft tissue in the right maxillary sinus, with a
radiopaque material at the tip of the mesiobuccal root of the first molar and
resorptive signs of the mesiobuccal and distobuccal roots of the first molar. The
palatal cortical bone of the right alveolar process seemed to be intact. After
explorative surgery with biopsies from the buccal, palatal, and sinus
proliferation areas, the pathologist diagnosed the lesion as a Ewing's sarcoma.
Treatment of the patient consisted of initial chemotherapy, hemimaxillectomy, and
postsurgical chemoradiotherapy.

PMID: 19026893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 1;68(21):8968-75. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0573.

EWS-FLI1 induces developmental abnormalities and accelerates sarcoma formation in
a transgenic mouse model.

Lin PP(1), Pandey MK, Jin F, Xiong S, Deavers M, Parant JM, Lozano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. plin@mdanderson.org

Ewing's sarcoma is characterized by the t(11;22)(q24:q12) reciprocal
translocation. To study the effects of the fusion gene EWS-FLI1 on development
and tumor formation, a transgenic mouse model was created. A strategy of
conditional expression was used to limit the potentially deleterious effects of
EWS-FLI1 to certain tissues. In the absence of Cre recombinase, EWS-FLI1 was not 
expressed in the EWS-FLI1 transgenic mice, and they had a normal phenotype. When 
crossed to the Prx1-Cre transgenic mouse, which expresses Cre recombinase in the 
primitive mesenchymal cells of the embryonic limb bud, the EF mice were noted to 
have a number of developmental defects of the limbs. These included shortening of
the limbs, muscle atrophy, cartilage dysplasia, and immature bone. By itself,
EWS-FLI1 did not induce the formation of tumors in the EF transgenic mice.
However, in the setting of p53 deletion, EWS-FLI1 accelerated the formation of
sarcomas from a median time of 50 to 21 weeks. Furthermore, EWS-FLI1 altered the 
type of tumor that formed. Conditional deletion of p53 in mesenchymal cells
(Prx1-Cre p53(lox/lox)) produced osteosarcomas as the predominant tumor. The
presence of EWS-FLI1 shifted the tumor phenotype to a poorly differentiated
sarcoma. The results taken together suggest that EWS-FLI1 inhibits normal limb
development and accelerates the formation of poorly differentiated sarcomas.

PMCID: PMC4167779
PMID: 18974141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Eur Surg Res. 2009;42(1):17-20. doi: 10.1159/000166166. Epub 2008 Oct 30.

Primary Ewing sarcoma of the stomach--a newly described entity.

Rafailidis S(1), Ballas K, Psarras K, Pavlidis T, Symeonidis N, Marakis G,
Sakadamis A.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Propedeutical Department of Surgery, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki, Greece. svrafail@otenet.gr

The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) includes classic Ewing sarcoma of the
bone, extraosseous or soft tissue Ewing sarcoma, Askin tumors of the chest wall, 
and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the bone and soft tissues.
They share a common neural histogenesis, tumor genetics and biology. The genetic 
hallmark of the ESFT is the presence of t(11;22)(q24;q12), which creates the
EWS/FLI1 fusion gene and results in the expression of a chimeric protein.
Although Ewing tumors can occur at any age, the great majority are found in
individuals less than 20 years of age. We herein report a case of gastric Ewing
sarcoma in a 68-year-old male. This patient illustrates the second reported
occurrence of primary Ewing sarcoma in the stomach and the first reported with
the t(11;22)(q24;q12) gene translocation.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18971581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cell Cycle. 2008 Oct;7(20):3127-32. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

Microsatellites are EWS/FLI response elements: genomic "junk" is EWS/FLI's
treasure.

Gangwal K(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a solid tumor of the bone that primarily occurs in children
and young adults. Most cases harbor the (11;22) (q24;q12) chromosomal
translocation that encodes the EWS/FLI oncoprotein. EWS/FLI is an aberrant
ETS-type transcription factor that dysregulates a number of genes important in
the development of Ewing's sarcoma. Because EWS/FLI is the key oncoprotein in
this tumor and ETS proteins are often dysregulated in various human cancers,
Ewing's sarcoma serves as a useful paradigm for ETS-mediated oncogenesis. We
recently showed that EWS/FLI interacts with GGAA-microsatellites to regulate some
of its target genes, including NR0B1, an EWS/FLI-regulated gene that is required 
for the oncogenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma. While microsatellites typically
have no ascribed function, and are sometimes considered "junk" DNA, our findings 
provide a unique role for microsatellites in cancer development. Furthermore,
these findings may indicate a novel mechanism for normal ETS protein function as 
well. Finally, it is tempting to speculate that microsatellite polymorphisms may 
confer differences in susceptibility to Ewing's sarcoma, both between individuals
and between populations, and other diseases mediated by ETS transcription
factors. The observation of microsatellites as transcriptional response elements 
for EWS/FLI suggest that these elements may not be "junk" after all.

PMID: 18927503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Diagn Cytopathol. 2008 Dec;36(12):868-75. doi: 10.1002/dc.20931.

Spectrum of cytomorphological features, including literature review, of an
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma with t(9;22)(q22;q12) (TEC/EWS) results in
one case.

Kumar R(1), Rekhi B, Shirazi N, Pais A, Amare P, Gawde D, Jambhekar N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, India.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is an uncommon soft tissue sarcoma with
evolving literature on its cytomorphological features and limited documentation
of its molecular analysis. Herein, we present cytological features, including
review, of four cases of an EMC. Smears were predominantly hypercellular,
comprising tumor cells arranged in clusters, traberculae, and cords against a
variable chondromyxoid background. Cells were mainly polygonal shaped with round 
to indented nuclei, uniform chromatin, displaying intranuclear inclusions,
grooves, and eosinophilic to finely vacuolated cytoplasm. Three cases revealed
presence of "rhabdoid" cells. All cases had histopathologic confirmation. One
case displayed t(9;22)(q22;q12) translocation by fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH), on smears.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18925568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Pathol. 2009 Jan;217(1):83-93. doi: 10.1002/path.2445.

The EWSR1/NR4A3 fusion protein of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma activates
the PPARG nuclear receptor gene.

Filion C(1), Motoi T, Olshen AB, Laé M, Emnett RJ, Gutmann DH, Perry A, Ladanyi
M, Labelle Y.

Author information: 
(1)Human and Molecular Genetic Research Unit, Saint-François d'Assise Hospital
Research Center, CHUQ, Quebec, Qc, Canada.

The NR4A3 nuclear receptor is implicated in the development of extraskeletal
myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC), primitive sarcoma unrelated to conventional
chondrosarcomas, through a specific fusion with EWSR1 resulting in an aberrant
fusion protein that is thought to disrupt the transcriptional regulation of
specific target genes. We performed an expression microarray analysis of EMC
tumours expressing the EWSR1/NR4A3 fusion protein, comparing their expression
profiles to those of other sarcoma types. We thereby identified a set of genes
significantly overexpressed in EMC relative to other sarcomas, including PPARG
and NDRG2. Western blot or immunohistochemical analyses confirm that PPARG and
NDRG2 are expressed in tumours positive for EWSR1/NR4A3. Bioinformatic analysis
identified a DNA response element for EWSR1/NR4A3 in the PPARG promoter, and
band-shift experiments and transient transfections indicate that EWSR1/NR4A3 can 
activate transcription through this element. Western blots further show that an
isoform of the native NR4A3 receptor lacking the C-terminal domain is very highly
expressed in tumours positive for EWSR1/NR4A3, and co-transfections of this
isoform along with EWSR1/NR4A3 indicate that it may negatively regulate the
activity of the fusion protein on the PPARG promoter. These results suggest that 
the overall expression of PPARG in EMC may be regulated in part by the balance
between EWSR1/NR4A3 and NR4A3, and that PPARG may play a crucial role in the
development of these tumours. The specific up-regulation of PPARG by EWSR1/NR4A3 
may also have potential therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC4429309
PMID: 18855877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Oncogene. 2009 Jan 15;28(2):270-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.378. Epub 2008 Oct 13.

The myxoid liposarcoma FUS-DDIT3 fusion oncoprotein deregulates NF-kappaB target 
genes by interaction with NFKBIZ.

Göransson M(1), Andersson MK, Forni C, Ståhlberg A, Andersson C, Olofsson A,
Mantovani R, Aman P.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research (LLCR), Department of Pathology,
Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

FUS (also called TLS), EWSR1 and TAF15 (also called TAF2N) are related genes
involved in tumor type-specific fusion oncogenes in human malignancies. The
FUS-DDIT3 fusion oncogene results from a t(12;16)(q13;p11) chromosome
translocation and has a causative role in the initiation of myxoid/round cell
liposarcomas (MLS/RCLS). The FUS-DDIT3 protein induces increased expression of
the CAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) and nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB)-controlled gene IL8, and the N-terminal FUS part is required for this
activation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that FUS-DDIT3 binds
the IL8 promoter. Expression studies of the IL8 promoter harboring a
C/EBP-NF-kappaB composite site pinpointed the importance of NF-kappaB for IL8
expression in FUS-DDIT3-expressing cells. We therefore probed for possible
interaction of FUS-DDIT3 with members of the NF-kappaB family. The nuclear factor
NFKBIZ colocalizes with FUS-DDIT3 in nuclear structures, and immunoprecipitation 
experiments showed that FUS-DDIT3 binds the C-terminal of NFKBIZ. We also report 
that additional NF-kappaB-controlled genes are upregulated at the mRNA level in
FUS-DDIT3-expressing cell lines and they can be induced by NFKBIZ. Taken
together, the results indicate that FUS-DDIT3 deregulates some
NF-kappaB-controlled genes through interactions with NFKBIZ. Similar mechanisms
may be a part of the transformation process in other tumor types carrying FUS,
EWSR1 and TAF15 containing fusion oncogenes.

PMID: 18850010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Lab Invest. 2008 Dec;88(12):1291-302. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2008.99. Epub 2008
Oct 6.

Genetically defined EWS/FLI1 model system suggests mesenchymal origin of Ewing's 
family tumors.

Potikyan G(1), France KA, Carlson MR, Dong J, Nelson SF, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, 
USA.

Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) are characterized by recurrent chromosomal
translocations that produce chimeric fusions between the EWS gene and one of five
ETS transcription factors. The expression of EWS/FLI1, the predominant fusion
product in EFTs, is believed to deregulate downstream target genes in an
undefined tissue type and leads to development of EFTs. Attempts to generate
model systems that represent EFTs have been hampered by an unexpected toxicity of
the fusion gene. In the present study, we used gene expression analysis to
identify tissue types based on the similarity of their expression profiles to
those of EWS/FLI1-modulated genes. The data obtained from this screen helped to
identify IMR-90 cells, a human fetal fibroblast, that upon further manipulation
can maintain stable EWS/FLI1 expression without the reported toxicity. In
addition, gene expression profiling of these cells revealed a significant overlap
of genes that have been previously reported to be targets of EWS/FLI1.
Furthermore, we show, for the first time, a partial transformation of these human
primary fibroblasts with EWS/FLI1 expression. The experiments presented here
provide a solid foundation for generation of a new model system for studying
Ewing's sarcoma biology.

PMID: 18838963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mod Pathol. 2009 Feb;22(2):223-31. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.164. Epub 2008 Sep
26.

Primary retroperitoneal myxoid/round cell liposarcoma is a nonexisting disease:
an immunohistochemical and molecular biological analysis.

de Vreeze RS(1), de Jong D, Tielen IH, Ruijter HJ, Nederlof PM, Haas RL, van
Coevorden F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. r.d.vreeze@nki.nl

Almost all primary retroperitoneal liposarcomas can be classified as
well-/dedifferentiated liposarcoma. Rarely, however, primary retroperitoneal
liposarcoma is classified as myxoid/round cell liposarcoma, based on the presence
of myxoid areas and vascular crow's feet pattern, which has resulted in a debate 
on the classification of liposarcoma in the retroperitoneum. Genetically,
myxoid/round cell liposarcoma and well-/dedifferentiated liposarcoma are
different diseases. Myxoid/round cell liposarcoma is characterized by a
translocation causing FUS-CHOP or EWSR1-CHOP fusion, whereas
well-/dedifferentiated liposarcoma is characterized by an amplification of the
12q13-15 region, including MDM2 and CDK4 genes. As myxoid/round cell liposarcoma 
is highly radio- and chemosensitive, differentiation between subtypes is
important to optimize treatment. We studied whether primary retroperitoneal
liposarcomas diagnosed as myxoid/round cell liposarcoma represent molecularly
true myxoid/round cell liposarcoma or are histopathological mimics and represent 
well-/dedifferentiated liposarcoma. Primary retroperitoneal myxoid/round cell
liposarcoma (n=16) were compared to primary extremity myxoid/round cell
liposarcoma (n=20). Histopathological and immunohistochemical features were
studied. Amplification status of the 12q13-15 region was studied using a
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis, and FUS-CHOP or
EWS-CHOP translocations were studied using RT-PCR. In primary retroperitoneal
myxoid/round cell liposarcoma, MDM2 and CDK4 staining was both positive in 12 of 
15 cases. In primary extremity myxoid/round cell liposarcoma, MDM2 was negative
in 18/20 and CDK4 was negative in all cases. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification showed the amplification of 12q13-15 region in 16/16 primary
retroperitoneal myxoid/round cell liposarcomas and in 1/20 primary extremity
myxoid/round cell liposarcomas. Translocation was present in all (18/18) primary 
extremity myxoid/round cell liposarcomas, but absent in all primary
retroperitoneal myxoid/round cell liposarcomas. On the basis of
immunohistochemical and molecular characteristics, apparent primary
retroperitoneal myxoid/round cell liposarcoma can be recognized as
well-/dedifferentiated liposarcoma with morphological features mimicking
myxoid/round cell liposarcoma. In these cases, treatment should probably be
specifically designed as for well-/dedifferentiated liposarcoma. Moreover,
finding of myxoid/round cell liposarcoma translocations in a retroperitoneal
localization is highly suggestive of metastasis and should prompt search for a
primary localization outside the retroperitoneum.

PMID: 18820664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mod Pathol. 2009 Jan;22(1):87-94. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.156. Epub 2008 Sep 
26.

Superficial primitive Ewing's sarcoma: a clinicopathologic and molecular
cytogenetic analysis of 14 cases.

Terrier-Lacombe MJ(1), Guillou L, Chibon F, Gallagher G, Benhattar J, Terrier P, 
Ranchère D, Coindre JM.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Superficial primitive Ewing's sarcomas are rare and have been reported to be of
favorable prognosis compared to conventional deep-seated tumors. In the skin and 
subcutis, the diagnosis is often difficult, and performing molecular cytogenetic 
techniques may be helpful. We performed a retrospective analysis of 14 cases of
superficial Ewing's sarcomas, all confirmed by molecular cytogenetics. Clinical, 
histological, immunohistochemical, molecular cytogenetic, therapeutic, and
follow-up data are reported. There were 11 female and 3 male patients aged from
12 to 77 years (median: 17 years). Seven tumors occurred in the extremities, five
in the trunk wall, and two in the head. Tumor size ranged from 1 to 5 cm (median,
3 cm). They were all small round-cell proliferations with a strong membranous
positivity for CD99. Ewing's sarcoma translocations/fusion gene transcripts were 
detected in eight cases, both by FISH and reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR. Four
tumors were positive by RT-PCR alone (FISH not done in three cases and not
interpretable in one case), and two cases were positive by FISH alone (RT-PCR not
done). Surgical resection was performed in all patients. Chemotherapy was given
in ten patients and radiotherapy in six. At last medical examination (median
follow-up, 47 months), two patients who underwent surgical resection alone had
died from the tumor. Our results confirm that superficial Ewing's sarcomas are of
good prognosis. Given the difficulty of the diagnosis and the importance of an
adapted treatment, a confirmation of the diagnosis by molecular or cytogenetic
techniques is recommended when dealing with a superficial tumor.

PMID: 18820660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cesk Patol. 2008 Jul;44(3):67-70.

A comparision of RT-PCR and FISH techniques in molecular diagnosis of Ewing's
sarcoma in paraffin-embedded tissue.

Berková A(1), Dundr P, Povýsil C, Melcákova S, Tvrdík D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, Charles
University and General Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.

Ewing's sarcoma is relatively uncommon tumor representing 6-8 percent of
malignant bone tumors with variable morphology. Cytogenetically, Ewing's sarcomas
are characterized by a specific reciprocal chromosomal translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12). The presence of this chromosomal translocation has been
detected in approximately 85 percent of the cases. The translocation results in
the fusion of EWS gene from chromosome 22 to FLI1 gene at 11q24 which is a member
of ETS family of transcription factors. In this study we performed a comparison
of two molecular diagnostic strategies, namely RT-PCR and FISH, in fresh, frozen 
and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues. We conclude that FISH is a more
sensitive technique than RT-PCR for the diagnosis of Ewing's tumors in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. In conclusion, molecular pathology
techniques, using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and/or
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) are valuable diagnostic tools for
evaluation of undifferentiated small round-cell tumors like Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 18783137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser (Oxf). 2008;(52):213-4. doi: 10.1093/nass/nrn108.

Identification of RNA binding specificity for the TET-family proteins.

Takahama K(1), Kino K, Arai S, Kurokawa R, Oyoshi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Shizuoka University,
Suruga, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

The TET-family proteins (TAF15, EWS and TLS) are the RNA binding proteins
involved in multiple levels of cellular functions. The RNA binding domain of
those proteins is known as the important region for cellular functions. But
little is known about the RNA binding specificity of TET-family proteins. In
order to investigate the RNA binding properties of the TET-family proteins, we
performed electrophoretic mobility shift assay using recombinant Flag-tagged TLS 
and guanine-rich and RNAs. It was found that TLS binds to human telomeric RNA in 
the presence of KCl, but not in the presence of LiCl.

PMID: 18776329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Nov;32(11):1742-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181706252.

Primary extraskeletal Ewing family tumor with complex epithelial differentiation:
a unique case arising in the lateral neck presenting with Horner syndrome.

Weinreb I(1), Goldstein D, Perez-Ordoñez B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology , University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
weinrebi@yahoo.ca

A great deal of attention has been given to epithelial differentiation in Ewing
family of tumors (EFTs) in recent years, with studies showing variable keratin
expression in 20% to 32% of cases. A 29-year-old man presented with a right-sided
Horner syndrome suggesting a sympathetic chain related lesion. No radiologic
evidence of a mass was appreciated initially. Several months later, he developed 
right vocal cord palsy and a large right-sided neck mass. An open biopsy
demonstrated a high-grade malignant neoplasm with sheets of undifferentiated
round cells infiltrating soft tissues and a large peripheral branch of the vagus 
nerve. Focally, the tumor abruptly produced keratinizing cells and frank squamous
pearls. The tumor showed diffuse expression of CD99, high molecular weight
keratin, p63, cytokeratin (CK) 5/6, AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, CK19, and focal CK14. It was
negative for muscle-specific actin, desmin, MyoD1, MYF-4, S100, and CK7.
Ultrastructurally, abundant cytoplasmic tonofilaments and well-formed desmosomes 
were demonstrated. Initial diagnosis was a metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of 
probable upper aerodigestive origin. Subsequently, the tumor was shown to harbor 
the t(11;22) involving EWSR1 and FLI-1 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction, characteristic of EFT's, which was confirmed by dual color break apart 
fluorescence in-situ hybridization analysis. This tumor is related to, if not an 
example of the recently described "adamantinoma-like" EFT and demonstrates a
potential diagnostic pitfall. It seems to be the first EFT to arise within, or in
close proximity to the cervical sympathetic chain of ganglia. It is also the
first EFT with complex epithelial differentiation arising outside the extremities
and with diffuse expression of high molecular weight keratin and p63.

PMID: 18769338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 1;68(17):7100-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6145.

EWS-FLI1 suppresses NOTCH-activated p53 in Ewing's sarcoma.

Ban J(1), Bennani-Baiti IM, Kauer M, Schaefer KL, Poremba C, Jug G, Schwentner R,
Smrzka O, Muehlbacher K, Aryee DN, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria.

Although p53 is the most frequently mutated gene in cancer, half of human tumors 
retain wild-type p53, whereby it is unknown whether normal p53 function is
compromised by other cancer-associated alterations. One example is Ewing's
sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), where 90% express wild-type p53. ESFT are
characterized by EWS-FLI1 oncogene fusions. Studying 6 ESFT cell lines, silencing
of EWS-FLI1 in a wild-type p53 context resulted in increased p53 and
p21(WAF1/CIP1) levels, causing cell cycle arrest. Using a candidate gene
approach, HEY1 was linked to p53 induction. HEY1 was rarely expressed in 59
primary tumors, but consistently induced upon EWS-FLI1 knockdown in ESFT cell
lines. The NOTCH signaling pathway targets HEY1, and we show NOTCH2 and NOTCH3 to
be expressed in ESFT primary tumors and cell lines. Upon EWS-FLI1 silencing,
NOTCH3 processing accompanied by nuclear translocation of the activated
intracellular domain was observed in all but one p53-mutant cell line. In cell
lines with the highest HEY1 induction, NOTCH3 activation was the consequence of
JAG1 transcriptional induction. JAG1 modulation by specific siRNA,
NOTCH-processing inhibition by either GSI or ectopic NUMB1, and siRNA-mediated
HEY1 knockdown all inhibited p53 and p21(WAF1/CIP1) induction. Conversely, forced
expression of JAG1, activated NOTCH3, or HEY1 induced p53 and p21(WAF1/CIP1).
These results indicate that suppression of EWS-FLI1 reactivates NOTCH signaling
in ESFT cells, resulting in p53-dependent cell cycle arrest. Our data link
EWS-FLI1 to the NOTCH and p53 pathways and provide a plausible basis both for
NOTCH tumor suppressor effects and oncogenesis of cancers that retain wild-type
p53.

PMID: 18757425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Pathology. 2008 Oct;40(6):547-52. doi: 10.1080/00313020802320424.

Characteristic sequence motifs located at the genomic breakpoints of the
translocation t(12;16) and t(12;22) in myxoid liposarcoma.

Xiang H(1), Wang J, Hisaoka M, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou. xianghua820@hotmail.com

AIMS: To analyse the characteristic sequence motifs around genomic breakpoints of
translocations, t(12;16) and t(12;22), and to study the mechanisms underlying
these chromosomal translocations in myxoid liposarcomas (MLS).
METHODS: Genomic DNA sequences derived from t(12;16) and t(12;22) were amplified 
by long-distance polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in six cases of MLS, and the DNA
sequences around the breakpoints were analysed.
RESULTS: Genomic sequences of the FUS-CHOP or EWS-CHOP fusion gene were amplified
in five and one MLS, respectively. Our sequence analysis revealed that the gene
fusions were generated between intron 1 of the CHOP and either intron 5 (type II)
or 7 (type I), or 8 (type III) of the FUS, or intron 7 of the EWS. The
breakpoints in intron 1 of the CHOP were located near or within Alu repetitive
sequences in the six cases. Sequences homologous to consensus recognition motifs 
of Translin were present adjacent to the breakpoints in the FUS, EWS, and CHOP
genes. Sequences homologous to the topoisomerase II consensus site and
palindromic oligomer sequences were also frequently found around the breakpoints 
in these genes. Moreover, Chi or Chi-like sequences were found in three cases,
alternating purine-pyrimidine tracts and polyadenine/polythymine sequences were
each found in one case.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that characteristic sequence motifs located at
the FUS, EWS and CHOP breakpoint regions, including Alu and palindromic oligomer 
sequences, are involved in the mechanisms creating chromosomal translocations in 
MLS.

PMID: 18752119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Sep;22(3):309-15.

EWS is a substrate of type I protein arginine methyltransferase, PRMT8.

Kim JD(1), Kako K, Kakiuchi M, Park GG, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life & Environmental Science, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan.

EWS, a pro-oncoprotein which is encoded by the Ewing sarcoma (EWS) gene, contains
arginine-glycine-glycine repeats (RGG box) in its COOH-terminus. We previously
found that the RGG box of EWS is a target for dimethylation catalyzed by protein 
arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs). Although it has been observed that arginine 
residues in EWS are dimethylated in vivo, the endogenous enzyme(s) responsible
for this reaction have not been identified to date. In the present study, we
determined that EWS was physically associated with PRMT8, the novel eighth member
of the PRMT family, through the COOH-terminal region of EWS including RGG3 with
the NH2-terminal region of PRMT8 encompassing the S-adenosyl-L-methionine binding
domain, and that arginine residues in EWS were asymmetrically dimethylated by
PRMT8 using amino acid analysis with thin-layer chromatography. These results
suggested that EWS is a substrate for PRMT8, as efficient as for PRMT1.

PMID: 18698489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2008 Sep;99(7):555-9.

[Case report of a subcutaneous peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor].

[Article in Spanish]

Cabrera R(1), Sánchez P, Rodríguez MA.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Dermatología. Complejo Asistencial de León. León. España.
rcp1312@yahoo.es

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors - also known as Ewing sarcomas - are 
a rare type of malignant tumor the histology of which characteristically reveals 
the presence of small round cells. Typically, t(11;22) translocation is observed.
We describe the case of a 45-year-old man with a subcutaneous peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumor in which the t(11;22) translocation was detected.
He was satisfactorily treated with surgery and radiotherapy.

PMID: 18682169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 15;105(3):785-800. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21876.

Differential transactivation by orphan nuclear receptor NOR1 and its fusion gene 
product EWS/NOR1: possible involvement of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase I, PARP-1.

Ohkura N(1), Nagamura Y, Tsukada T.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Endocrinology Project, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1,
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. nohkura@ncc.go.jp

In extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, a chromosomal translocation creates a
gene fusion between EWS and an orphan nuclear receptor, NOR1. The resulting
fusion protein EWS/NOR1 has been believed to lead to malignant transformation by 
functioning as a transactivator for NOR1-target genes. By comparing the gene
expression profiles of NOR1- and EWS/NOR1-overexpressing cells, we found that
they largely shared up-regulated genes, but no significant correlation was
observed with respect to the transactivation levels of each gene. In addition,
the proteins associated with NOR1 and EWS/NOR1 were mostly the same in these
cells. The results suggest that these proteins differentially transactivate
overlapping target genes through a similar transcriptional machinery. To clarify 
the mechanisms underlying the transcriptional divergence between NOR1 and
EWS/NOR1, we searched for alternatively associated proteins, and identified
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase I (PARP-1) as an NOR1-specific binding protein.
Consistent with its binding properties, PARP-1 acted as a transcriptional
repressor of NOR1, but not EWS/NOR1, in a luciferase reporter assay employing
PARP-1(-/-) fibroblasts. Interestingly, suppressive activity of PARP-1 was
observed in a DNA response element-specific manner, and in a subtype-specific
manner toward the NR4A family (Nur77, Nurr1, and NOR1), suggesting that PARP-1
plays a role in the diversity of transcriptional regulation mediated by the NR4A 
family in normal cells. Altogether, our findings suggest that NOR1 and EWS/NOR1
regulate overlapping target genes differently by utilizing associated proteins,
including PARP-1; and that EWS/NOR1 may acquire oncogenic activities by avoiding 
(or gaining) transcription factor-specific modulation by the associated proteins.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18680143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Aug 18;40(4):358-62.

[Application of the in situ hybridization with EWS dual-color break-apart
fluorescence probe and anti-CD99 and anti-FLI-1 antibodies in the diagnosis of
Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu BY(1), Yang Y, DU J, Zhang Y, Wang H, Zheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the value of using EWS dual-color, break-apart
rearrangement probe fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique, CD99 and
FLI-1 antibodies immunohistochemistry in the diagnosis of Ewing's
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET).
METHODS: Thirty-five cases of EWS/PNET and 24 cases of non-EWS/PNET small round
cell tumor were analyzed by FISH and immunohistochemically detected with FLI-1
and CD99 antibodies. Comparison between FISH and immunohistochemical results was 
carried out and their diagnostic value was evaluated.
RESULTS: The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and negative
predictive value of FISH in EWS/PNET were 93.8%(30/32), 81.8%(18/22),
88.2%(30/34) and 90%(18/20); those of CD99 were 100%(35/35), 58.3% (14/24),
77.8%(35/45) and 100%(14/14); those of FLI-1 were 71.4%(25/35), 62.5%(15/24),
73.5%(25/34), 60%(15/25), respectively. The sensitivity, specificity, positive
predictive value and negative predictive value of combined use of CD99 and FLI-1 
were 71.4%(25/35), 75%(18/24), 80.6%(25/31) and 64.3%(18/28), those of combined
use of FLI-1 and FISH were 68.7%(22/32), 86.4%(19/22), 88%(22/25) and
65.5%(19/29), those of combined use of CD99 and FISH were 93.7%(30/32),
95.5%(21/22), 96.8%(30/31) and 91.3%(21/23), respectively.
CONCLUSION: EWS dual-color, break-apart rearrangement probe FISH is a highly
sensitive and specific technique in the diagnosis of EWS/PNET. The combination of
CD99 and FISH is the method of choice for the diagnosis of EWS/PNET. The
combination of CD99 and FLI-1 can improve the specificity in EWS/PNET without the
data of FISH.

PMID: 18677380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cell Cycle. 2008 Aug;7(15):2299-305. Epub 2008 Jun 17.

Coupled alteration of transcription and splicing by a single oncogene: boosting
the effect on cyclin D1 activity.

Sanchez G(1), Delattre O, Auboeuf D, Dutertre M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U685, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Paris, France.

In cancer cells, gene expression is altered at the levels of transcription and
mRNA maturation, with many splice variants being associated with cancer. Splicing
is tightly connected to transcription and can be affected by transcription
elongation dynamics. Moreover, various transcriptional coregulators that are
altered in cancer, such as the proto-oncogene EWS, are thought to play a role in 
splicing. A recent study shows that an alteration of EWS in Ewing sarcoma alters 
the dynamics of RNA polymerase II over the CCND1 proto-oncogene encoding cyclin
D1, leading to an increase in its transcription and to an alteration of splicing 
that results in high levels of the oncogenic cyclin D1b splice isoform. The
cyclin D1b isoform is highly expressed in Ewing sarcoma cells and tumors and
stimulates Ewing sarcoma cell growth. Thus, alterations of transcriptional
regulators in disease may lead to splicing alterations. We review these data and 
discuss how this concept may apply to various factors that are altered in cancer.

PMID: 18677114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Diagn Pathol. 2008 Jul 15;3 Suppl 1:S27. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-3-S1-S27.

Tissue microarrays: applications in study of p16 and p53 alterations in Ewing's
cell lines.

Noguera R(1), Machado I, Piqueras M, Lopez-Guerrero JA, Navarro S, Mayordomo E,
Pellin A, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
rosa.noguera@uv.es

BACKGROUND: Tissue microarrays (TMAs) are used to study genomics and proteomics
in several tumour tissue samples. Cell lines (CC) are of great importance in the 
study of the genetic changes in tumours, and some reveal several aspects of
tumour oncogenesis. There are few published reports on Ewing's tumours with TMAs 
including original tumours (OT) and corresponding CC.
METHODS: We have performed four TMAs, from 3 OT and the corresponding CC of
successive in vivo and in vitro tumour passages. Xenotransplant CC in nude mice
from OT (XT/OT) was made. Subsequently multiple XT were performed and in vitro XT
cell line (CC/XT) was obtained. In vivo re-inoculation of CC/XT (XT/CC) was
planned. TMAs with the successive tumour passages that grew in nude mice (XT/OT
and XT/CC) were analyzed by morphologic pattern (Hematoxilin/eosin),
immunohistochemical staining (CD99, FLI1, p16, p53, ki-67), fluorescent in situ
hybridization-FISH-(EWSR1 break apart, p16 and p53 status) and gene fusion types.
RESULTS: Heterogeneous results of the p16, p53 and ki67 in OT, XT/OT, CC/XT and
XT/CC were observed. The three cell lines revealed EWS/FLI1 rearrangements. p16
gene was deleted only in one case. The deletion was detected by FISH and
confirmed by PCR assays. A p53 alteration was found in the second case with
monosomy and subsequently polysomic status of chromosome 17 during the evolution 
of CC. The PCR study revealed p53 mutation. The third case showed
hypermethylation in the promoter of p16. The growth of the tumour in nude mice
was more accelerated when the inoculation was performed from the CC/XT,
increasing progressively over the passages. The third case did not reveal tumour 
growth in nude mice after the re-inoculation of CC/XT.
CONCLUSION: The study of several cores from original tumours and successive
tumour passages in TMAs facilitated the analysis of the genetic alteration and
protein expression in Ewing's tumours.

PMCID: PMC2500108
PMID: 18673516  [PubMed]


112. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2009 Mar-Apr;12(2):143-6. doi: 10.2350/08-04-0460.1. Epub
2008 Jul 30.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma with t(2;22)(q33;q12.2) and EWSR1 gene
rearrangement.

Shao L(1), Singh V, Cooley L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Mercy Hospitals and Clinics, School of
Medicine, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, USA. lshao@cmh.edu

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue tumor of low
malignant potential. The tumor is mostly seen in the deep dermis and subcutis of 
the lower extremities in children and young adults. Histologically, the tumor
forms lobulated sheets of plump round to spindle cells surrounded by a fibrous
pseudocapsule and lymphoid cuff. The cytogenetic and molecular hallmarks of AFH
are not well defined. Only 4 of 30 reported cases of AFH have had karyotypic
information. We present a case of AFH in the inguinal region of a 12-year-old
girl. The tumor showed characteristic histological features, t(2;22)(q33;q12.2), 
and EWSR gene rearrangement by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

PMID: 18666823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 9;3(7):e2634. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002634.

IGF1 is a common target gene of Ewing's sarcoma fusion proteins in mesenchymal
progenitor cells.

Cironi L(1), Riggi N, Provero P, Wolf N, Suvà ML, Suvà D, Kindler V, Stamenkovic 
I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology CHUV, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is associated with 85-90% of Ewing's
sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), the remaining 10-15% of cases expressing chimeric
genes encoding EWS or FUS fused to one of several ets transcription factor family
members, including ERG-1, FEV, ETV1 and ETV6. ESFT are dependent on insulin-like 
growth factor-1 (IGF-1) for growth and survival and recent evidence suggests that
mesenchymal progenitor/stem cells constitute a candidate ESFT origin.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To address the functional relatedness between
ESFT-associated fusion proteins, we compared mouse progenitor cell (MPC)
permissiveness for EWS-FLI-1, EWS-ERG and FUS-ERG expression and assessed the
corresponding expression profile changes. Whereas all MPC isolates tested could
stably express EWS-FLI-1, only some sustained stable EWS-ERG expression and none 
could express FUS-ERG for more than 3-5 days. Only 14% and 4% of the total number
of genes that were respectively induced and repressed in MPCs by the three fusion
proteins were shared. However, all three fusion proteins, but neither FLI-1 nor
ERG-1 alone, activated the IGF1 promoter and induced IGF1 expression.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Whereas expression of different ESFT-associated fusion
proteins may require distinct cellular microenvironments and induce transcriptome
changes of limited similarity, IGF1 induction may provide one common mechanism
for their implication in ESFT pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2481291
PMID: 18648544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 22;105(29):10149-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0801073105. Epub 2008 Jul 14.

Microsatellites as EWS/FLI response elements in Ewing's sarcoma.

Gangwal K(1), Sankar S, Hollenhorst PC, Kinsey M, Haroldsen SC, Shah AA, Boucher 
KM, Watkins WS, Jorde LB, Graves BJ, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The ETS gene family is frequently involved in chromosome translocations that
cause human cancer, including prostate cancer, leukemia, and sarcoma. However,
the mechanisms by which oncogenic ETS proteins, which are DNA-binding
transcription factors, target genes necessary for tumorigenesis is not well
understood. Ewing's sarcoma serves as a paradigm for the entire class of
ETS-associated tumors because nearly all cases harbor recurrent chromosomal
translocations involving ETS genes. The most common translocation in Ewing's
sarcoma encodes the EWS/FLI oncogenic transcription factor. We used whole genome 
localization (ChIP-chip) to identify target genes that are directly bound by
EWS/FLI. Analysis of the promoters of these genes demonstrated a significant
over-representation of highly repetitive GGAA-containing elements
(microsatellites). In a parallel approach, we found that EWS/FLI uses GGAA
microsatellites to regulate the expression of some of its target genes including 
NR0B1, a gene required for Ewing's sarcoma oncogenesis. The microsatellite in the
NR0B1 promoter bound EWS/FLI in vitro and in vivo and was both necessary and
sufficient to confer EWS/FLI regulation to a reporter gene. Genome wide
computational studies demonstrated that GGAA microsatellites were enriched close 
to EWS/FLI-up-regulated genes but not down-regulated genes. Mechanistic studies
demonstrated that the ability of EWS/FLI to bind DNA and modulate gene expression
through these repetitive elements depended on the number of consecutive GGAA
motifs. These findings illustrate an unprecedented route to specificity for ETS
proteins and use of microsatellites in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2481306
PMID: 18626011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Nov;51(5):698-701. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21678.

Congenital Ewing sarcoma in retroperitoneum with multiple metastases.

Saito Y(1), Matsuzaki A, Suminoe A, Koga Y, Kurata H, Oda Y, Tsuneyoshi M, Hara
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

A 7-day-old Japanese female showed the absence of spontaneous movement in her
both legs. MRI revealed tumors in the retroperitoneum invading into the spinal
canal, the left cerebral hemisphere and the right eyeball. Histological
examination of retroperitoneal tumor revealed the sheets of undifferentiated
small round cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and scanty cytoplasm. EWS-FLI1
fusion gene was detected by RT-PCR, indicating Ewing sarcoma. She received
chemo-radiotherapy and survived for 2 years and 10 months despite the multiple
metastases at initial presentation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18623202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Neurooncol. 2008 Nov;90(2):141-50. doi: 10.1007/s11060-008-9646-x. Epub 2008
Jul 12.

Neural differentiation arrest in embryonal carcinoma cells with forced expression
of EWS-FLI1.

Yang Y(1), Zhang L, Wei Y, Wang H, Fukuma M, Xu H, Xiong W, Zheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Health Science Center, Peking University, Beijing
100083, China.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET) has a characteristic
chimeric oncogene EWS-FLI1, which results from chromosomal translocation t (11;
22), that is believed to initiate tumorigenesis of EWS/PNET. However, the
specific details of EWS/PNET oncogenesis and exact role of EWS-FLI1 remain
largely unknown. In this study we explored the role of EWS-FLI1 in tumor
differentiation using an embryonal carcinoma cell line P19 as a model, with
forced expression of EWS-FLI1 in these cells. EWS-FLI1 has been reported to
promote neural differentiation in fibroblasts, mesenchymal stem cells and
rhabdomyosarcoma cells. We show forced expression of EWS-FLI1 causes absence of
retinoic acid-induced neural morphology, and decreases expression of
neural-specific proteins MAPT and NCAM. Critical transcriptional factors for
neural differentiation and stem cells are also altered in the presence of
EWS-FLI1, including decreases in levels of Oct-3 and Pax-6, and an increase in
the level of Id2, which is a target of EWS-FLI1. Increased proliferation and
decreased apoptotic rates are also observed in P19 cells with forced expression
of EWS-FLI1. Our results raise the possibility that arrest of neural
differentiation by forced expression of EWS-FLI1 as observed in this study may
result from dysregulation of the cell cycle and cell proliferation. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that the modulation of neural differentiation
in P19 cells which have a stem cell-like pluripotency in vitro can provide a
novel model system to study the neural differentiation effects of EWS-FLI1
tumorigenesis of EWS/PNET.

PMID: 18622580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. BMC Cell Biol. 2008 Jul 11;9:37. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-9-37.

The multifunctional FUS, EWS and TAF15 proto-oncoproteins show cell type-specific
expression patterns and involvement in cell spreading and stress response.

Andersson MK(1), Ståhlberg A, Arvidsson Y, Olofsson A, Semb H, Stenman G, Nilsson
O, Aman P.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, Sahlgrenska 
Academy at Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden.
mattias.andersson@llcr.med.gu.se

BACKGROUND: FUS, EWS and TAF15 are structurally similar multifunctional proteins 
that were first discovered upon characterization of fusion oncogenes in human
sarcomas and leukemias. The proteins belong to the FET (previously TET) family of
RNA-binding proteins and are implicated in central cellular processes such as
regulation of gene expression, maintenance of genomic integrity and mRNA/microRNA
processing. In the present study, we investigated the expression and cellular
localization of FET proteins in multiple human tissues and cell types.
RESULTS: FUS, EWS and TAF15 were expressed in both distinct and overlapping
patterns in human tissues. The three proteins showed almost ubiquitous nuclear
expression and FUS and TAF15 were in addition present in the cytoplasm of most
cell types. Cytoplasmic EWS was more rarely detected and seen mainly in secretory
cell types. Furthermore, FET expression was downregulated in differentiating
human embryonic stem cells, during induced differentiation of neuroblastoma cells
and absent in terminally differentiated melanocytes and cardiac muscle cells. The
FET proteins were targeted to stress granules induced by heat shock and oxidative
stress and FUS required its RNA-binding domain for this translocation.
Furthermore, FUS and TAF15 were detected in spreading initiation centers of
adhering cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results point to cell-specific expression patterns and functions 
of the FET proteins rather than the housekeeping roles inferred from earlier
studies. The localization of FET proteins to stress granules suggests activities 
in translational regulation during stress conditions. Roles in central processes 
such as stress response, translational control and adhesion may explain the FET
proteins frequent involvement in human cancer.

PMCID: PMC2478660
PMID: 18620564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2008 Oct;47(10):845-52. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20587.

High-resolution molecular cytogenetic analysis of Wilms tumors highlights
diagnostic difficulties among small round cell kidney tumors.

Stewénius Y(1), Jin Y, Ora I, Panagopoulos I, Möller E, Mertens F, Sandstedt B,
Alumets J, Akerman M, Merks JH, de Kraker J, Gisselsson D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
ylva.stewenius@med.lu.se

Many solid tumors exhibit characteristic gene fusions, which are reflected by
balanced translocations at the cytogenetic level. These changes might be useful
diagnostic and prognostic tools. In Wilms tumor (WT, nephroblastoma) no fusions
genes or recurrent balanced translocations have been described thus far. To
screen for cryptic balanced translocations, we have analyzed 17 renal neoplasms, 
histopathologically classified as WT, by a combination of G-banding, multicolor
FISH, and subtelomeric FISH. This approach revealed several submicroscopic
chromosomal aberrations and three different seemingly balanced translocations,
resulting in a heterozygous deletion of HACE1, an EWSR1/ERG fusion, and an
EWSR1/FLI1 fusion, respectively. As EWSR1 rearrangements are known to be a
characteristic of Ewing tumors (ET), our findings illustrate the diagnostic
problems regarding small cell kidney tumors and strongly argue for the need of
adjuvant diagnostic techniques in this group of neoplasms. In summary, our
genomic screening approach proved efficient in finding structural chromosomal
aberrations. The fact that no recurrent translocations were found in the WTs of
this study argues against the presence of a frequent pathognomonic translocation 
in this disease entity.

PMID: 18615675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Jul;36(6):1269-74. doi: 10.1007/s11033-008-9308-2. Epub 2008
Jul 8.

In vitro interaction between the N-terminus of the Ewing's sarcoma protein and
the subunit of RNA polymerase II hsRPB7.

Todorova R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Acad. Georgi Bonchev
str., Bl. 21, 1113, Sofia, Bulgaria. todorova@obzor.bio21.bas.bg

In vivo and in vitro expressed N-terminal sequence of EWS (EAD) and hsRPB7
(subunit of human RNA polymerase II) were probed for protein-protein interactions
using pull-down assays. In result, it was found that the proteins 57Z (residues
1-57 of EAD) and hsRPB7 interact in vitro forming a stable complex. The direct
interaction between 57z and hsRPB7 indicate that DHR-related peptides and other
small molecules, targeted to N-terminus of EWS might possess therapeutic
potentialities as anti-cancer agents to function as inhibitors of EAD-mediated
transactivation.

PMID: 18607770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mod Pathol. 2008 Nov;21(11):1311-9. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.124. Epub 2008
Jul 4.

Heterogeneous genetic profiles in soft tissue myoepitheliomas.

Hallor KH(1), Teixeira MR, Fletcher CD, Bizarro S, Staaf J, Domanski HA, von
Steyern FV, Panagopoulos I, Mandahl N, Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
Karolin.Hansen_Hallor@med.lu.se

Myoepithelioma, mixed tumor and parachordoma are uncommon soft tissue tumors
thought to represent morphological variants of a single tumor type. The genetic
basis of these neoplasms is poorly understood. However, they morphologically
resemble mixed tumor of the salivary glands (also known as pleomorphic adenoma), 
a tumor characterized by deregulated expression of PLAG1 or HMGA2. To evaluate a 
possible genetic relationship between these soft tissue and salivary gland
tumors, PLAG1 expression levels and the genomic status of PLAG1 and HMGA2 were
investigated in five soft tissue myoepitheliomas and one pleomorphic adenoma. In 
addition, all tumors were cytogenetically investigated and whole genome DNA copy 
number imbalances were studied in five of them. The genetic profiles were
heterogeneous and the only aberration common to all soft tissue myoepitheliomas
was a minimally deleted region of 3.55 Mb in chromosome band 19p13. Recurrent
deletion of CDKN2A suggests that inactivation of this tumor suppressor gene is
pathogenetically important in a subset. Furthermore, PLAG1 rearrangement was
found in a soft tissue tumor from a patient previously treated for a salivary
pleomorphic adenoma, indicating either metastasis of the salivary gland lesion or
that some soft tissue tumors develop through the same mechanisms as their
salivary gland counterparts.

PMID: 18604193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Hum Pathol. 2008 Oct;39(10):1535-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.01.013. Epub 2008
Jul 7.

Primary Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the vulva.

Fong YE(1), López-Terrada D, Zhai QJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

We report a case of Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor
(ES/pPNET) arising in the vulva in a 17-year-old adolescent girl. Primary
extraskeletal ES/pPNET is uncommon and only rarely affects the female genital
tract. Characteristic histologic features of ES/pPNET were present in this case
including a monomorphic population of small round blue cells with cytoplasmic
glycogen confirmed by periodic acid-Schiff and were immunohistochemically
positive for CD99 in a membranous and Fli-1 in a nuclear pattern. The presence of
an EWS/Fli-1 fusion transcript was demonstrated by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction and confirmed by direct sequencing. This report
described another very rare case of ES/pPNET arising in the vulva and confirmed
by molecular analysis.

PMID: 18602673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Oncogene. 2008 Oct 9;27(46):6034-43. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.203. Epub 2008 Jun 30.

DAX1, a direct target of EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein, is a principal regulator of
cell-cycle progression in Ewing's tumor cells.

García-Aragoncillo E(1), Carrillo J, Lalli E, Agra N, Gómez-López G, Pestaña A,
Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Laboratorio de
Genética y Patología Molecular de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas A Sols, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain.

The molecular hallmark of the Ewing's family of tumors is the presence of
balanced chromosomal translocations, leading to the formation of chimerical
transcription factors (that is, EWS/FLI1) that play a pivotal role in the
pathogenesis of Ewing's tumors by deregulating gene expression. We have recently 
demonstrated that DAX1 (NR0B1), an orphan nuclear receptor that was not
previously implicated in cancer, is induced by the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and is
highly expressed in Ewing's tumors, suggesting that DAX1 is a biologically
relevant target of EWS/FLI1-mediated oncogenesis. In this study we demonstrate
that DAX1 is a direct transcriptional target of the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein through 
its binding to a GGAA-rich region in the DAX1 promoter and show that DAX1 is a
key player of EWS/FLI1-mediated oncogenesis. DAX1 silencing using an inducible
model of RNA interference induces growth arrest in the A673 Ewing's cell line and
severely impairs its capability to grow in semisolid medium and form tumors in
immunodeficient mice. Gene expression profile analysis demonstrated that about
10% of the genes regulated by EWS/FLI1 in Ewing's cells are DAX1 targets,
confirming the importance of DAX1 in Ewing's oncogenesis. Functional genomic
analysis, validated by quantitative RT-PCR, showed that genes implicated in
cell-cycle progression, such as CDK2, CDC6, MCM10 or SKP2 were similarly
regulated by EWS/FLI1 and DAX1. These findings indicate that DAX1 is important in
the pathogenesis of the Ewing's family of tumors, identify new functions for DAX1
as a cell-cycle progression regulator and open the possibility to new therapeutic
approaches based on DAX1 function interference.

PMID: 18591936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mod Pathol. 2008 Nov;21(11):1303-10. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.114. Epub 2008
Jun 27.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization is a useful ancillary diagnostic tool for
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Wang WL(1), Mayordomo E, Czerniak BA, Abruzzo LV, Dal Cin P, Araujo DM, Lev DC,
López-Terrada D, Lazar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma is a rare soft tissue tumor characterized by 
a nodular growth pattern with eosinophilic cells usually in a reticular pattern
and abundant myxoid stroma. In contrast to other myxoid sarcomas, the majority of
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas harbor a balanced translocation,
t(9;22)(q22;q12), that fuses EWSR1 with NR4A3 (also known as CHN). Other less
common translocations involving NR4A3 have also been described. We examined the
diagnostic utility of fluorescence in situ hybridization for extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma using the LSI EWSR1 break-apart probe (Abbott Molecular/Vysis, Des
Plaines, IL, USA). Sixteen cases of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma with
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue available were retrieved (1991-2007). The
mean age at time of presentation was 57 years (range, 30-78). The male to female 
ratio was 7:1. All cases where either consistent with or highly suggestive of the
diagnosis, with most of the primary tumors occurring in the thigh, inguinal or
gluteal region. Fifteen of 16 cases were analyzable, of which 14 (93%) were
positive for the rearrangement of the EWSR1 locus. In this study, the vast
majority of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas are associated with a
rearrangement at the EWSR1 locus (22q12). Fluorescence in situ hybridization is
useful to support the diagnosis of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas and may
help to differentiate it from mimics such as other myxoid sarcomas, particularly 
in limited biopsies.

PMID: 18587326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Aug;32(8):1168-74. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318161781a.

SMARCB1/INI1 protein expression in round cell soft tissue sarcomas associated
with chromosomal translocations involving EWS: a special reference to
SMARCB1/INI1 negative variant extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Kohashi K(1), Oda Y, Yamamoto H, Tamiya S, Oshiro Y, Izumi T, Taguchi T,
Tsuneyoshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

Several previous studies have demonstrated the lack of SMARCB1/INI1 protein
expression in only the malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT). Several sarcoma groups are
associated with a tumor-specific translocation involving EWS. Moreover, the EWS
and SMARCB1/INI1 genes are located on the same 22q chromosome. We analyzed the
status of SMARCB1/INI1 protein expression in 93 cases of sarcomas associated with
chromosomal translocation involving EWS, comprising 52 Ewing's sarcoma/primitive 
neuroectodermal tumors, 24 extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMCS), 14 clear 
cell sarcomas of soft tissue, 2 desmoplastic small round cell tumors, and 1
myxoid/round cell liposarcoma. In addition, we analyzed the detailed SMARCB1/INI1
gene alteration in cases, which lacked its protein expression. Consequently, 4
EMCS showed no SMARCB1/INI1 expression, and 2 of these 4 cases revealed
homozygous deletion and frameshift mutation of the SMARCB1/INI1 gene,
respectively. These cases showed histologic findings compatible with EMCS,
according to the most recent WHO classification, but no major fusion gene
transcripts were detected. Moreover, 3 out of 4 SMARCB1/INI1 negative variant
EMCS disclosed rhabdoid features. Therefore, the lack of SMARCB1/INI1 protein
expression may be associated with rhabdoid features. The immunohistochemical
result of the SMARCB1/INI expression is not an absolute diagnostic criteria for
MRT and careful histologic evaluation is required to make a precise diagnosis of 
MRT.

PMID: 18580682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2008 Sep;466(9):2131-46. doi: 10.1007/s11999-008-0342-0.
Epub 2008 Jun 20.

Gene translocations in musculoskeletal neoplasms.

Krishnan B(1), Khanna G, Clohisy D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, 420
Delaware Street SE, MMC 492, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Establishing the best diagnosis for musculoskeletal neoplasms requires a
multidisciplinary approach using clinical, radiographic, and histologic analyses.
Despite this rigorous approach, establishing accurate diagnoses and prognoses
remains challenging. Improved diagnostic methods are expected as unique molecular
signals for specific bone and soft tissue cancers are identified. We performed a 
systematic review of the best available evidence to explore three major
applications of molecular genetics that will best benefit clinical management of 
musculoskeletal neoplasms: diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic applications. 
The specific questions addressed in this systematic review are: (1) What sets of 
histopathologic sarcoma subtypes will benefit from molecular evaluation and
diagnosis? (2) What molecular methods are best applied to histopathologic
sarcomas to distinguish between major subtypes? (3) How do the molecular patterns
discovered on genetic diagnosis affect prognosis of certain sarcomas? (4) Which
sarcoma translocations can benefit from an improved response and outcome using
existing and forthcoming pharmacogenetic approaches targeting molecular events?
This review summarizes recent advances in molecular genetics that are available
and will soon be available to clinicians to better predict outcomes and
subsequently help make future treatment decisions.LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level IV,
diagnostic study. See the Guidelines for Authors for a complete description of
levels of evidence.

PMCID: PMC2493006
PMID: 18566876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2008 Sep;466(9):2176-83. doi: 10.1007/s11999-008-0348-7.
Epub 2008 Jun 19.

Dendritic cell-Ewing's sarcoma cell hybrids enhance antitumor immunity.

Guo W(1), Guo Y, Tang S, Qu H, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Tumor Center, Peking University People's Hospital, #11 South
Xizhimen Street, Beijing 100044, People's Republic of China. bonetumor@163.com

Given the effective immunotherapy of DC-based vaccine in other cancers, we
hypothesized DC-based vaccines would induce effective immune responses against
Ewing's sarcoma. To verify this hypothesis and develop the most effective
dendritic cell vaccine against Ewing's sarcoma, we evaluated the antitumor
efficacy of dendritic cell-Ewing's sarcoma hybrids and dendritic cells pulsed
with other antigen-loading methods, including cell lysates and the characteristic
EWS-FLI1 gene of Ewing's sarcoma, using an A673 cell line as a model. The hybrids
were generated by electrofusion with fusion efficiency and viability determined
by flow cytometry and fluorescent microscopy analyses. By interferon-gamma
secretion assay, the capacity of hybrids to stimulate cytotoxic T-lymphocytes
(CTLs) is higher than that of other antigen-loading methods showing stronger
tumor antigen-specific CTL cytotoxicity to A673. By in vivo experiment in SCID
mice, all dendritic cell-based strategies induced specific immune responses to
Ewing's sarcoma after mice-human immune system reconstitution by inoculating
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells into the peritoneal cavity of SCID mice.
However, the hybrids most inhibited the subcutaneous tumor growth in SCID mice
compared with dendritic cells pulsed with other loading methods. The data suggest
A673 cells respond to dendritic cell-based immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2493000
PMID: 18563501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Stem Cells. 2008 Sep;26(9):2237-44. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0133. Epub 2008
Jun 12.

EWS-FLI1 causes neuroepithelial defects and abrogates emigration of neural crest 
stem cells.

Coles EG(1), Lawlor ER, Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology M/C 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 
California 91125, USA.

The most frequently occurring chromosomal translocation that gives rise to the
Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) is the chimeric fusion gene EWS-FLI1 that
encodes an oncogenic protein composed of the N terminus of EWS and the C terminus
of FLI1. Although the genetic basis of ESFT is fairly well understood, its
putative cellular origin remains to be determined. Previous work has proposed
that neural crest progenitor cells may be the causative cell type responsible for
ESFT. However, surprisingly little is known about the expression pattern or role 
of either wild-type EWS or wild-type FLI1 in this cell population during early
embryonic development. Using the developing chick embryo as a model system, we
identified EWS expression in emigrating and migratory neural crest stem cells,
whereas FLI1 transcripts were found to be absent in these populations and were
restricted to developing endothelial cells. By ectopically expressing EWS-FLI1 or
wild-type FLI1 in the developing embryo, we have been able to study the cellular 
transformations that ensue in the context of an in vivo model system. Our results
reveal that misexpression of the chimeric EWS-FLI1 fusion gene, or wild-type
FLI1, in the developing neural crest stem cell population leads to significant
aberrations in neural crest development. An intriguing possibility is that
misexpression of the EWS-FLI1 oncogene in neural crest-derived stem cells may be 
an initiating event in ESFT genesis.

PMID: 18556509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2008 Jun;30(6):474-7. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e31816e2309.

Primary PNET of maxilla: an unusual presentation.

Mohindra P(1), Zade B, Basu A, Patil N, Viswanathan S, Bakshi A, Muckaden MA,
Laskar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, India.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) are a type of small round cell tumors
developing from migrating embryonal cells of the neural crest. Peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs) are less common with varying incidence 
of occurrence in head and neck region. Only 8 reported cases of primary PNET of
maxilla are available in English literature. We report a case of 8-year-old boy
diagnosed as pPNET of maxilla after detailed radiologic, histopathologic,
including immuno-histochemical examination and molecular diagnosis using reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction showing EWS-FLI1 translocation. The boy
was treated with multiagent combination chemotherapy to be followed by definitive
radiation therapy. A brief literature review of diagnosis and management of the
previous 8 reported cases is done. In view of no definitive guideline for
management of such cases, treatment on the lines of other pPNET is suggested.

PMID: 18525469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS One. 2008 Jun 4;3(6):e2353. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002353.

Adenosine transporter ENT4 is a direct target of EWS/WT1 translocation product
and is highly expressed in desmoplastic small round cell tumor.

Li H(1), Smolen GA, Beers LF, Xia L, Gerald W, Wang J, Haber DA, Lee SB.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes &
Digestive & Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Desmoplastic Small Round Cell Tumor (DSRCT) is a highly aggressive
malignancy that affects mainly adolescents and young adults. A defining
characteristic of DSRCT is a specific chromosomal translocation,
t(11;22)(p13;q12), that fuses EWS with WT1, leading to a production of two
isoforms of chimeric transcription factor, EWS/WT1(-KTS) and EWS/WT1(+KTS). The
chimeric proteins are thought to play critical roles in various stages of
oncogenesis through aberrant transcription of different genes, but only a few of 
these genes have been identified.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We report the identification of a new target of
EWS/WT1, ENT4 (equilibrative nucleoside transporter 4) which encodes a
pH-dependent adenosine transporter. ENT4 is transcriptionally activated by both
isoforms of EWS/WT1 as evidenced by promoter-reporter and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses. Furthermore, ENT4 is highly and specifically
expressed in primary tumors of DSRCT as well as in a DSRCT cell line, JN-DSRCT-1.
Treatment of JN-DSRCT-1 cells with adenosine analogs, such as
2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine (2-CdA), resulted in an increased cytotoxic response
in dose- and pH-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our detailed analyses of a novel target of EWS/WT1 in
DSRCT reveal an insight into the oncogenic mechanism of EWS-fusion chromosomal
translocation gene products and provide a new marker for DSRCT. Furthermore,
identification of ENT4 as a highly expressed transcript in DSRCT may represent an
attractive pathway for targeting chemotherapeutic drugs into DSRCT.

PMCID: PMC2394657
PMID: 18523561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Int J Surg Pathol. 2010 Oct;18(5):388-93. doi: 10.1177/1066896908316903. Epub
2008 May 21.

Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the esophagus: report of a
case and review of literature.

Johnson AD(1), Pambuccian SE, Andrade RS, Dolan MM, Aslan DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Comment in
    Int J Surg Pathol. 2011 Jun;19(3):409-10; author reply 410.

This study presents a case of Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor
arising in the esophagus of a 44-year-old woman who presented with progressive
dysphagia. Imaging studies demonstrated a polypoid lesion in the esophagus. The
tumor was characterized by corded and pseudopapillary architecture, cytologic
monotony, and low proliferative activity. Immunohistochemical stains were
positive for CD99, neuron-specific enolase, vimentin, cyclin D1, p53, and FLI1
gene product. Fluorescence in situ hybridization demonstrated a 22q12
translocation, associated with primitive neuroectodermal tumor in the tumor
cells, whereas reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction conformed
expression of Ewing sarcoma/FLI1 fusion transcript in the patient's bone marrow
aspirate. Although this is a rare site for this type of tumor to occur, primitive
neuroectodermal tumor should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
mesenchymal tumors of the esophagus. Genetic analysis is crucial to establish the
diagnosis and can be successfully performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
material and hematopoietic tissue.

PMID: 18499684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2008 Jul;56(5):257-9. doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2008.03.005.
Epub 2008 May 15.

[Ewing's tumours, genetic and cellular aspects].

[Article in French]

Delattre O.

Ewing's tumour is the second most frequent primary tumour of bone. It is
associated in 85% of cases with a specific and recurrent chromosome
translocation, a t(11; 22)(q24; q12) which generates a fusion gene between the 5'
part of EWS and the 3' part of FLI-1, a member of the ETS family. Less
frequently, this gene fusion involves EWS and another member of the ETS family
which can be: ERG, ETV1, E1AF or FEV depending on the cases. The EWS-ETS fusion
is causative in the development of Ewing's tumour. Its mechanism of action mainly
relies on the abnormal transcription regulation of key target genes which are
involved in the regulation of cell cycle, signal transduction, migration. The
cellular context within which EWS-FLI-1 exerts its oncogenic action is a long
standing matter of debate. Recent data converge to suggest that the Ewing cell
origin is a mesenchymal stem cell.

PMID: 18485618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Immunol. 2008 May 15;180(10):6733-42.

The Ewing sarcoma protein (EWS) binds directly to the proximal elements of the
macrophage-specific promoter of the CSF-1 receptor (csf1r) gene.

Hume DA(1), Sasmono T, Himes SR, Sharma SM, Bronisz A, Constantin M, Ostrowski
MC, Ross IL.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Research Council Special Research Centre for Functional and Applied
Genomics and the Cooperative Research Centre for Chronic Inflammatory Diseases,
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. David.Hume@bbsrc.ac.uk

Many macrophage-specific promoters lack classical transcriptional start site
elements such as TATA boxes and Sp1 sites. One example is the CSF-1 receptor
(CSF-1R, CD115, c-fms), which is used as a model of the transcriptional
regulation of macrophage genes. To understand the molecular basis of start site
recognition in this gene, we identified cellular proteins binding specifically to
the transcriptional start site (TSS) region. The mouse and human csf1r TSS were
identified using cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) data. Conserved elements
flanking the TSS cluster were analyzed using EMSAs to identify discrete
DNA-binding factors in primary bone marrow macrophages as candidate
transcriptional regulators. Two complexes were identified that bind in a highly
sequence-specific manner to the mouse and human TSS proximal region and also to
high-affinity sites recognized by myeloid zinc finger protein 1 (Mzf1). The
murine proteins were purified by DNA affinity isolation from the RAW264.7
macrophage cell line and identified by mass spectrometry as EWS and FUS/TLS,
closely related DNA and RNA-binding proteins. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments in bone marrow macrophages confirmed that EWS, but not FUS/TLS, was
present in vivo on the CSF-1R proximal promoter in unstimulated primary
macrophages. Transfection assays suggest that EWS does not act as a conventional 
transcriptional activator or repressor. We hypothesize that EWS contributes to
start site recognition in TATA-less mammalian promoters.

PMID: 18453593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Aug;51(2):228-34. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21602.

Membrane-associated phospholipase A1 beta (LIPI) Is an Ewing tumour-associated
cancer/testis antigen.

Foell JL(1), Hesse M, Volkmer I, Schmiedel BJ, Neumann I, Staege MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Children's Cancer Research Centre,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, 06097 Halle, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Cancer/testis antigens (CTA) represent a heterogeneous group of
antigens expressed nearly exclusively in tumour cells and testis. Recently, we
identified phospholipase A1 beta (a CTA also known as lipase member I, LIPI) as a
gene with high expression in Ewing family tumours (EFT). In the present paper we 
analyzed expression of LIPI in a panel of normal tissues and tumour samples.
PROCEDURE: The expression of CTA in EFT and normal tissues was analyzed by using 
DNA microarray datasets. Expression of LIPI in EFT, a panel of other tumour
samples, and normal tissues was analyzed by using RT-PCR and quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: LIPI was expressed in EFT samples but not in other investigated tumour
samples. Expression of LIPI in normal tissues was restricted to testis and
thyroid. However, expression in these tissues was low compared with EFT.
Interestingly testis as well as thyroid expressed all analyzed EFT-associated
transcripts, suggesting that these tissues harbour a small cell population with
molecular features of EFT. The sensitivity of the LIPI RT-PCR was similar to the 
sensitivity of the conventional EWSR1-FLI1 RT-PCR, suggesting that LIPI might be 
useful as additional diagnostic target structure.
CONCLUSIONS: The human cancer/testis antigen LIPI is highly expressed in Ewing
family tumours and can be easily detected by RT-PCR or quantitative RT-PCR. LIPI 
might be an interesting target for the development of future diagnostic tools or 
treatment strategies.

PMID: 18435455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Cutan Pathol. 2008 Sep;35(9):855-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0560.2007.00908.x.
Epub 2008 Apr 17.

Pleomorphic angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: a case confirmed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization analysis for EWSR1 rearrangement.

Weinreb I(1), Rubin BP, Goldblum JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology; and Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
weinrebi@yahoo.ca

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a neoplasm of uncertain histogenesis
with intermediate malignant potential. It occurs in superficial soft tissues in
any age group and at any body site, although the typical example occurs on
extremities in children/young adults. The neoplasm is usually composed of a bland
histiocytoid proliferation of cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm forming a
syncytium, often surrounded by a dense fibrous pseudocapsule and lymphoid
infiltrate, with abundant intralesional hemorrhage forming blood-filled spaces.
AFH may show striking pleomorphism and mitotic activity, and such cases can lead 
to confusion with other atypical mesenchymal lesions, including pleomorphic
sarcomas. Recent findings have shown that a majority of cases of AFH have
translocations involving the EWSR1 or FUS genes. We present a diagnostically
challenging case of AFH with pleomorphic features and minimal lymphoid and
angiomatoid changes involving the superficial subcutis and deep dermis on the
scalp of an 8-year-old boy. "Areas with typical AFH morphology were identified
and the diagnosis confirmed with identification of an EWSR1..." rearrangement
detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Pleomorphic AFH should be
included in the differential diagnosis of atypical mesenchymal tumors of skin and
superficial subcutis and molecular testing may prove helpful in this regard.

PMID: 18422688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Surg Pathol. 2008 Apr;16(2):189-93. doi: 10.1177/1066896907306841.

Intestinal clear cell sarcoma with melanocytic differentiation and EWS
[corrected] rearrangement: report of a case.

Abdulkader I(1), Cameselle-Teijeiro J, de Alava E, Ruiz-Ponte C, Used-Aznar MM,
Forteza J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Clínico Universitario, SERGAS, University of
Santiago de Compostela, Galicia, Spain. ihab.abdulkader.nallib@sergas.es

Erratum in
    Int J Surg Pathol.2008 Jul;16(3):354.

A clear cell sarcoma-like tumor with osteoclast-like giant cells of the
gastrointestinal tract without immunoexpression of CD117 was recently proposed as
a new tumor entity. In this article, a case of a 37-year-old man with a neoplasm 
of the jejunum composed of polygonal cells with clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm
forming nests and fascicles is reported. Giant cells were not identified.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells expressed strongly S100 protein, human
melanoma black 45, platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha, B-cell lymphoma
2, p53, and to a lesser extent vimentin, neuron-specific enolase, and epithelial 
membrane antigen. Mindbomb homolog-1 index was 35%. Immunoreactivity for CD34 and
CD117 was negative. The fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis showed a
translocation involving chromosome 22q12, the diagnostic hallmark of clear cell
sarcoma of soft tissues. This case indicates a close histogenetic relationship
with the recently reported clear cell sarcoma with osteoclast-like giant cells of
the gastrointestinal tract, as well as with the clear cell sarcoma of soft
tissues.

PMID: 18417679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. PLoS One. 2008 Apr 16;3(4):e1965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001965.

EWS/FLI mediates transcriptional repression via NKX2.2 during oncogenic
transformation in Ewing's sarcoma.

Owen LA(1), Kowalewski AA, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, 
United States of America.

EWS/FLI is a master regulator of Ewing's sarcoma formation. Gene expression
studies in A673 Ewing's sarcoma cells have demonstrated that EWS/FLI
downregulates more genes than it upregulates, suggesting that EWS/FLI, and/or its
targets, function as transcriptional repressors. One critical EWS/FLI target,
NKX2.2, is a transcription factor that contains both transcriptional activation
and transcriptional repression domains, raising the possibility that it mediates 
portions of the EWS/FLI transcriptional signature. We now report that microarray 
analysis demonstrated that the transcriptional profile of NKX2.2 consists solely 
of downregulated genes, and overlaps with the EWS/FLI downregulated signature,
suggesting that NKX2.2 mediates oncogenic transformation via transcriptional
repression. Structure-function analysis revealed that the DNA binding and
repressor domains in NKX2.2 are required for oncogenesis in Ewing's sarcoma
cells, while the transcriptional activation domain is completely dispensable.
Furthermore, blockade of TLE or HDAC function, two protein families thought to
mediate the repressive function of NKX2.2, inhibited the transformed phenotype
and reversed the NKX2.2 transcriptional profile in Ewing's sarcoma cells. Whole
genome localization studies (ChIP-chip) revealed that a significant portion of
the NKX2.2-repressed gene expression signature was directly mediated by NKX2.2
binding. These data demonstrate that the transcriptional repressive function of
NKX2.2 is necessary, and sufficient, for the oncogenic phenotype of Ewing's
sarcoma, and suggest a therapeutic approach to this disease.

PMCID: PMC2291578
PMID: 18414662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 22;105(16):6004-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0710748105. Epub 2008 Apr 14.

Alteration of cyclin D1 transcript elongation by a mutated transcription factor
up-regulates the oncogenic D1b splice isoform in cancer.

Sanchez G(1), Bittencourt D, Laud K, Barbier J, Delattre O, Auboeuf D, Dutertre
M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 685, Institut
Universitaire d'Hématologie, 1, Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75010 Paris, France.

Pre-mRNA splicing and polyadenylation are tightly connected to transcription, and
transcriptional stimuli and elongation dynamics can affect mRNA maturation.
However, whether this regulatory mechanism has a physio/pathological impact is
not known. In cancer, where splice variant expression is often deregulated, many 
mutated oncogenes are transcriptional regulators. In particular, the Ewing
sarcoma (EwSa) oncogene, resulting from a fusion of the EWS and FLI1 genes,
encodes a well characterized transcription factor. EWS-FLI1 directly stimulates
transcription of the CCND1 protooncogene encoding cyclin D1a and a less abundant 
but more oncogenic splice isoform, D1b. We show that, although both EWS and
EWS-FLI1 enhance cyclin D1 gene expression, they regulate the D1b/D1a transcript 
ratio in an opposite manner. Detailed analyses of RNA polymerase dynamics along
the gene and of the effects of an inhibitor of elongation show that EWS-FLI1
favors D1b isoform expression by decreasing the elongation rate, whereas EWS has 
opposite effects. As a result, the D1b/D1a ratio is elevated in EwSa cell lines
and tumors. The endogenous D1b protein is enriched in nuclei, where the oncogenic
activity of cyclin D1 is known to occur, and depleting D1b in addition to D1a
results in a stronger reduction of EwSa cell growth than depleting D1a only.
These data show that elevated expression of a splice isoform in cancer can be due
to an alteration of the transcription process by a mutated transcriptional
regulator and provide evidence for a physio/pathological impact of the coupling
between transcription and mRNA maturation.

PMCID: PMC2329709
PMID: 18413612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2008 Jul;47(7):558-64. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20559.

Detection of a t(1;22)(q23;q12) translocation leading to an EWSR1-PBX1 fusion
gene in a myoepithelioma.

Brandal P(1), Panagopoulos I, Bjerkehagen B, Gorunova L, Skjeldal S, Micci F,
Heim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine and Radiotherapy, The
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Rikshospitalet University Hospital, Montebello, Oslo, 
Norway. petter.brandal@klinmed.uio.no

Chromosome banding as well as molecular cytogenetic methods are of great help in 
the diagnosis of mesenchymal tumors. Myoepithelial neoplasms of soft tissue
including myoepitheliomas, mixed tumors, and parachordomas are diagnoses that
have been increasingly recognized the last few years. It is still debated which
neoplasms should be included in these morphologically heterogeneous entities, and
the boundaries between them are not clear-cut. The pathogenetic mechanisms behind
myoepithelial tumors are unknown. Only five parachordomas and one mixed tumor
have previously been karyotyped, and nothing is known about their molecular
genetic characteristics. We present a mesenchymal tumor classified as a
myoepithelioma that had a balanced translocation t(1;22)(q23;q12) as the sole
karyotypic change. A novel EWSR1-PBX1 fusion gene consisting of exons 1-8 of the 
5'-end of EWSR1 and exons 5-9 of the 3'-end of PBX1 was shown to result from the 
translocation. Both genes are known to be targeted also by other
neoplasia-specific translocations, PBX1 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia and EWSR1
in several solid tumors, most of which are malignant. Based on the structure of
the novel fusion gene detected, its transforming mechanism is thought to be the
same as for other fusion genes involving EWSR1 or PBX1.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18383210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;68(7):2176-85. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1761.

EWS-FLI-1 expression triggers a Ewing's sarcoma initiation program in primary
human mesenchymal stem cells.

Riggi N(1), Suvà ML, Suvà D, Cironi L, Provero P, Tercier S, Joseph JM, Stehle
JC, Baumer K, Kindler V, Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) express the EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene generated 
by the chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12). Expression of the EWS-FLI-1
fusion protein in a permissive cellular environment is believed to play a key
role in ESFT pathogenesis. However, EWS-FLI-1 induces growth arrest or apoptosis 
in differentiated primary cells, and the identity of permissive primary human
cells that can support its expression and function has until now remained
elusive. Here we show that expression of EWS-FLI-1 in human mesenchymal stem
cells (hMSC) is not only stably maintained without inhibiting proliferation but
also induces a gene expression profile bearing striking similarity to that of
ESFT, including genes that are among the highest ESFT discriminators. Expression 
of EWS-FLI-1 in hMSCs may recapitulate the initial steps of Ewing's sarcoma
development, allowing identification of genes that play an important role early
in its pathogenesis. Among relevant candidate transcripts induced by EWS-FLI-1 in
hMSCs, we found the polycomb group gene EZH2, which we show to play a critical
role in Ewing's sarcoma growth. These observations are consistent with our recent
findings using mouse mesenchymal progenitor cells and provide compelling evidence
that hMSCs are candidate cells of origin of ESFT.

PMID: 18381423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3190-7. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02291-07. Epub 2008 Mar
17.

The RASSF1A tumor suppressor restrains anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome
activity during the G1/S phase transition to promote cell cycle progression in
human epithelial cells.

Whitehurst AW(1), Ram R, Shivakumar L, Gao B, Minna JD, White MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department Cell Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines
Blvd., Dallas, TX 75220-9039, USA.

Multiple molecular lesions in human cancers directly collaborate to deregulate
proliferation and suppress apoptosis to promote tumorigenesis. The candidate
tumor suppressor RASSF1A is commonly inactivated in a broad spectrum of human
tumors and has been implicated as a pivotal gatekeeper of cell cycle progression.
However, a mechanistic account of the role of RASSF1A gene inactivation in tumor 
initiation is lacking. Here we have employed loss-of-function analysis in human
epithelial cells for a detailed investigation of the contribution of RASSF1 to
cell cycle progression. We found that RASSF1A has dual opposing regulatory
connections to G(1)/S phase cell cycle transit. RASSF1A associates with the Ewing
sarcoma breakpoint protein, EWS, to limit accumulation of cyclin D1 and restrict 
exit from G(1). Surprisingly, we found that RASSF1A is also required to restrict 
SCF(betaTrCP) activity to allow G/S phase transition. This restriction is
required for accumulation of the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C)
inhibitor Emi1 and the concomitant block of APC/C-dependent cyclin A turnover.
The consequence of this relationship is inhibition of cell cycle progression in
normal epithelial cells upon RASSF1A depletion despite elevated cyclin D1
concentrations. Progression to tumorigenicity upon RASSF1A gene inactivation
should therefore require collaborating genetic aberrations that bypass the
consequences of impaired APC/C regulation at the G(1)/S phase cell cycle
transition.

PMCID: PMC2423179
PMID: 18347058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Pathol. 2008 May;215(1):78-86. doi: 10.1002/path.2327.

POU5F1, encoding a key regulator of stem cell pluripotency, is fused to EWSR1 in 
hidradenoma of the skin and mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the salivary glands.

Möller E(1), Stenman G, Mandahl N, Hamberg H, Mölne L, van den Oord JJ, Brosjö O,
Mertens F, Panagopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund,
Sweden. emely.moller@med.lu.se

The EWSR1 gene is known to play a crucial role in the development of a number of 
different bone and soft tissue tumours, notably Ewing's sarcoma. POU5F1 is
expressed during early development to maintain the totipotent status of embryonic
stem and germ cells. In the present study, we report the fusion of EWSR1 and
POU5F1 in two types of epithelial tumours: hidradenoma of the skin and
mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the salivary glands. This finding not only broadens
considerably the spectrum of neoplasms associated with EWSR1 fusion genes but
also strengthens the evidence for shared pathogenetic mechanisms in the
development of adnexal and salivary gland tumours. Reminiscent of the previously 
reported fusion genes involving EWSR1, the identified transcript is predicted to 
encode a chimeric protein consisting of the EWSR1 amino-terminal domain and the
POU5F1 carboxy-terminal domain. We assessed the transcriptional activation
potential of the chimera compared to the wild-type proteins, as well as
activation of transcription through the oct/sox composite element known to bind
POU5F1. Among other POU5F1 target genes, this element is present in the promoter 
of NANOG and in the distal enhancer of POU5F1 itself. Our results show that
although the chimera is capable of significant transcriptional activation, it may
in fact convey a negative regulatory effect on target genes.

PMID: 18338330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Mar;24(3):248-50. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2008243248.

[Cellular origin of Ewing's tumor. A corner of the veil is lifted].

[Article in French]

Tirode F, Laud-Duval K, Delattre O.

PMID: 18334171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Cutan Pathol. 2008 Apr;35(4):411-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0560.2007.00821.x.

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue: diagnostic utility of fluorescence in situ
hybridization and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.

Curry CV(1), Dishop MK, Hicks MJ, Naeem R, Reed JA, López-Terrada DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

A 7-year-old girl presented with pain and progressive swelling on the left
plantar surface. Biopsy of a 2.5 cm mass showed nests of large round to oval
neoplastic cells with abundant amphophilic to clear cytoplasm, prominent nucleoli
and high mitotic activity. Occasional cells showed spindled morphology.
Infrequent melanin pigment was present. Melanocytic markers (HMB45, S-100) were
diffusely positive. A diagnosis of clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue (CCSS) was
made, and the mass was re-excised with negative margins. 28 months later, a 1.0
cm pulmonary nodule was identified and wedge excision showed metastatic CCSS.
Cytogenetics showed a complex karyotype (unbalanced translocation
der(12;14)(q10;q10), additional chromosome 22 material of unknown origin).
Although the CCSS translocation t(12;22)(q13;q12) was not identified, EWSR1 gene 
rearrangement was detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Reverse 
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) showed an EWS-ATF1 fusion
transcript, confirmed by direct sequencing. CCSS requires differentiation from
malignant melanoma, because of overlapping clinical presentations, sites of
involvement, histomorphology, immunocytochemical profiles and ultrastructure. In 
many circumstances, definitive diagnosis is only possible with confirmation of
the CCSS-defining translocation.

PMID: 18333903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 Mar;31(3):391-4.

Treatment of Ewing's sarcoma using an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide to regulate 
the cell cycle.

Asami S(1), Chin M, Shichino H, Yoshida Y, Nemoto N, Mugishima H, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Clinical Medicine, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University,
7-7-1 Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is one of the most malignant tumors of bone and soft tissue 
in children and young adults. ES belongs to a group of small round cell tumors
(SRCTs) that also includes neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and malignant
lymphoma. However, ES exhibits several specific chimeric genes (EWS-FLI1,
EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1, EWS-E1AF, and EWS-FEV) caused by chromosomal translocations
that are not shared by other SRCTs. These chimeric genes regulate the expression 
of various other genes; that is, they activate inhibitors of DNA binding 2 (Id2) 
gene expression or they suppress transforming growth factor beta II (TbetaRII)
receptor gene expression. The regulation of these chimeric genes may affect
critical cell signal transductions, such as signals involved in cell cycle and
apoptosis in ES tumor cells. Using an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide against a
sequence containing the ATG initiation codon of the EWS-FLI1 chimeric gene that
specifically reacts with the EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG chimeric genes, we were able to
regulate the cell cycle through the down-regulation of Id2. Here, we report that 
treatment with an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide against this chimeric gene was
very useful for inducing the regression of ES tumor growth; thus, this chimeric
gene may be an important target for the treatment of ES patients.

PMID: 18310898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Mar;32(3):452-60. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31814b18fb.

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue: a clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and 
molecular analysis of 33 cases.

Hisaoka M(1), Ishida T, Kuo TT, Matsuyama A, Imamura T, Nishida K, Kuroda H,
Inayama Y, Oshiro H, Kobayashi H, Nakajima T, Fukuda T, Ae K, Hashimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.
hisaoka@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) of soft tissue is a rare sarcoma with morphologic
similarities to malignant melanoma but a distinct genetic background including a 
chromosomal translocation, t(12;22)(q13;q12), or a resultant EWSR1-ATF1 fusion
gene. In addition, the tumors occurring in the gastrointestinal tract may have a 
variant fusion gene EWSR1-CREB1. This study analyzed the clinicopathologic and
molecular genetic features of 33 CCSs of soft tissue. The patients' ages ranged
from 13 to 73 years (median, 30 y), and there was a male predominance (20 males, 
13 females). The tumors were located in the deep soft tissues of the extremities 
(N=25) or in the trunk or limb girdles (N=8). The median tumor size was 4 cm
(range, 1 to 15 cm). The tumor cells were either spindle or epithelioid, and they
were arranged predominantly in a short fascicular (N=19) or a solid sheetlike
growth pattern (N=14). Minor histologic variations included the existence of
rhabdoid cells (N=8), bizarre pleomorphic cells (N=6), alveolar structures due to
loss of cellular cohesion (N=3), and a seminomalike pattern (N=2). Tumor necrosis
was evident in 14 tumors, and the mitotic activity ranged from 0 to 43 mitotic
figures (MF)/10 high-power fields (HPF) (mean: 4 MF/10 HPF).
Immunohistochemically, the tumors were consistently positive for S-100 protein
(33/33) and variably or focally for HMB45 (32/33), microphthalmia transcription
factor (26/32), Melan A (23/32), CD57 (25/33), bcl-2 (30/32), synaptophysin
(14/32), CD56 (7/32), epithelial membrane antigen (12/33), cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) 
(1/32), CD34 (3/32), c-erbB-2 (10/32), c-kit (5/32), and c-met (5/32).
alpha-Smooth muscle actin, desmin, and cytokeratin (CAM5.2) were negative.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction using RNA extracted from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues demonstrated transcripts of the
EWSR1-ATF1 (31/33) or EWSR1-CREB1 fusion gene (2/33). In 26 cases with available 
clinical information, local recurrences and metastases developed in 2 and 15
patients, respectively. Ten patients were dead of the disease, and the overall
survival rate was 63% at 5 years. However, no clinicopathologic or molecular
variables associated with the patients' prognosis were identified. This study
confirms that CCS is an aggressive soft tissue tumor with a melanocytic phenotype
and wider morphologic variations than had been generally considered. In cases
with unusual histologic findings, molecular detection of the EWSR1-ATF1/CREB1
fusion genes provides critical information regarding the diagnosis of the tumor.

PMID: 18300804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Mar;32(3):478-84. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181453451.

Primary intracerebral angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: report of a case with a
t(12;22)(q13;q12) causing type 1 fusion of the EWS and ATF-1 genes.

Dunham C(1), Hussong J, Seiff M, Pfeifer J, Perry A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St
Louis, MO 63110, USA

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is generally considered a soft tissue
sarcoma of low malignant potential that occurs in children/young adults and most 
frequently affects the extremities. AFH infrequently recurs and rarely
metastasizes. AFH has a characteristic histomorphology, and immunohistochemical
reactivities for desmin and CD68 have led to myofibroblastic and fibrohistiocytic
histogenetic hypotheses, respectively. Although only a limited number of AFH
cases have been molecularly characterized, many have demonstrated evidence of an 
underlying translocation event. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
and fluorescence in situ hybridization studies suggest that chromosomal
rearrangement in AFH most frequently involve the EWS, CREB, ATF-1, and FUS genes.
We report the first pathologically confirmed case of an AFH presenting as an
intracerebral primary in a previously healthy 25-year-old man. Genetic analyses
revealed a t(12;22)(q13;q12) and a unique underlying clear cell sarcomalike type 
1 EWS/ATF-1 gene fusion.

PMID: 18300800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Orthop Res. 2008 Jun;26(6):886-93. doi: 10.1002/jor.20597.

EWS/FLI1 suppresses retinoblastoma protein function and senescence in Ewing's
sarcoma cells.

Hu HM(1), Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A, Munro K, Wilcox J, Wu DY, Yang L, Chansky HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of Washington, 1660 S. Columbian Way, ORT112, Seattle, Washington 98108, USA.

Ewing's Family Tumors (EFTs) most commonly harbor a specific t(11;22)
translocation that generates the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein responsible for
malignant transformation. Many potential downstream targets of EWS/FLI1 have been
identified but a detailed mechanism by which the fusion protein brings about
transformation remains unknown. In this report, we show that depletion of
EWS/FLI1 in Ewing's cell lines results in a senescence phenotype, a marked
increase in expression of the G1/S regulatory proteins p27(kip1) and p57(kip2),
and a significant decrease in cyclin D1 and CDK2. We also demonstrate for the
first time, to our knowledge, that knockdown of EWS/FLI1 leads to
hypophosphorylation and functional activation of the retinoblastoma (pRb) family 
of proteins. Consistent with activation of the pRb proteins, E2F-responsive genes
such as cyclin A are repressed in EWS/FLI1-depleted cells. Together, these
results support the role of EWS/LI1 as an inhibitor of cellular senescence and
implicate the retinoblastoma family of proteins as key mediators of this
inhibition.

(c) 2008 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 18271016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cell Cycle. 2008 Jan 15;7(2):250-6. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

A transcriptional profiling meta-analysis reveals a core EWS-FLI gene expression 
signature.

Hancock JD(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology and The Center for Children,
Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City,
Utah, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas are characterized by recurrent chromosomal translocations
expressing EWS-ETS fusion proteins, the most common of which is EWS-FLI.(1-5)
EWS-FLI is an oncogenic transcription factor that regulates genes involved in
tumorigenesis.(6,7) Because the Ewing's sarcoma cell of origin remains unknown, a
variety of model systems have been developed to study EWS-FLI fusions,(8-14) and 
multiple microarray experiments describing potential EWS-FLI target genes have
been reported.(8,10,11,13,15-21) Each model has potential benefits and drawbacks,
but a large-scale comparison of these has not been reported. Herein we report a
meta-analysis of the genes that are dysregulated by EWS-FLI in Ewing's sarcoma
model systems. In general, EWS-FLI gain- and loss-of-function models in human
cell types were well correlated to patient-derived tumor samples, while murine
models were not. Using frequency analysis of dysregulated genes across multiple
model systems, we identified a conserved "core" EWS-FLI transcriptional
signature. This signature contained many of the genes known to be involved in the
tumorigenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma, and also contained genes that have not 
been previously reported. Comparisons between the core EWS-FLI signature and
published mesenchymal stem cell data support the recent assertion that
mesenchymal stem cells are likely the Ewing's sarcoma precursor cell.(15) These
results demonstrate the utility of using comparative analysis to validate model
systems and emphasize the unique potential of this approach to identify both
oncogenic and background cell signatures.

PMID: 18256529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Feb;32(2):219-28. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318093e421.

Uterine tumors with neuroectodermal differentiation: a series of 17 cases and
review of the literature.

Euscher ED(1), Deavers MT, Lopez-Terrada D, Lazar AJ, Silva EG, Malpica A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. edeusche@mdanderson.org

Uterine tumors with neuroectodermal differentiation, frequently referred to as
primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs), are uncommon. The clinicopathologic
features of 17 such cases reviewed at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC) are
presented along with a review of the literature. All of the pathology material
was reviewed at MDACC, and in all cases, immunohistochemistry contributed to the 
diagnosis. In 12 cases, in situ hybridization techniques were used to determine
whether a rearrangement of the EWSR1 gene, required for a diagnosis of peripheral
PNET, was present. Clinical information was obtained from a patient chart review.
Ages ranged from 31 to 81 years (median 58). Clinical presentations included
vaginal bleeding (9), back pain (1), presumed fibroids (2), pelvic mass (1),
incidental finding at hysterectomy (1), and unknown (3). Twelve patients had
surgery or imaging to determine stage: I (2), II (0), III (6), and IV (4). Five
patients had biopsy only. Ten tumors had only neuroectodermal components. In 7
tumors, the neuroectodermal component was admixed with an additional component
including unclassified sarcoma (2 cases), rhabdomyosarcoma, endometrioid
carcinoma, adenosarcoma and malignant mixed Mullerian tumor (2 cases). Follow-up,
available for 13 patients, ranged from 2 to 41 months with 7 patients dead of
disease 2 to 26 months after diagnosis. Six patients are alive with no evidence
of disease after follow-up ranging from 6 to 41 months. Four patients were lost
to follow-up. Results for the most commonly used immunohistochemistry studies
include cytokeratin, 13/15 tumors negative (2 focally positive); synaptophysin,
15/16 tumors positive; neurofilament, 10/11 tumors positive; and CD99, 7/9 tumors
positive (2 tumors had nonspecific cytoplasmic staining). None of the 12 tumors
tested had a detectable rearrangement in the EWSR1 gene. Uterine tumors with
neuroectodermal differentiation, similar to more common endometrial malignancies,
tend to occur in postmenopausal women and frequently present with vaginal
bleeding. An immunohistochemistry panel including cytokeratin, neurofilament,
synaptophysin, and CD99 can highlight neuroectodermal differentiation and
identify tumors for which molecular testing should be considered. Tumors without 
a rearrangement of the EWSR1 gene should be descriptively characterized as
uterine tumors with neuroectodermal differentiation or alternatively central type
PNETs rather than PNET, not otherwise specified to avoid confusion with
peripheral PNET.

PMID: 18223324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2125-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00740-07. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Inducible expression of chimeric EWS/ETS proteins confers Ewing's family
tumor-like phenotypes to human mesenchymal progenitor cells.

Miyagawa Y(1), Okita H, Nakaijima H, Horiuchi Y, Sato B, Taguchi T, Toyoda M,
Katagiri YU, Fujimoto J, Hata J, Umezawa A, Kiyokawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, 2-10-1, Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(11):3882.

Ewing's family tumor (EFT) is a rare pediatric tumor of unclear origin that
occurs in bone and soft tissue. Specific chromosomal translocations found in EFT 
cause EWS to fuse to a subset of ets transcription factor genes (ETS), generating
chimeric EWS/ETS proteins. These proteins are believed to play a crucial role in 
the onset and progression of EFT. However, the mechanisms responsible for the
EWS/ETS-mediated onset remain unclear. Here we report the establishment of a
tetracycline-controlled EWS/ETS-inducible system in human bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPCs). Ectopic expression of both EWS/FLI1 and
EWS/ERG proteins resulted in a dramatic change of morphology, i.e., from a
mesenchymal spindle shape to a small round-to-polygonal cell, one of the
characteristics of EFT. EWS/ETS also induced immunophenotypic changes in MPCs,
including the disappearance of the mesenchyme-positive markers CD10 and CD13 and 
the up-regulation of the EFT-positive markers CD54, CD99, CD117, and CD271.
Furthermore, a prominent shift from the gene expression profile of MPCs to that
of EFT was observed in the presence of EWS/ETS. Together with the observation
that EWS/ETS enhances the ability of cells to invade Matrigel, these results
suggest that EWS/ETS proteins contribute to alterations of cellular features and 
confer an EFT-like phenotype to human MPCs.

PMCID: PMC2268432
PMID: 18212050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Pol J Pathol. 2008;59(4):211-5.

Perivascular epithelioid tumor (PEComa) of the falciform/ broad ligament.

Rys J(1), Karolewski K, Pudelek J, Kruczak A, Wasilewska A, Vogelgesang M, Kojs
Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Pathology, Cracow Center of Oncology, Kraków.
z5rys@cyf-kr.edu.pl

PEComas localized in the region of falciform ligament and broad ligament are
exceedingly rare. Most of them are built of spindle neoplastic cells. We report a
case of epithelioid PEComa of the falciform ligament and/or broad ligament. There
is only one report of such neoplasm in English-language literature.
Histologically, the tumor was composed of nests of epithelioid clear cells
stained positively for vimentin, HMB45, and SMA. Because of morphological
features of the tumour (4 mitoses /20HPF, focal necrosis, and vascular invasion) 
we assess the neoplasm as potentially malignant.

PMID: 19391488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Jan;32(1):8-13.

The utility of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in the diagnosis of
myxoid soft tissue neoplasms.

Downs-Kelly E(1), Goldblum JR, Patel RM, Weiss SW, Folpe AL, Mertens F, Hartke M,
Tubbs RR, Skacel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Diagnosing myxoid soft tissue neoplasms can be challenging because of overlapping
histologic features. Distinct chromosomal translocations have been identified in 
several myxoid sarcomas, including t(12;16)(q13;p11) FUS-DDIT3 in myxoid
liposarcoma, t(7;16)(q34;p11) FUS-CREB3L2 in low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma, and
t(9;22)(q31;q12) EWSR1-NR4A3 in extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. These
recurrent chromosomal alterations are attractive targets for diagnostic studies. 
To that end, dual-color, break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
probes spanning the genomic regions of EWSR1 (22q12), DDIT3 (12q13), and FUS
(16p11) (Vysis, Downer's Grove, IL) were evaluated in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissues from myxoid neoplasms, including intramuscular myxoma
(n=10), myxoid liposarcoma (n=18), low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (n=10),
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (n=13), and myxofibrosarcoma (n=8). Of the
myxoid liposarcomas, 18/18 cases had a rearrangement of the DDIT3 gene, with
17/18 (94.4%) showing both DDIT3 and FUS gene rearrangements. A FUS gene
rearrangement was identified in 7/10 (70%) of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcomas,
with no changes involving EWSR1 or DDIT3. An EWSR1 translocation was seen in 6/13
(46.2%) of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas, without changes in DDIT3 or FUS 
genes. The remaining neoplasms studied showed no rearrangements involving DDIT3, 
FUS, or EWSR1 genes. In conclusion, interphase FISH using DDIT3 and FUS probes
identifies the characteristic translocation in myxoid liposarcoma. FUS and EWSR1 
probes are useful in confirming the diagnosis of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma
and extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, respectively. The specificity of the
probes is documented as none of the non-translocation-associated myxoid tumors
showed genomic abnormalities with the probes tested. FISH is capable of providing
specific ancillary information useful in this often difficult differential
diagnosis.

PMID: 18162764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Dec 15;13(24):7322-8.

EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusion genes in angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma.

Rossi S(1), Szuhai K, Ijszenga M, Tanke HJ, Zanatta L, Sciot R, Fletcher CD, Dei 
Tos AP, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Regional Hospital, Treviso, Italy.

PURPOSE: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a low-grade mesenchymal
neoplasm which usually occurs in children and adolescents. Either FUS-ATF1 or
EWSR1-ATF1 have been detected in the few cases published, pointing to the
interchangeable role of FUS and EWSR1 in this entity. EWSR1-ATF1 also represents 
the most frequent genetic alteration in clear cell sarcoma, suggesting the
existence of a molecular homology between these two histotypes. We investigated
the presence of EWSR1-CREB1, recently found in gastrointestinal clear cell
sarcoma, and FUS-CREB1, as well as the already reported FUS-ATF1 and EWSR1-ATF1
in a series of AFH.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Fourteen cases were analyzed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) on paraffin-embedded tissue sections, using a commercial
EWSR1 probe and custom-designed probes for FUS, ATF1, and CREB1. In two cases,
four-color FISH was also done. Reverse transcription-PCR for the four
hypothetical fusion genes was done in one case, for which frozen material was
available.
RESULTS: Thirteen cases showed rearrangements of both EWSR1 and CREB1, whereas
one case showed the rearrangement of both EWSR1 and ATF1. Four-color FISH
confirmed the results in two selected cases. Reverse transcription-PCR showed
EWSR1-CREB1 transcript in the case analyzed.
CONCLUSION: We identified the presence of either EWSR1-CREB1 or EWSR1-ATF1 in all
the cases, strengthening the concept of chromosomal promiscuity between AFH and
clear cell sarcoma. Either the occurrence of a second unknown tumor-specific
molecular event or, perhaps more likely, divergent differentiation programs of
the putatively distinct precursor cells of AFH and clear cell sarcoma might be
invoked in order to explain the two different phenotypes.

PMID: 18094413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2008 Jan;8(1):97-105.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors: a model for the new era of integrated laboratory 
diagnostics.

Khoury JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Associated Pathologists Chartered/Quest Diagnostics, 4230 Burnham Avenue, Las 
Vegas, NV 89119, USA. joseph.d.khoury@questdiagnostics.com

The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) represents one of the best models
illustrating the multifaceted approach to the diagnosis of cancer that has
evolved over the past decade. ESFT encompasses tumors that arise in bone or soft 
tissues and may have disparate histologic features. As a result, it was not until
the discovery that these tumors share a common underlying molecular pathogenesis 
(chromosomal translocations involving the EWS gene and one of several members of 
the ETS family of transcription factors) that significant advances in the
diagnosis and therapy of ESFT became possible. As a result, ESFT has come to
embody the amalgamation of classical diagnostic tools, such as histology and
routine microscopy, with newer techniques, such as immunohistochemistry and
molecular techniques; the latter include PCR-based methods and fluorescence in
situ hybridization. This review will address the features of ESFT and how it has 
emerged as a model for the new era of integrated diagnostics.

PMID: 18088234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Oncogene. 2008 May 22;27(23):3282-91. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

The EWS/FLI1 oncogenic transcription factor deregulates GLI1.

Zwerner JP(1), Joo J, Warner KL, Christensen L, Hu-Lieskovan S, Triche TJ, May
WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
CA, USA.

Ewing family tumors (EFT), classically Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor, share a common class of tumor-specific fusion genes
thought to be key mediators of tumor biology. Here we demonstrate that the most
common Ewing's fusion, EWS/FLI1, produces transcriptional upregulation of GLI1
and its direct transcriptional target PATCHED1 in a model transformation system. 
This deregulation of GLI1 is common to other EWS/ets chimera and depends on the
functional transcriptional regulatory domains. Inhibition of GLI1 via RNAi or via
overexpression of endogenous inhibitors results in a reduction of EWS/FLI1
transformation activity. Activation of GLI1 appears to occur in a
Hedgehog-independent fashion as blockade of Hedgehog signaling has only a modest 
effect on EFT cells. We present evidence that EWS/FLI1 upregulation of cMYC may
play a role in the upregulation of GLI1 in EWS/FLI1-transformed NIH3T3 cells.
Finally, we demonstrate that observations made in a model transformation system
translate to an Ewing cellular background. EFT cell lines express GLI1 and
PATCHED and this expression is EWS/FLI1 dependent. Inhibition of GLI1 expression 
via RNAi results in reduced anchorage-independent growth in an EFT cell line.
GLI1 appears to be a transcriptionally deregulated target of EWS/FLI1 that
mediates a portion of its tumorigenic phenotype.

PMID: 18084326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2008 Mar;47(3):207-20.

Ploidy and karyotype complexity are powerful prognostic indicators in the Ewing's
sarcoma family of tumors: a study by the United Kingdom Cancer Cytogenetics and
the Children's Cancer and Leukaemia Group.

Roberts P(1), Burchill SA, Brownhill S, Cullinane CJ, Johnston C, Griffiths MJ,
McMullan DJ, Bown NP, Morris SP, Lewis IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics, St James's University Hospital, Beckett Street,
Leeds LS9 7TF, UK. paul.roberts@leedsth.nhs.uk

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are characterized by the presence of
EWSR1-ETS fusion genes. Secondary chromosome changes are frequently described,
although their clinical significance is not clear. In this study, we have
collected and reviewed abnormal karyotypes from 88 patients with primary ESFT and
a rearrangement of 22q12. Secondary changes were identified in 80% (70/88) of
tumors at diagnosis. Multivariate analysis showed a worse overall and relapse
free survival (RFS) for those with a complex karyotype (overall survival, P =
0.005; RFS, P = 0.04), independent of metastatic disease. Univariate survival
analysis showed that a chromosome number above 50 or a complex karyotype was
associated with a worse overall survival (>50 chromosomes, P = 0.05; complex
karyotype, P = 0.04). There was no association between type of cytogenetic
abnormality and the presence of metastatic disease at diagnosis. Univariate and
multivariate survival analysis of a small subgroup with trisomy 20 indicated that
trisomy 20 was associated with a worse overall and RFS. There was no difference
in outcome associated with other recurrent trisomies (2, 5, 7, 8, or 12) or the
common recurrent secondary structural rearrangements (deletions of 1p36, 9p12,
17p13, and 16q, and gain of 1q), although numbers were small. These data
demonstrate the continued value of cytogenetics as a genome-wide screen in ESFT
and illustrates the potential importance of secondary chromosome changes for
stratification of patients for risk. Specifically, karyotype complexity appears
to be a powerful predictor of prognosis, and the presence of trisomy 20 may be a 
marker of a more aggressive subset of this group.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18064647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Dec 1;13(23):6978-83.

Novel markers of subclinical disease for Ewing family tumors from gene expression
profiling.

Cheung IY(1), Feng Y, Danis K, Shukla N, Meyers P, Ladanyi M, Cheung NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York 10021, USA. cheungi@mskcc.org

PURPOSE: Targeting subclinical disease in the bone marrow is particularly
relevant in metastatic Ewing family tumors (EFT) where cure is difficult.
Genome-wide expression arrays can uncover novel genes differentially expressed in
tumors over normal marrow/blood, which may have potentials as markers of
subclinical disease.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression array data were obtained on 28 EFT tumors
using the Affymetrix U133 gene chip and compared with 10 normal blood samples.
Ten genes with high tumor to blood ratios were identified. Quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR was done to study (a) the dynamic range of detection of rare
tumor cells, (b) the gene expression in normal blood/marrow samples, (c) the gene
expression among EFT tumors, and (d) the detection and prognostic impact of
marker positivity in histology-negative diagnostic marrows of EFT patients.
RESULTS: Five of 10 genes (i.e., six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of the
prostate 1 [STEAP1], cyclin D1 [CCND1], NKX2-2 transcription factor [NKX2-2],
plakophilin 1 [PKP1], and transmembrane protein 47 [TMEM47]) were chosen for
further analyses based on their steep linear dynamic range in detecting tumor
cells seeded in normal mononuclear cells and on their homogeneous expression
among EFT tumors. Prognostic effect was evaluated in 35 histology-negative
diagnostic marrows. Marker negativity of STEAP1, CCND1, or NKX2-2, as well as
three markers in combination, was strongly correlated with patient survival as
well as survival without new metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: This gene expression array-based approach identified novel markers
that may be informative at diagnosis for risk group assessment. Their clinical
utility needs to be tested in large patient cohorts.

PMID: 18056173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Korean Med Sci. 2007 Sep;22 Suppl:S159-63.

Primary pulmonary Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in a
67-year-old man.

Lee YY(1), Kim do H, Lee JH, Choi JS, In KH, Oh YW, Cho KH, Roh YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Korea University, College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma (EES) is a branch of neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), 
which is very rare soft tissue sarcoma. We report a case of EES/PNET arising is
the lung of a 67-yr-old man. Computed tomography, bone scintigraphy, and positron
emission tomography confirmed the mass to have a primary pulmonary origin. The
mass showed positive reactivity in the Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS) stain and MIC-2
immunoreactivity in immunohistochemical stain. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) was performed, which revealed an EWSR1 (Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1)
22q12 rearrangement. The diagnosis was confirmed both pathologically and
genetically. The mass lesion was resected, and the patient is currently
undergoing chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2694395
PMID: 17923745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Int J Surg Pathol. 2007 Oct;15(4):429-36.

Primitive small cell tumor with epithelial, gangliocytic, neuroendocrine, and
mesenchymal differentiation: report of 2 cases.

Michal M(1), Kazakov DV, Síma R, Vanecek T.

Author information: 
(1)Sikl's Department of Pathology, Charles University, Medical Faculty Hospital, 
Alej Svobody 80, 304 60 Pilsen, Czech Republic. michal@medima.cz

The authors describe 2 tumors that, to the best of their knowledge, are hitherto 
undescribed. The predominant cell type was small round to fusiform dark blue
cells. The dark blue cells formed distinct epithelial cords with gland-like
formations with mucicarmine-positive mucus. Another distinctive component of the 
tumors was a mesenchymal one. The mesenchymal areas appeared benign and could be 
likened to a fibroma having a densely collagenous stroma, or they had spindle
cells set in the myxoid background, rendering a myxoma-like appearance. Another
distinctive feature was ganglion cell differentiation. Mitotic figures, including
atypical forms, were found only in the small cell component. All cells were
immunohistochemically negative for actin, calponin, desmin, HMB45, neurofilament 
protein, CD99/MIC2, Melan A, tyrosinase, serotonin, CD56, Melan A, GFAP, and
S-100 protein. Cytokeratin, synaptophysin, FLI1 protein, and chromogranin
antibodies reacted only in the primitive small round cells, while all the other
components were cytokeratin negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed
that the tumors are without the EWSR1 gene translocation and gain 12p.
Ultrastructurally, the cells were endowed with well-formed intercellular
desmosomes membrane-bound secretory in the cytoplasm. Granules were found in the 
cytoplasm. We suggest the name "primitive small cell tumor with epithelial,
gangliocytic, neuroendocrine, and mesenchymal differentiation" for this neoplasm.

PMID: 17913955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2007 Oct 3;2(10):e979.

Ewing sarcoma protein ewsr1 maintains mitotic integrity and proneural cell
survival in the zebrafish embryo.

Azuma M(1), Embree LJ, Sabaawy H, Hickstein DD.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 gene (EWSR1), also known as
EWS, is fused to a number of different partner genes as a result of chromosomal
translocation in diverse sarcomas. Despite the involvement of EWSR1 in these
diverse sarcomas, the in vivo function of wild type EWSR1 remains unclear.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified two zebrafish EWSR1 orthologues, ewsr1a and
ewsr1b, and demonstrate that both genes are expressed maternally, and are
expressed ubiquitously throughout zebrafish embryonic development. Morpholino
induced knockdown of both zebrafish ewsr1 genes led to mitotic defects with
multipolar or otherwise abnormal mitotic spindles starting from the bud stage (10
hour post-fertilization (hpf)). The abnormalities in mitotic spindles were
followed by p53-mediated apoptosis in the developing central nervous system (CNS)
leading to a reduction in the number of proneural cells, disorganization of
neuronal networks, and embryonic lethality by 5 days post-fertilization. siRNA
silencing of EWSR1 in Hela cells resulted in mitotic defects accompanied by
apoptotic cell death, indicating that the role of EWSR1 is conserved between
zebrafish and human.
CONCLUSIONS: Ewsr1 maintains mitotic integrity and proneural cell survival in
early zebrafish development.

PMCID: PMC1991596
PMID: 17912356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Anal Quant Cytol Histol. 2007 Aug;29(4):221-30.

Detection of EWSR1 translocation with nuclear extraction-based fluorescence in
situ hybridization for diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal
tumor.

Yang Y(1), Zhang L, Wei Y, Wang H, Xiong W, Chen Z, Hes O, Zheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Health Science Center, Peking University, Beijing,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate nuclear extraction-based fluorescence in situ
hybridization (NE-FISH) in EWSR1 translocation of Ewing's sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissue, compared to thin-section FISH (TS-FISH) and nested reverse-transcription 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
STUDY DESIGN: Nuclei of the tumor cells and total ribonucleic acid (RNA) were
extracted from 10 cases of ES/PNET. NE-FISH and TS-FISH were used to analyze the 
EWS gene translocation. RT-PCR was used to detect t(11;22)(q24;q12) and
t(21;22)(q22;q12) fusion transcripts.
RESULTS: Of 10 cases, 9 (90%) were abnormal by NE-FISH and TS-FISH. The average
rate of abnormal split signals detected by NE-FISH was significantly higher than 
by TS-FISH. We analyzed 10 ES/PNET cases and 8 various normal human tissues by
NE-FISH and nested RT-PCR. Fusion signals were found in 9 (90%) ES/PNET cases by 
NE-FISH and 8 (80%) by nested RT-PCR. Of 8 normal tissues, none was abnormal by
either FISH or RT-PCR.
CONCLUSION: NE-FISH is more reliable than TS-FISH in detecting EWSR1
translocation of ES/PNET in FFPE tissue, although the FISH techniques were
concordant. Nested RT-PCR could be more sensitive than conventional RT-PCR. A
combination of NE-FISH and nested RT-PCR would improve accuracy of molecular
diagnosis of ES/PNET.

PMID: 17879630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(22):7918-34. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

EWS/FLI-1 induces rapid onset of myeloid/erythroid leukemia in mice.

Torchia EC(1), Boyd K, Rehg JE, Qu C, Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Hartwell Center, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, 332 N. Lauderdale St., Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

EWS/FLI-1 is a chimeric oncogene generated by chromosomal translocation in Ewing 
tumors, a family of poorly differentiated pediatric tumors arising predominantly 
in bone but also in soft tissue. The fusion gene combines sequences encoding a
strong transactivating domain from the EWS protein with the DNA binding domain of
FLI-1, an ETS transcription factor. A related fusion, TLS/ERG, has been found in 
myeloid leukemia. To determine EWS/FLI-1 function in vivo, we engineered mice
with Cre-inducible expression of EWS/FLI-1 from the ubiquitous Rosa26 locus. When
crossed with Mx1-cre mice, Cre-mediated activation of EWS/FLI-1 resulted in the
rapid development of myeloid/erythroid leukemia characterized by expansion of
primitive mononuclear cells causing hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, severe anemia,
and death. The disease could be transplanted serially into naïve recipients. Gene
expression profiles of primary and transplanted animals were highly similar,
suggesting that activation of EWS/FLI-1 was the primary event leading to disease 
in this model. The Cre-inducible EWS/FLI-1 mouse provides a novel model system to
study the contribution of this oncogene to malignant disease in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2169157
PMID: 17875932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jun;36(6):412-3.

[Detection of chromosomal translocation in fresh samples of myxoid/round cell
liposarcoma by long-distance polymerase chain reaction].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiang H, Wang J, Hisaoka M, Zhu XZ.

PMID: 17822629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2007 Aug;29(8):561-5.

Periosteal Ewing sarcoma family of tumors of the femur confirmed by molecular
detection of EWS-FLI1 fusion gene transcripts: a case report and review of the
literature.

Hakozaki M(1), Hojo H, Tajino T, Yamada H, Kikuta A, Ito M, Sano H, Mochizuki K, 
Akaihata M, Kikuchi S, Abe M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Fukushima Medical University School of
Medicine, Fukushima, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) comprise common sarcomas in children and
young adults. Such tumors usually occur in the medullary cavity of long bones and
directly invade cortical bone and circumferential soft tissue, including
periosteum. Periosteal ESFT is extremely rare and only a small numbers of cases, 
including cases not confirmed by molecular detection of chimeric fusion gene,
have been reported. We describe herein a case of periosteal ESFT of the femur in 
a 13-year-old boy harboring EWS-FLI1 chimeric fusion gene transcripts detected by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis. This report may provide
an opportunity for further evaluation of the EWS-FLI1 type 1 fusion gene and
detection of prognostic significance in periosteal ESFT.

PMID: 17762498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Dec;46(12):1051-60.

EWSR1-CREB1 is the predominant gene fusion in angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma.

Antonescu CR(1), Dal Cin P, Nafa K, Teot LA, Surti U, Fletcher CD, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA. antonesc@mskcc.org

The molecular hallmark of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is not well
defined, with only six cases with specific gene fusions reported to date,
consisting of either FUS-ATF1 or EWSR1-ATF1. To address this, we investigated the
presence of FUS-ATF1, EWSR1-ATF1, and the highly related EWSR1-CREB1 fusion in a 
group of nine AFHs. All cases were subjected to RT-PCR for EWSR1-ATF1 and
EWSR1-CREB1. FISH for EWSR1 and FUS rearrangements was performed in most cases.
Transcriptional profiling was performed in three tumors and their gene expression
was compared to five clear cell sarcomas expressing either the EWSR1-ATF1 or
EWSR1-CREB1 fusion. By RT-PCR, eight out of nine tumors showed the presence of
the EWSR1-CREB1 fusion, while one had an EWSR1-ATF1 transcript. FISH showed
evidence of EWSR1 rearrangement in seven out of eight cases. Karyotypic analysis 
performed in one tumor showed a t(2;22)(q33;q12). High transcript levels were
noted for TFE3 in AFH tumors, while overexpression of genes involved in
melanogenesis, such as MITF, GP100, and MET was noted in somatic clear cell
sarcomas. We report for the first time the presence of EWSR1-CREB1 in AFH, which 
now appears to be the most frequent gene fusion in this tumor. EWSR1-CREB1 is a
novel translocation recently described in clear cell sarcoma of the GI tract.
EWSR1-ATF1, identified in some AFH cases, is the most common genetic abnormality 
in soft tissue clear cell sarcoma. Thus, identical fusions involving ATF1 and
CREB1 are found in two distinct sarcomas, which may be able to transform two
different types of mesenchymal precursor cells, unlike most other sarcoma gene
fusions.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17724745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Oncogene. 2008 Feb 7;27(7):985-96. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

The sensitivity of the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumours to fenretinide-induced
cell death is increased by EWS-Fli1-dependent modulation of p38(MAPK) activity.

Myatt SS(1), Burchill SA.

Author information: 
(1)Candlelighter's Children's Cancer Research Laboratory, Cancer Research UK
Clinical Centre, St James's University Hospital, Leeds, UK.

The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumours (ESFT) are small round cell tumours
characterized by the non-random EWS-ETS gene rearrangements. We have previously
demonstrated that ESFT are highly sensitive to fenretinide-induced death,
effected in part through a reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent pathway. Here,
we demonstrate for the first time that the sensitivity of ESFT cells to
fenretinide-induced cell death is decreased following downregulation of the
oncogenic fusion protein EWS-Fli1; siRNA targeting EWS-Fli1 attenuated
fenretinide-induced cell death in cell lines expressing EWS-Fli1, but not
EWS-ERG. This decrease in cell death was independent of the level of ROS produced
following exposure to fenretinide, but was effected through EWS-Fli1-dependent
modulation of p38(MAPK) activity. Furthermore, inhibition of p38(MAPK) activity
and knockdown of EWS-Fli1 reduced fenretinide-induced mitochondrial
permeabilization, cytochrome c release, caspase and PARP cleavage, consistent
with the hypothesis that p38(MAPK) is critical for activation of the death
cascade by fenretinide in ESFT cells. These data demonstrate that expression of
EWS-Fli1 enhances fenretinide-induced cell death in ESFT and that this is
effected at least in part through modulation of p38(MAPK) activity.

PMID: 17700534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Pathol. 2007 Sep;213(1):4-20.

Sarcomas: genetics, signalling, and cellular origins. Part 1: The fellowship of
TET.

Riggi N(1), Cironi L, Suvà ML, Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2007 Oct;213(2):117-30.

Sarcomas comprise some of the most aggressive solid tumours that, for the most
part, respond poorly to chemo- and radiation therapy and are associated with a
sombre prognosis when surgical removal cannot be performed or is incomplete.
Partly because of their lower frequency, sarcomas have not been studied as
intensively as carcinomas and haematopoietic malignancies, and the molecular
mechanisms that underlie their pathogenesis are only beginning to be understood. 
Even more enigmatic is the identity of the primary cells from which these tumours
originate. Over the past 25 years, however, several non-random chromosomal
translocations have been found to be associated with defined sarcomas. Each of
these translocations generates a fusion gene believed to be directly related to
the pathogenesis of the sarcoma in which it is expressed. The corresponding
fusion proteins provide a unique tool not only to study the process of sarcoma
development, but also to identify cells that are permissive for their putative
oncogenic properties. This is the first of two reviews that cover the mechanisms 
whereby specific fusion/mutant gene products participate in sarcoma development
and the cellular context that may provide the necessary permissiveness for their 
expression and oncogenicity. Part 1 of the review focuses on sarcomas that
express fusion genes containing TET gene family products, including EWSR1,
TLS/FUS, and TAFII68. Part 2 (J Pathol 2007; DOI: 10.1002/path.2008) summarizes
our current understanding of the genetic and cellular origins of sarcomas
expressing fusion genes exclusive of TET family members; it also covers soft
tissue malignancies harbouring specific mutations in RTK-encoding genes, the
prototype of which are gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST).

PMID: 17691072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cancer. 2007 Oct 25;111(5):298-305.

Cytopathology of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma: report of 8 cases.

Jakowski JD(1), Wakely PE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio 43210, USA.

BACKGROUND: Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is a rare soft-tissue
sarcoma rarely subjected to cytologic analysis. With the exception of a few small
series, the cytology literature of EMC is largely limited to single-case reports.
The purpose was to evaluate the cytomorphology of 8 EMC cases as obtained by
imprint/scrape cytology and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy, to review the
literature, and to demonstrate the utility of cytogenetic analysis in the
diagnosis of EMC.
METHODS: The cytology files were reviewed for all soft-tissue lesions signed out 
as chondrosarcoma, myxoid sarcoma, and EMC, and the tissue files for any cases of
EMC that had corresponding cytopathology. FNA was performed using a standard
technique. Scrape preparations were performed from tissue sent fresh to the
laboratory for either frozen section or for special studies such as electron
microscopy or tissue banking.
RESULTS: Eight cases of EMC were retrieved from 4 men and 3 women (median age =
62 years). One patient had 2 separate cytologic specimens 4.5 years apart. All
patients had subsequent tissue confirmation of the diagnosis of EMC. Five
individuals presented as new patients, and 2 had a prior diagnosis of EMC. Sites 
included 4 masses from the foot/ankle, 2 from the calf, 1 wrist mass, and 1
buttock mass. Five patients were diagnosed from FNA biopsy, whereas 3 were
diagnosed using scrape slides. Five cases were correctly and categorically
diagnosed by the cytologic method as EMC, 1 as chondrosarcoma favor EMC, 1 as
sarcoma favor EMC, and 1 as myxoid spindle/epithelial neoplasm. Cytologic
features ranged from hypocellular to highly cellular smears composed primarily of
rounded cells set in an abundant myxoid stroma that varied from opaque to
semitransparent and lacked vascularity or necrosis. Smears showed cells in short,
sometimes anastomosing cords, but also as single cells and nondescript cell
clusters. Cells displayed a monotonous uniformity in nuclear diameter and cell
size. Bland nuclei with evenly dispersed chromatin displayed variably sized
nucleoli, and a moderate amount of infrequently vacuolated cytoplasm. Tissue
fragments of variable size were found in 5 of 5 FNA cell blocks. Fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using the EWSR1 probe showed a positive 22q12 
translocation in 2 of 3 FNA cases that were tested. One case with negative FISH
results on the cytologic preparation showed a positive translocation using the
same technique in the subsequent resection specimen.
CONCLUSIONS: A confident cytologic diagnosis of EMC depends on the presence of a 
uniform, round to oval cell population often arranged in cords and set in an
abundant myxoid/chondromyxoid background and arising in the appropriate clinical 
context. If positive, FISH testing (of paraffin cell blocks or cytospin
preparations) is confirmatory when coupled with this cytomorphology.

PMID: 17676582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Nov;46(11):961-71.

Relevance of translocation type in myxoid liposarcoma and identification of a
novel EWSR1-DDIT3 fusion.

Bode-Lesniewska B(1), Frigerio S, Exner U, Abdou MT, Moch H, Zimmermann DR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
beata.bode@usz.ch

The clinical course of myxoid/round cell liposarcoma (MRCL) is characterized by
frequent local recurrences and metastases at unusual sites. MRCLs carry specific 
translocations, t(12;16) or rarely t(12;22), linking the FUS or the EWSR1 gene
with the DDIT3 gene, respectively. Nine FUS/DDIT3 and three EWSR1/DDIT3 variants 
of fusion transcripts have been described thus far. In search of prognostic
markers for MRCL, we analyzed the translocation types of 31 patients and related 
them to the event free and overall survival. Using break-apart FISH and RT-PCR
combined with DNA sequencing, we detected FUS/DDIT3 fusions in 30 sarcomas, while
an EWSR1/DDIT3 translocation was identified in one tumor. FUS/DDIT3 type II
(exons 5-2) was most commonly detected (20 cases), followed by type I (7-2) (7
cases) and type III (8-2) (3 cases). A single tumor carrying a t(12;22)
translocation expressed a hitherto unknown EWSR1-DDIT3 fusion transcript (13-3)
linking the complete RNA-binding domain of EWSR1 with a short piece of the 5'-UTR
and the entire open reading frame of the DDIT3 gene. Interestingly, five of six
patients with type I (7-2) FUS/DDIT3 fusions displayed local recurrences and/or
metastatic spread within the first 3 years, generally requiring
chemotherapeutical treatment (median disease-free survival 17 months). In
contrast, 9 of 13 patients with type II FUS/DDIT3 translocations remained at 3
years disease-free (median disease-free survival 75 months). Since the total
number of patients is still limited, further studies are required to verify a
putative association of type I FUS/DDIT3-fusion transcripts with a prognosis of
MRCL.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17647282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 15;67(14):6675-84.

EWS/FLI1 regulates tumor angiogenesis in Ewing's sarcoma via suppression of
thrombospondins.

Potikyan G(1), Savene RO, Gaulden JM, France KA, Zhou Z, Kleinerman ES, Lessnick 
SL, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of California-Los Angeles, 10833 Le Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA.

Suppression of the expression of antiangiogenic factors has been closely
associated with multiple malignancies. Thrombospondins 1 and 2 are members of a
family of angiogenic inhibitors that are regulated by several oncogenes. In this 
study, we investigate the role of thrombospondins in Ewing's sarcoma and their
regulation by EWS/ETS fusion oncoproteins. We show that the EWS/FLI1 fusion
suppresses the expression of thrombospondins in both NIH3T3 fibroblasts and
Ewing's sarcoma tumor-derived cell lines. This regulation depends on an intact
EWS/FLI1 DNA-binding domain and may involve direct interactions between EWS/FLI1 
and thrombospondin promoter regions. Forced expression of thrombospondins in
Ewing's sarcoma cell lines inhibited the rate of tumor formation in vivo and
markedly decreased the number of microvessels present in the tumors. These
findings suggest that thrombospondins play a biologically significant role in
tumor vascularization in Ewing's sarcoma and suggest potential therapeutic
strategies for future therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 17638877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diagn Cytopathol. 2007 Aug;35(8):516-20.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor: using FISH as an ancillary technique to
support cytologic diagnosis in an unusual case.

Waugh MS(1), Dash RC, Turner KC, Dodd LG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytopathology, Department of Pathology, Duke University Health
System, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA. michael.waugh@duke.edu

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor is a rare and aggressive neoplasm that
predominantly affects young males. In almost all cases, a reciprocal
translocation is present resulting in the fusion of the Ewing sarcoma gene with
the Wilms' tumor gene. Here we describe an unusual case occurring in a
59-year-old male, in which fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was used in 
conjunction with immunohistochemical studies to confirm the diagnosis. To our
knowledge, this is the first reported case of using FISH as an ancillary
technique to confirm the cytologic diagnosis of this tumor.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17636487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Surg Orthop Adv. 2007 Summer;16(2):84-8.

Ewing's sarcoma of the hip presenting as a benign cystic lesion.

Papagelopoulos PJ(1), Mavrogenis AF, Benetos IS, Papaparaskeva K, Galanis EC,
Soucacos PN.

Author information: 
(1)Athens University Medical School, Neo Psychikon, Athens, Greece. pjp@hol.gr

Comment in
    J Surg Orthop Adv. 2007 Winter;16(4):207; author reply 207.

A 14-year-old girl with a Ewing's sarcoma of the left femoral head and neck is
presented. The imaging features mimicked a benign cystic lesion. Biopsy and
molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis. The patient was treated with
chemotherapy, wide tumor resection, and proximal femoral reconstruction using an 
allograft-prosthesis composite. Differential diagnosis, imaging, and pathologic
features of Ewing's sarcoma are discussed.

PMID: 17592716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Lancet Oncol. 2007 Jul;8(7):595-602.

Efficacy of trabectedin (ecteinascidin-743) in advanced pretreated myxoid
liposarcomas: a retrospective study.

Grosso F(1), Jones RL, Demetri GD, Judson IR, Blay JY, Le Cesne A, Sanfilippo R, 
Casieri P, Collini P, Dileo P, Spreafico C, Stacchiotti S, Tamborini E, Tercero
JC, Jimeno J, D'Incalci M, Gronchi A, Fletcher JA, Pilotti S, Casali PG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Medicine Department, Adult Sarcoma Medical Treatment Unit, IRCCS
Foundation-National Cancer Institute, Milan, Italy.
federica.grosso@istitutotumori.mi.it

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2007 Jul;8(7):565-7.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have suggested that trabectedin (ecteinascidin-743) 
could have antitumour activity in soft-tissue sarcoma. We aimed to study the
usefulness of trabectedin in the treatment of patients with myxoid liposarcomas, 
a subtype of liposarcoma that is associated with specific chromosomal
translocations t(12;16)(q13;p11) or t(12;22)(q13;q12) that result in the
formation of DDIT3-FUS or DDIT3-EWSR1 fusion proteins.
METHODS: 51 patients with advanced pretreated myxoid liposarcoma who started
treatment with trabectedin between April 4, 2001, and Sept 18, 2006 at five
institutions in a compassionate-use programme were analysed retrospectively.
Centralised radiological and pathological reviews were done for most patients.
Trabectedin was given either as a 24-h continuous infusion or as a 3-h infusion, 
every 21 days, at 1.1-1.5 mg(2). 558 courses of trabectedin were given in total, 
with a median of ten courses for each patient (range 1-23). The primary endpoints
were response rate and progression-free survival, and the secondary endpoint was 
overall survival.
FINDINGS: According to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST),
after a median follow-up of 14.0 months (IQR 8.7-20.0), two patients had complete
responses (CR) and 24 patients had partial responses (PR); the overall response
was 51% (95% CI 36-65). Five patients had early progressive disease. In 17 of the
23 patients who achieved PR or CR as defined by RECIST and who had centralised
radiological review, tissue-density changes, consisting of a decrease in tumour
density on CT scan or a decrease in contrast enhancement on MRI (or both),
preceded tumour shrinkage. Median progression-free survival was 14.0 months
(13.1-21.0), and progression-free survival at 6 months was 88% (79-95).
INTERPRETATION: Trabectedin was associated with antitumour activity in this
series of patients with myxoid liposarcoma. The noted patterns of tumour response
were such that tissue density changes occurred before tumour shrinkage in several
patients. In some patients, tissue-density changes only were seen. Long-lasting
tumour control was noted in responsive patients. The compassionate-use programme 
is still ongoing. This analysis has resulted in the initiation of two prospective
studies to assess the role of trabectedin in the treatment of patients with
myxoid liposarcoma in preoperative and metastatic settings. Furthermore, the
selective mechanism of action for trabectedin in this translocation-related
sarcoma is being studied.

PMID: 17586092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biochem J. 2007 Sep 15;406(3):519-26.

The EWS-Oct-4 fusion gene encodes a transforming gene.

Lee J(1), Kim JY, Kang IY, Kim HK, Han YM, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science,
Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, South Korea.

The t(6;22)(p21;q12) translocation associated with human bone and soft-tissue
tumours results in a chimaeric molecule fusing the NTD (N-terminal domain) of the
EWS (Ewing's sarcoma) gene to the CTD (C-terminal domain) of the Oct-4
(octamer-4) embryonic gene. Since the N-terminal domains of EWS and Oct-4 are
structurally different, in the present study we have assessed the functional
consequences of the EWS-Oct-4 fusion. We find that this chimaeric gene encodes a 
nuclear protein which binds DNA with the same sequence specificity as the
parental Oct-4 protein. Comparison of the transactivation properties of EWS-Oct-4
and Oct-4 indicates that the former has higher transactivation activity for a
known target reporter gene containing Oct-4 binding. Deletion analysis of the
functional domains of EWS-Oct-4 indicates that the EWS (NTD), the POU domain and 
the CTD of EWS-Oct-4 are necessary for full transactivation potential. EWS-Oct-4 
induced the expression of fgf-4 (fibroblast growth factor 4) and nanog, which are
potent mitogens as well as Oct-4 downstream target genes whose promoters contain 
potential Oct-4-binding sites. Finally, ectopic expression of EWS-Oct-4 in
Oct-4-null ZHBTc4 ES (embryonic stem) cells resulted in increased tumorigenic
growth potential in nude mice. These results suggest that the oncogenic effect of
the t(6;22) translocation is due to the EWS-Oct-4 chimaeric protein and that
fusion of the EWS NTD to the Oct-4 DNA-binding domain produces a transforming
chimaeric product.

PMCID: PMC2049031
PMID: 17564582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Jun;60(6):674-80.

Ewing family of tumours involving the vulva and vagina: report of a series of
four cases.

McCluggage WG(1), Sumathi VP, Nucci MR, Hirsch M, Dal Cin P, Wells M, Flanagan
AM, Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Group of Hospitals Trust, Belfast, Northern
Ireland. glenn.mccluggage@bll.n-i.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumour
(pPNET) are now regarded as two morphological ends of a spectrum of neoplasms,
characterised by a t(11;22) or other related chromosomal translocation involving 
the EWS gene on chromosome 22 and referred to as Ewing family of tumours (EFTs). 
EFTs are extremely rare in the vulva and vagina, a review of the literature
revealing only 13 previously reported possible cases, most of which have not had 
molecular confirmation. In this study, four new cases of EFTs involving the vulva
(three cases) or vagina (one case) are reported.
RESULTS: The tumours occurred in women aged 19, 20, 30 and 40 years and ranged in
size from 3 to 8 cm. Morphologically, all neoplasms had a lobulated architecture 
and were composed of solid aggregates of cells. In one case, occasional rosettes 
were formed. In all the tumours, there was diffuse membranous staining with CD99;
nuclear positivity with FLI-1 was present in two cases. Three cases were focally 
positive with the broad-spectrum cytokeratin AE1/3, all were diffusely positive
with vimentin and all were desmin negative. In two cases, a t(11;22) (q24;q12)
(EWSR1-FLI-1) chromosomal translocation was demonstrated by reverse
transcriptase-PCR (one case) and fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) (one
case), and in another case a rearrangement of the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 was
demonstrated by FISH. In the other case, a variety of molecular studies did not
reveal a translocation involving the EWS gene but this tumour, on the balance of 
probability, is still considered to represent a neoplasm in the EFTs. Follow-up
in two cases revealed that one patient developed pulmonary metastasis and died
and another is alive without disease at 12 months.
CONCLUSIONS: This report expands the published literature regarding EFTs
involving the vulva and vagina and stresses the importance of molecular
techniques in firmly establishing the diagnosis, especially when these neoplasms 
arise at unusual sites.

PMCID: PMC1955083
PMID: 17557870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Curr Opin Oncol. 2007 Jul;19(4):371-6.

Update on chondrosarcomas.

Chow WA(1).

Author information: 
(1)City of Hope Medical Center, Division of Medical Oncology & Therapeutics
Research, Duarte, CA 91010, USA. wchow@coh.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This paper reviews recent molecular, biologic, developmental
therapeutic, and clinical findings in conventional and variant chondrosarcomas.
RECENT FINDINGS: The prognosis of chondrosarcomas traditionally correlates with
histologic grade and adequacy of surgery. Newer markers of cell differentiation, 
activation, genetics, and cell signaling may offer important prognostic
information. Translational research has validated platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor, estrogen signaling, matrix metalloproteinase-1, histone deacetylase,
methylthioadenosine phosphorylase, and vascular endothelial growth factor-A as
potential therapeutic targets. Bisphosphonates may also possess important
antitumoral effects. Molecular studies have established that extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma is a unique entity defined by the presence of a fusion gene
between the orphan nuclear receptor, CHN/NOR1, and a promiscuous partner, most
commonly EWSR1. Clinical studies have shown that development of second
malignancies is an uncommon but real risk for chondrosarcoma survivors; the
benefit of chemotherapy for dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas remains
questionable; and late recurrences of clear cell chondrosarcomas emphasize the
need for long-term follow up.
SUMMARY: Chondrosarcomas are a heterogeneous group of bone and soft tissue
tumors. Recent advances in molecular diagnostics, pathobiology, and developmental
therapeutics will aid both scientists and clinicians in improving the
classification and therapy of this diverse family of cartilaginous tumors.

PMID: 17545802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2007 Oct;133(10):749-59. Epub 2007 May 25.

Microsatellite instability in Ewing tumor is not associated with loss of mismatch
repair protein expression.

Alldinger I(1), Schaefer KL, Goedde D, Ottaviano L, Dirksen U, Ranft A, Juergens 
H, Gabbert HE, Knoefel WT, Poremba C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Pediatric Surgery,
Heinrich-Heine-University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Only few clinical factors predict the prognosis of patients with Ewing tumors.
Unfavorable outcome is associated with primary metastatic disease, age > 15
years, tumor volume above 200 ml, and the histological response to chemotherapy. 
The aim of this study was to elucidate the prevalence and clinical impact of
microsatellite instability (MSI) together with the relation between MSI and
mismatch repair protein expression in Ewing tumors. DNA from 61 primary Ewing
tumors and 11 Ewing tumor cell lines was extracted and microsatellite analysis
for the detection of instability or loss of heterozygosity was performed for the 
five markers of the Bethesda panel BAT25, BAT26, D5S346, D2S123, and D17S250,
which represents the established marker panel for the analysis of hereditary
non-polyposis colorectal carcinoma (HNPCC) patients. In addition, single
nucleotide repeat regions of the two tumor genes BAX and transforming growth
factor receptor II (TGFBR2) were also included. All of the 61 samples were
suitable for LOH analysis and 55 for the determination of MSI-status. LOH of
these microsatellite markers was detected in 9 of the 61 patients (14.8%). Over
all, genetic instability, i.e. MSI and/or LOH, was detected in 17 tumors (27.9%).
One out of the 11 tumor cell lines (STA ET1) was characterized by instability of 
all the five Bethesda markers, while from primary tumor samples, only one showed 
MSI in more than one microsatellite marker (D5S346 and D17S250, MSI-high). Eight 
of the fifty-five patients (14.5%) showed instability of one microsatellite locus
(MSI-low). No instability was detected in BAT26, D2S123, BAX and TGFBR2. There
was no significant correlation between MSI and loss of expression of mismatch
repair proteins MLH1, MSH2, or MSH6. The impairment of the p53 signaling pathway 
(expression of TP53 and/or MDM2 by immunohistochemistry) was significantly
associated with reduced overall survival (15 of 49 patients (30.6%), P = 0.0410, 
log-rank test). We conclude that MSI is not prevalent in Ewing tumor and that the
nature of instability differs from the form observed in colorectal carcinoma, the
model tumor of MSI. This is documented by the different pattern of MSI (no BAT26 
instability) in Ewing tumors and the lack of a strict correlation between
MSI-high and loss of expression of MSH2, MSH6 and MLH1.

PMID: 17530287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2007 Jun;16(2):108-11.

Primary Ewing sarcoma of the brain: a case report and literature review.

Kazmi SA(1), Perry A, Pressey JG, Wellons JC, Hammers Y, Palmer CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Ewing sarcoma, along with peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor, belongs to 
a tumor family that shares clinicopathologic and molecular genetic features,
including the characteristic chromosomal translocation that results in the fusion
of the EWS gene on 22q12 to either the FLI1 gene on 11q24 or other Ets family
transcription factor gene, such as the ERG gene on 21q22. In contrast, such
translocations are not found in central primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(cPNETs), such as medulloblastoma and supratentorial PNET. Ewing sarcoma has only
rarely been noted to primarily involve the central nervous system-extraosseous
Ewing sarcoma (CNS-EES). We report a case of a 7-year-old girl with an anterior
cranial fossa mass. Pathology showed a primitive small blue cell tumor with focal
Homer Wright rosette formation. The positive membranous immunostaining for CD99
and the EWS-FLI1 fusion demonstrated by fluorescence in situ hybridization
studies confirmed the diagnosis of CNS-EES. Although CNS-EES may look identical
to cPNETs, these tumors differ in histogenesis, molecular characteristics, and
clinical behavior. Demonstration of characteristic translocations by molecular
studies differentiates CNS-EES from cPNET and help clinicians make informed
decisions regarding therapy.

PMID: 17525681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Diagn Cytopathol. 2007 Jun;35(6):353-7.

Primary Ewing sarcoma/PNET of the kidney: fine-needle aspiration, histology, and 
dual color break apart FISH Assay.

Kang SH(1), Perle MA, Nonaka D, Zhu H, Chan W, Yang GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University Medical Center, New York, New
York, USA.

A 34-year-old previously healthy Hispanic man presented with lower back pain. CT 
scan revealed an 8-cm space-occupying lesion in the superior pole of the left
kidney with numerous small lytic lesions in the skull, vertebrae, ribs, and
pelvic bones. CT-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy revealed a high-grade
primitive small round cell tumor with the tumor cells being strongly positive for
CD99 and vimentin. The patient subsequently underwent a left nephrectomy.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis using a DNA probe for the Ewing
Sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) on chromosome 22g12 revealed a rearrangement 
of the EWSR1 locus. The diagnosis of primary Ewing sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney was established.

PMID: 17497665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cancer. 2007 Jun 25;111(3):192-9.

Cytologic diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor with paired
prospective molecular genetic analysis.

Sanati S(1), Lu DW, Schmidt E, Perry A, Dehner LP, Pfeifer JD.

Author information: 
(1)Lauren V Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Barnes-Jewish and Saint
Louis Children's Hospitals, Washington University Medical Center, St Louis, MO
63110-1093, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET), since its 
characterization immunophenotypically and cytogenetically, has emerged as one of 
most common sarcomas of childhood. Currently, it is recognized that EWS/PNET can 
occur in any number of extraosseous sites and is one of several distinctive tumor
types with an EWS translocation. In the past, the pathologic diagnosis of
EWS/PNET relied on an open biopsy with the application of various ancillary
studies, ranging from periodic acid-Schiff stain to molecular testing, but the
tumor increasingly is diagnosed on the basis of cytologic specimens alone.
METHODS: The authors report 3 cases of EWS/PNET in patients aged 11 years to 53
years. These 3 patients had tumors that involved the parotid gland, cervical soft
tissue, and pelvis, and were diagnosed by cytologic evaluation of fine-needle
aspiration (FNA) biopsy material alone. The FNA materials also were evaluated
prospectively by fluorescence in situ hybridization and/or reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The results emphasized the diagnostic utility of FNA biopsy material for
morphologic and molecular analysis without compromising conventional cytologic
and immunocytochemical analysis, and that prospective molecular testing of FNA
specimens has utility in routine practice although it is subject to many of the
same limitations that impact molecular analysis when applied to conventional
tissue biopsy specimens.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results demonstrated that molecular genetic techniques
can provide clinically useful ancillary information for FNA specimens when
cytologic features and/or immunophenotype are equivocal on the basis of limited
sampling or secondary changes, such as hemorrhage and/or necrosis.

PMID: 17487851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Mol Med (Berl). 2007 Sep;85(9):1015-29. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

EWS/FLI-1 oncoprotein subtypes impose different requirements for transformation
and metastatic activity in a murine model.

González I(1), Vicent S, de Alava E, Lecanda F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Adhesion and Metastasis Laboratory, Center for Applied
Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra, Pamplona, 31080, Navarra, Spain.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (EWS/PNET) are characterized by
specific chromosomal translocations most often generating a chimeric EWS/FLI-1
gene. Depending on the number of juxtaposed exons assembled, several fusion types
have been described with different incidences and prognoses. To assess the impact
of each fusion type on the specific phenotypic, tumorigenic, and metastatic
features of EWS/PNET, we developed an amenable system using a murine mesenchymal 
multipotent C3H10T1/2 cell line. Upon transduction of EWS/FLI-1, cells acquired
dramatic morphological changes in vitro, including a smaller size and
"neurite-like" membrane elongations. Chimeric fusion proteins conferred oncogenic
properties in vitro, including anchorage-independent growth and an increased rate
of proliferation. Furthermore, EWS/FLI-1 expression blocked mineralization, with 
concomitant repression of osteoblastic genes, and induced a dramatic repression
of the adipocytic differentiation program. Moreover, EWS/FLI-1 promoted an
aberrant neural phenotype by the de novo expression of specific neural genes. The
intramuscular injection of transduced cells led to tumor development and the
induction of overt osteolytic lesions. Analogously, to what was observed in human
tumors, type 2 EWS/FLI-1 cells formed primary tumors in immunodeficient mice with
a higher incidence and a lower latency than cells bearing types 1 and 3 fusions. 
By contrast, cells expressing types 2 and 3 fusions showed specific metastatic
activity with a higher number of macroscopic metastases in soft tissues and
osteolytic lesions in the limbs as compared to type-1-expressing cells.
Therefore, the structure of each oncoprotein strongly influenced its
tumorigenicity and metastagenicity. Thus, this model provides a basis for
understanding the genetic determinants involved in Ewing tumor development and
metastatic activity and represents a cellular system to analyze other
oncoproteins involved in human sarcomagenesis.

PMID: 17453169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cell Res. 2007 Apr;17(4):286-8.

Ewings family oncoproteins: drunk, disorderly and in search of partners.

Lee KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Kowloon, Hong Kong, SAR China. bokaw@ust.hk

PMID: 17426699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e122.

Signature-based small molecule screening identifies cytosine arabinoside as an
EWS/FLI modulator in Ewing sarcoma.

Stegmaier K(1), Wong JS, Ross KN, Chow KT, Peck D, Wright RD, Lessnick SL, Kung
AL, Golub TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Children's 
Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.

BACKGROUND: The presence of tumor-specific mutations in the cancer genome
represents a potential opportunity for pharmacologic intervention to therapeutic 
benefit. Unfortunately, many classes of oncoproteins (e.g., transcription
factors) are not amenable to conventional small-molecule screening. Despite the
identification of tumor-specific somatic mutations, most cancer therapy still
utilizes nonspecific, cytotoxic drugs. One illustrative example is the treatment 
of Ewing sarcoma. Although the EWS/FLI oncoprotein, present in the vast majority 
of Ewing tumors, was characterized over ten years ago, it has never been
exploited as a target of therapy. Previously, this target has been intractable to
modulation with traditional small-molecule library screening approaches. Here we 
describe a gene expression-based approach to identify compounds that induce a
signature of EWS/FLI attenuation. We hypothesize that screening small-molecule
libraries highly enriched for FDA-approved drugs will provide a more rapid path
to clinical application.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: A gene expression signature for the EWS/FLI off state was
determined with microarray expression profiling of Ewing sarcoma cell lines with 
EWS/FLI-directed RNA interference. A small-molecule library enriched for
FDA-approved drugs was screened with a high-throughput, ligation-mediated
amplification assay with a fluorescent, bead-based detection. Screening
identified cytosine arabinoside (ARA-C) as a modulator of EWS/FLI. ARA-C reduced 
EWS/FLI protein abundance and accordingly diminished cell viability and
transformation and abrogated tumor growth in a xenograft model. Given the poor
outcomes of many patients with Ewing sarcoma and the well-established ARA-C
safety profile, clinical trials testing ARA-C are warranted.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that a gene expression-based approach to
small-molecule library screening can identify, for rapid clinical testing,
candidate drugs that modulate previously intractable targets. Furthermore, this
is a generic approach that can, in principle, be applied to the identification of
modulators of any tumor-associated oncoprotein in the rare pediatric
malignancies, but also in the more common adult cancers.

PMCID: PMC1851624
PMID: 17425403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Clin Invest. 2007 May;117(5):1314-23. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Ewing sarcoma gene EWS is essential for meiosis and B lymphocyte development.

Li H(1), Watford W, Li C, Parmelee A, Bryant MA, Deng C, O'Shea J, Lee SB.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville
Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Ewing sarcoma gene EWS encodes a putative RNA-binding protein with proposed roles
in transcription and splicing, but its physiological role in vivo remains
undefined. Here, we have generated Ews-deficient mice and demonstrated that EWS
is required for the completion of B cell development and meiosis. Analysis of
Ews(-/-) lymphocytes revealed a cell-autonomous defect in precursor B lymphocyte 
(pre-B lymphocyte) development. During meiosis, Ews-null spermatocytes were
deficient in XY bivalent formation and showed reduced meiotic recombination,
resulting in massive apoptosis and complete arrest in gamete maturation.
Inactivation of Ews in mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in premature cellular
senescence, and the mutant animals showed hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation.
Finally, we showed that EWS interacts with lamin A/C and that loss of EWS results
in a reduced lamin A/C expression. Our findings reveal essential functions for
EWS in pre-B cell development and meiosis, with proposed roles in DNA pairing and
recombination/repair mechanisms. Furthermore, we demonstrate a novel role of EWS 
in cellular senescence, possibly through its interaction and modulation of lamin 
A/C.

PMCID: PMC1838927
PMID: 17415412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2007 May;39(10):589-94. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Ewing Sarcoma tumor cells express CD34: implications for autologous stem cell
transplantation.

Yaniv I(1), Stein J, Luria D, Cohen IJ, Liberzon E, Manor S, Grunshpan A,
Sverdlov Y, Kodman Y, Issakov J, Feinmesser M, Zaizov R, Avigad S.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, 
Petah Tikva 49202, Israel.

The significance of tumor cell contamination in marrow and peripheral blood stem 
cell (PBSC) collections of patients with solid tumors remains controversial.
Various methods have been developed to purge tumor cells from autologous stem
cell products, including CD34+ selection. PBSC harvests from patients with Ewing 
family of tumors (EFT) were analyzed for contaminating tumor cells prior and
after CD34+ selection using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and flow cytometry (FC) analyzes. The expression of CD34 was studied by 
RT-PCR and FC in 14 primary tumors and 13 PBSC harvests, respectively. Tumor
cells were identified in the harvests by both methods. In two patients,
contaminating tumor cells were evident by RT-PCR only after positive selection.
FC analysis confirmed a higher level of tumor cells in the CD34+ fraction. In an 
attempt to explore this finding, expression of CD34 was detected in 93% of
primary tumors and 67% of contaminated harvests. As CD34 is expressed on EFT
cells, these cells may be enriched following CD34+ selection of harvests,
although the total number of tumor cells is reduced. Other methods of purging,
rather than CD34+ selection, should be explored in patients with EFT undergoing
autologous stem cell transplantation.

PMID: 17369866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cancer Lett. 2007 Aug 28;254(1):1-10. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

The Biology of Ewing sarcoma.

Riggi N(1), Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Sarcomas account for less than 10% of all human malignancies that are believed to
originate from as yet poorly defined mesenchymal progenitor cells. They
constitute some of the most aggressive adult and childhood cancers in that they
have a high metastatic proclivity and are typically refractory to conventional
chemo- and radiation therapy. Ewing's sarcoma is a member of Ewing's family
tumors (ESFT) and the second most common solid bone and soft tissue malignancy of
children and young adults. It is associated in 85% of cases with the
t(11;22)(q24:q12) chromosomal translocation that generates fusion of the 5'
segment of the EWS gene with the 3' segment of the ETS family gene FLI-1. The
resulting EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is believed to behave as an aberrant
transcriptional activator that contributes to ESFT development by altering the
expression of its target genes in a permissive cellular environment. Although
ESFTs are among the best studied sarcomas, the mechanisms involved in
EWS-FLI-1-induced transformation require further elucidation and the primary
cells from which ESFTs originate need to be identified. This review will
highlight some of the most recent discoveries in the field of Ewing sarcoma
biology and origins.

PMID: 17250957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Sci STKE. 2007 Jan 16;2007(369):pe1.

Proline-rich regions in transcriptional complexes: heading in many directions.

Neduva V(1), Russell RB.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg,
Germany.

Although many protein complexes are now known, the precise details of how each
component operates are rarely understood. Through a combination of bioinformatics
and analysis of gene-trapped mouse clones, Enkhmandakh et al. were able to deduce
the modular function for a part of Ssdp1, a crucial component of the Ldb1
transcriptional complex, which plays a central role in mammalian head
development. A proline-rich module from Ssdp1 is likely responsible for
transactivation, and this region is curiously mobile, occurring in different
proteins in different species. The results underscore the importance of protein
modularity in complex organization, as well as the role of irregular or
disordered parts of proteins in crucial biological processes.

PMID: 17228057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Jan;131(1):152-6.

Clear cell sarcoma of tendons and aponeuroses: a review.

Dim DC(1), Cooley LD, Miranda RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Missouri at Kansas City School of
Medicine/Truman Medical Center, 2301 Holmes St, Kansas City, MO 64108-2677, USA.

Clear cell sarcoma of tendons and aponeuroses, also referred to as malignant
melanoma of soft parts, is a rare malignancy derived from neural crest cells. It 
usually presents in the distal lower extremities of young adults, frequently
attached to tendons or aponeuroses. It behaves like a high-grade soft tissue
sarcoma and is associated with poor overall survival. Magnetic resonance imaging 
studies of the lesion reveal T1 hypointensity, T2 hyperintensity, and gadolinium 
uptake. Grossly, the tumor is usually circumscribed with a histologic pattern of 
uniform polygonal to fusiform cells with clear to pale eosinophilic cytoplasm
divided into variably sized clusters by fibrous septa. Immunohistochemical
studies in most cases show that the neoplastic cells are positive with HMB-45 and
react with antibody against S100 protein. Most cases show a reciprocal
cytogenetic translocation t(12;22)(q13;q12) that creates a unique chimeric fusion
EWSR1/ATF1 gene transcript. Metastasis occurs mainly to regional lymph nodes and 
lungs. Poor prognostic indicators include a tumor size equal to or more than 5
cm, presence of metastasis, and necrosis. The mainstay of treatment is wide
excision of the tumor. The use of sentinel lymph node biopsy may become an
important procedure in detecting occult regional metastasis and guiding the
extent of surgery. The beneficial effects of adjuvant chemotherapy and
radiotherapy have not been fully evaluated. This article provides a short
overview of the current knowledge of clear cell sarcoma of tendons and
aponeuroses.

PMID: 17227118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 9;104(2):479-84. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

Multiple aromatic side chains within a disordered structure are critical for
transcription and transforming activity of EWS family oncoproteins.

Ng KP(1), Potikyan G, Savene RO, Denny CT, Uversky VN, Lee KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear
Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, S.A.R. China.

Chromosomal translocations involving the N-terminal approximately 250 residues of
the Ewings sarcoma (EWS) oncogene produce a group of EWS fusion proteins (EFPs)
that cause several distinct human cancers. EFPs are potent transcriptional
activators and interact with other proteins required for mRNA biogenesis,
indicating that EFPs induce tumorigenesis by perturbing gene expression. Although
EFPs were discovered more than a decade ago, molecular analysis has been greatly 
hindered by the repetitive EWS activation domain (EAD) structure, containing
multiple degenerate hexapeptide repeats (consensus SYGQQS) with a conserved
tyrosine residue. By exploiting total gene synthesis, we have been able to
systematically mutagenize the EAD and determine the effect on transcriptional
activation by EWS/ATF1 and cellular transformation by EWS/Fli1. In both assays,
we find the following requirements for EAD function. First, multiple tyrosine
residues are essential. Second, phenylalanine can effectively substitute for
tyrosine, showing that an aromatic ring can confer EAD function in the absence of
tyrosine phosphorylation. Third, there is little requirement for specific peptide
sequences and, thus, overall sequence composition (and not the degenerate
hexapeptide repeat) confers EAD activity. Consistent with the above findings, we 
also report that the EAD is intrinsically disordered. However, a sensitive
computational predictor of natural protein disorder (PONDR VL3) identifies
potential molecular recognition features that are tyrosine-dependent and that
correlate well with EAD function. In summary we have uncovered several molecular 
features of the EAD that will impact future studies of the broader EFP family and
molecular recognition by complex intrinsically disordered proteins.

PMCID: PMC1766410
PMID: 17202261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cancer Lett. 2007 Jun 18;251(1):158-63. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

Fusion genes in angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma.

Hallor KH(1), Micci F, Meis-Kindblom JM, Kindblom LG, Bacchini P, Mandahl N,
Mertens F, Panagopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
Karolin.Hansen_Hallor@med.lu.se <Karolin.Hansen_Hallor@med.lu.se>

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue tumor of low
malignant potential and uncertain differentiation. Only three genetically
investigated cases of AFH have been reported. Two of them displayed a FUS-ATF1
fusion gene and one showed an EWSR1-ATF1 chimera. Using RT-PCR analysis, we have 
identified the EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcript, and delineated the genomic
breakpoints, in two new cases of AFH. Previously, the EWSR1-ATF1 fusion protein
has been suggested to activate expression of the MITF-M transcript, and therefore
the expression pattern of the MITF gene was studied. The MITF-M transcript was
not detected in either AFH, in line with the finding that the co-activator SOX10 
was not expressed. Thus, of the five AFH that have been molecularly analyzed to
date, two have displayed a FUS-ATF1 fusion gene and three have shown an
EWSR1-ATF1 chimera. There is no apparent correlation between the type of fusion
gene and clinicopathologic features. Nonetheless, RT-PCR for these fusion
transcripts remains a valuable diagnostic adjunct in the distinction between AFH 
and other soft tissue tumors or metastases that may simulate it.

PMID: 17188428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Jan 1;172(1):12-22.

Detection and molecular cytogenetic characterization of a novel ring chromosome
in a histological variant of Ewing sarcoma.

Szuhai K(1), IJszenga M, Tanke HJ, Taminiau AH, de Schepper A, van Duinen SG,
Rosenberg C, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Post
Zone S-01-P, PO Box 9600, 2300RC Leiden, The Netherlands. k.szuhai@lumc.nl
<k.szuhai@lumc.nl>

Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuro-ectodermal tumor (PNET) is a round-cell 
sarcoma that may show varying degrees of neuro-ectodermal differentiation. These 
tumors are identified by a characteristic round-cell morphology and
immunohistochemical profile, as well as by specific translocations involving the 
EWS gene on chromosome 22 and the 3' portion of the E26 transformation-specific
family of transcription factors. These translocations result in fusion proteins
that act as aberrant transcription factors. The majority of Ewing sarcoma cases
are characterized by a balanced t(11;22). Specific chromosomal abnormalities
often correlate with distinct morphologic or phenotypic subtypes of tumors and
play an important role in prognosis. Here we describe the molecular cytogenetic
investigation of a case of Ewing sarcoma in the proximal humerus of a 39-year-old
male using COBRA (combined binary ratio labelling) fluorescent in situ
hybridization karyotyping, array comparative genomic hybridization, and EWS-gene 
specific fluorescence in situ hybridization. Multiple chromosomal aberrations
were identified, including a der(22)r(20;22), resulting in an amplification of
the proximal region of the EWS gene. This is the first time that both
translocation and amplification involving the EWS gene and an unidentified gene
are described. This case adds to the spectrum of both morphology and genetic
rearrangements in Ewing sarcoma, and shows the importance of combined molecular
cytogenetic approaches in identifying uncommon rearrangements in sarcomas.

PMID: 17175374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2006 Dec 18;38(6):623-7.

[Construction of recombinant adenoviral vector containing gene of EWS-FLI1 and
antitumor immunity of its modified dentritic cell in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Qu HY(1), Guo W, He XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Soft Tissue and Bone Tumor Therapeutic Center, Peking University People's
Hospital, Bejjing, China. wwwqhy@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To construct an adenoviral vector containing cDNA of EWS-FLI1 and
detect its expression in peripheral blood mononeuclear cell(PBMC). To Investigate
the antitumor immunity in vitro of the EWS-FLI1 gene modified-dendritic cells.
METHODS: The EWS-FLI1 cDNA in plasmid Pec1/ EWS-FLI1 was digested and subcloned
into the shuttle plasimid padtrack-cmv. The shuttle plasmid and the bone plasmid 
pADeasy-1 were cotransformed into BJ5183 cells. The recombinant plasmid was
generated by homologous recombination in BJ5183 cells. The positive clone was
obtained by digestion and electrophoresis. Transforming the recombinant plasmid
into "293 cells" by lipofectamine method. Adenoviruses with high titer and purity
were obtained by amplifying in the"293 cells" on a large scale and
ultra-centrifugation in CsCL step gradient solutions. The cytotoxic activity of
stimulated T cells to Ewing sarcoma cells was detected by (51)Cr release assay.
RESULTS: PCR showed that the adenovirus contained EWS-FLI1 cDNA. After the PBMC
were transfected by Ad EWS-FLI1, the EWS-FLI1 mRNA was detected by RT-PCR. The
antigen-specific CTL was induced successfully by the EWS-FLI1 gene modified-DC.
The vigorous antigen-specific CTL response against A673 cells was detected by
(51)Cr release assay. The killing percentage was 35.18%+/-0.0128% at
effector-target ratio 40:1, which was more efficient than that of the control.
CONCLUSION: The recombinant adenovirus was successfully constructed and could
efficient express EWS-FLI1 in PBMC. After T lymphocytes were stimulated by DCs
modified with EWS-FLI1 gene, the specific CTL response against Ewing's sarcoma
cell line A 673 in vitro was observed successfully. (51)Cr release assay showed
that there was significant difference between the experimental group and the
control group.

PMID: 17173084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cell Cycle. 2006 Dec;5(23):2753-9. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Expression of EWS-ETS fusions in NIH3T3 cells reveals significant differences to 
Ewing's sarcoma.

Braunreiter CL(1), Hancock JD, Coffin CM, Boucher KM, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas contain specific chromosomal translocations that fuse EWS to ETS
family members, including FLI, ERG, FEV, ETV1 and ETV4. Prior work has suggested 
that functional differences exist between some of these EWS-ETS fusions. However,
as the cell of origin of Ewing's sarcoma is unknown, this prior work was
conducted in NIH3T3 cells, which have not been validated as an appropriate model 
for the study of EWS-ETS fusions. To determine if NIH3T3 cells are a good model
for Ewing's sarcoma, we introduced all five EWS-ETS fusions into these cells, and
analyzed their phenotypes and gene expression patterns. EWS-FLI, EWS-ERG, and
EWS-FEV caused NIH3T3 cells to exhibit anchorage independent growth whereas
EWS-ETV1 and EWS-ETV4 did not. In contrast, all the EWS-ETS fusions induced tumor
formation in a xenograft model. We defined the core transcriptional profile of
the EWS-ETS fusions using cDNA microarrays, and compared these to data derived
from patient-derived Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. The NIH3T3 model did not
recapitulate the gene expression pattern of bona fide Ewing's sarcoma. Based on
these results, we conclude that while there may be functional differences between
the various EWS-ETS fusions, the NIH3T3 cell model is inadequate to study the
gene expression pattern induced by EWS-ETS proteins in Ewing's sarcoma. Thus,
data derived from the NIH3T3 model system needs to be appropriately validated
before they can be accepted as relevant to the human disease.

PMID: 17172842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Histopathology. 2006 Dec;49(6):569-75.

Diagnostic utility of FLI-1 monoclonal antibody and dual-colour, break-apart
probe fluorescence in situ (FISH) analysis in Ewing's sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumour (EWS/PNET). A comparative study with CD99 and FLI-1
polyclonal antibodies.

Mhawech-Fauceglia P(1), Herrmann F, Penetrante R, Beck A, Sait S, Block AM,
Odunsi K, Fisher J, Balos L, Cheney RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer
Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. pmhawech1@yahoo.com

AIMS: To compare the sensitivity and specificity of the recently commercially
available FLI-1 monoclonal (FLI-1m) antibody with the currently used antibodies
[CD99 and FLI-1 polyclonal (FLI-1p)] in the diagnosis of Ewing's
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumour (EWS/PNET) and to determine the
diagnostic value of the EWSR1 (22q12) dual-colour, break-apart rearrangement
probe fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-three cases of well-documented EWS/PNET and 15
non-EWS/PNET cases were retrieved from the archival files. Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) for FLI-1p, FLI-1m and FISH analysis was performed.
RESULTS: The most sensitive and specific test panel for the diagnosis of EWS/PNET
is the combination of CD99 and FLI-1p. FISH had a very high specificity (100%)
but only a moderate sensitivity (50%).
CONCLUSION: The combination of CD99 and FLI-1p is the method of choice for the
diagnosis of EWS/PNET. EWRS1 (22q12) dual-colour, break-apart rearrangement probe
FISH should be used as a confirmatory test in addition to CD99 and FLI1-p due to 
its high specificity.

PMID: 17163841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2006 Nov-Dec;9(6):488-95.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors in unusual sites: confirmation by rt-PCR.

Ahmed AA(1), Nava VE, Pham T, Taubenberger JK, Lichy JH, Sorbara L, Raffeld M,
Mackall CL, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors originating in the palate or adrenal gland are
extremely rare and may cause difficulty in diagnosis. More common tumors primary 
to these sites need to be excluded before one arrives at the correct diagnosis.
We have recently diagnosed 2 such cases. The 1st case was that of a 24-year-old
woman who presented with a swelling in the right side of the hard palate. The 2nd
case was diagnosed in a 28-year-old woman who presented with a mass in the right 
adrenal gland. In both cases, the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma family of tumors was
confirmed by immunohistochemical studies and reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). The hard palate case is the 1st and the adrenal gland
the 3rd case of Ewing sarcoma family of tumors arising in these sites, in which
the diagnosis was confirmed by RT-PCR and/or cytogenetics. Accurate diagnosis of 
Ewing sarcoma family of tumors is crucial for the management of patients, and
when found in such rare locations, diagnosis should be supported by
immunohistochemical and/or molecular genetic studies.

PMID: 17163788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2006;587:41-52.

EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's sarcoma: real targets and collateral damage.

Ban J(1), Siligan C, Kreppel M, Aryee D, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, Kinderspitalgasse 9, A1190 Vienna,
Austria.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) are a clinically and scientifically very 
demanding group of tumors in children and young adults with still unknown
histogenesis. The rate-limiting oncogenic mutation in this disease has been
identified as a chromosomal translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), that leads to the
expression of a chimeric transcription factor, EWS-FLI1. We have studied the
downstream pathway of EWS-FLI1 by a dual strategy including the isolation of
direct target genes from ESFT chromatin and the monitoring of transcriptomic
changes after silencing of EWS-FLI1 by RNA interference. This study has lead to
the identification of several directly EWS-FLI1-regulated genes and the
characterization of their genomic distribution. By comparing several ESFT cell
lines, not only variation in overall gene expression patterns downstream of
EWS-FLIl was observed, but also differential regulation of directly
EWS-FLI1-bound genes. Interestingly, there was variation between members of the
same functional gene families. Studies on CD99, another diagnostic hallmark of
ESFT, in relation to EWS-FLI1 provided additional evidence for context dependence
of fusion protein function. Together, our study represents a first approach to
the separation of essential molecular consequences from noise generated by the
EWS-FLI1 gene rearrangement in ESFT.

PMID: 17163154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Mar;50(3):703-6.

SK-NEP-1 and Rh1 are Ewing family tumor lines.

Smith MA(1), Morton CL, Phelps D, Girtman K, Neale G, Houghton PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA. smithm@ctep.nci.nih.gov

The utility of preclinical models of childhood cancers is contingent upon
reliably classifying them with their corresponding clinical counterparts.
Molecular tools such as gene expression profiling allow researchers to confirm
the similarity between clinical tumors and preclinical models. We describe the
use of gene expression profiling to show that SK-NEP-1, a cell line previously
thought to represent anaplastic Wilms tumor, is instead related to Ewing sarcoma.
RT-PCR confirmed that SK-NEP-1 expresses EWS-FLI1 gene fusion transcripts
characteristic of Ewing sarcoma, and DNA sequencing demonstrated the joining of
exon 7 of EWS with exon 5 of FLI1 for these transcripts. Rh1, which was
previously categorized as an alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma cell line, also has a gene
expression profile suggestive of Ewing sarcoma and expresses EWS-FLI1 fusion
transcripts in which exon 7 of EWS is joined with exon 6 of FLI1. These examples 
illustrate the importance of molecularly characterizing pediatric preclinical
models used for testing new agents.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17154184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006 Dec;130(12):1813-8.

Comparative analysis of routine histology, immunohistochemistry, reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, and fluorescence in situ hybridization
in diagnosis of Ewing family of tumors.

Jambhekar NA(1), Bagwan IN, Ghule P, Shet TM, Chinoy RF, Agarwal S, Joshi R,
Amare Kadam PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, 8th Floor, Annex Building,
Parel, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India 4000012. najambhekap@rediffmail.com

CONTEXT: The Ewing family of tumors are often difficult to distinguish from other
malignant small round cell tumors, but more than 90% have EWS-FLI1 chimeric
transcript, which acts as a potential molecular diagnostic marker.
OBJECTIVE: To do a comparative analysis of 32 cases with EWS-FLI1: Ewing family
of tumors (n = 30), desmoplastic small round cell tumor (n = 1), and
undifferentiated sarcoma (n = 1).
DESIGN: The initial diagnosis was made on core biopsy (n = 22) and open biopsy (n
= 4) specimens by using morphology and immunohistochemistry and on fine-needle
aspiration cytology ([FNAC], n = 6) specimens. EWS-FLI1 was detected by reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction on all 32 fresh FNAC samples and by
fluorescence in situ hybridization on 16 paraffin blocks.
RESULTS: The 19 male and 13 female patients had bone (n = 19) or soft tissue (n =
13) tumors. Histologic groups were typical Ewing sarcoma (n = 15), atypical Ewing
sarcoma (n = 4), Askin Rosai tumors (n = 5), desmoplastic small round cell tumor 
(n = 1), undifferentiated sarcoma (n = 1), and cases diagnosed as malignant small
round cell tumors on FNAC (n = 6). All tumors except desmoplastic small round
cell tumor and undifferentiated sarcoma were CD99 positive. EWS-FLI1 by reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction was noted in 15 cases of typical Ewing
sarcoma, 4 cases of atypical Ewing sarcoma, 5 cases of Askin Rosai tumor, and no 
cases of desmoplastic small round cell tumor or undifferentiated sarcoma. With
use of fluorescence in situ hybridization, EWS break was detected in 10 of 11
paraffin blocks used and was negative in desmoplastic small round cell tumor.
CONCLUSIONS: The excellent correlation of routine histologic findings in Ewing
family of tumors with results on immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ
hybridization on archival material and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction on fresh FNAC specimens underscores that the traditional observation on 
routine histologic examination is a time-tested tool. The diagnosis of Ewing
family of tumors can be validated on archival material or fresh biopsy samples,
including those obtained by FNAC.

PMID: 17149955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Hum Pathol. 2007 Feb;38(2):205-11. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Immunohistochemistry of primary malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the kidney: a
potential source of confusion? A study of 30 cases from the National Wilms Tumor 
Study Pathology Center.

Ellison DA(1), Parham DM, Bridge J, Beckwith JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Arkansas Children's Hospital, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA. ellisondalea@uams.edu

Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET) is a rare
primary tumor of the kidney with morphologic features similar to those of other
primitive tumors. Previous studies have shown that these tumors frequently stain 
positively with immunostains against CD99 and FLI-1 and negatively with stains
against WT-1, suggesting that these markers may be used for the distinction
between Wilms tumor and pPNET. We present 30 cases of primary malignant
neuroepithelial tumor with immunohistochemical profiles and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis and show that immunophenotypic
overlap exists between Wilms tumor and pPNET. A subset of 30 neuroepithelial
tumors from the National Wilms Tumor Study originally categorized as putative
pPNETs of the kidney was stained with FLI-1, WT-1, and thyroid transcription
factor-1. Bicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization studies were performed on 19
of the cases. Other data on these tumors were available from a previous study (Am
J Surg Pathol 2001;25:133). Of 7 primary tumors that had the EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcript by RT-PCR, 6 exhibited strong immunopositivity for FLI-1. Nine that
were negative by RT-PCR stained positively with the FLI-1 stain. Five
fusion-negative cases stained with both FLI-1 and WT-1. Three fusion-negative
cases were negative for FLI-1 but positive for WT-1. Five fusion-negative cases
were negative for both FLI-1 and WT-1. Of the 30 cases, 29 were positive for
CD99. Seven cases that were negative for the EWS-FLI-1 fusion by RT-PCR were
positive by fluorescence in situ hybridization. All cases were negative for
thyroid transcription factor-1. Reliance upon immunohistochemistry as the sole
means of ancillary diagnosis in renal pPNET can lead to confusing results. We
recommend molecular fusion studies for clarification of primitive renal tumors
with unexpected immunophenotypic results.

PMID: 17134738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Oct;35(10):634-6.

[Multiplex RT-PCR assay for detecting fusion genes of soft tissue small round
cell tumors using paraffin-embedded and formalin-fixed tissue].

[Article in Chinese]

Qi Y, Chang B, Pang LJ, Liu CX, Hu WH, Li HA, Jiang JF, Gao JF, Wei JY, Li F.

PMID: 17134577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Br J Haematol. 2007 Mar;136(6):767.

Ewing sarcoma diagnosed by fluorescence in situ hybridisation of bone marrow
films.

Ong YL(1), Humphreys M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Ulster Hospital Dundonald, Belfast, UK.
ongly@doctors.org.uk

PMID: 17129230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;12(22):6781-90.

Combined transcriptional and translational targeting of EWS/FLI-1 in Ewing's
sarcoma.

Mateo-Lozano S(1), Gokhale PC, Soldatenkov VA, Dritschilo A, Tirado OM, Notario
V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Department of Radiation Medicine,
V.T. Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington,
District of Columbia 20057-1482, USA.

PURPOSE: To show the efficacy of targeting EWS/FLI-1 expression with a
combination of specific antisense oligonucleotides and rapamycin for the control 
of Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) cell proliferation in vitro and the treatment of mouse
tumor xenografts in vivo.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: EWS cells were simultaneously exposed to EWS/FLI-1-specific 
antisense oligonucleotides and rapamycin for various time periods. After
treatment, the following end points were monitored and evaluated: expression
levels of the EWS/FLI-1 protein, cell proliferation, cell cycle distribution,
apoptotic cell death, caspase activation, and tumor growth in EWS xenografts
implanted in nude mice.
RESULTS: Simultaneous exposure of EWS cells in culture to an EWS/FLI-1-targeted
suppression therapy using specific antisense oligonucleotides and rapamycin
resulted in the activation of a caspase-dependent apoptotic process that involved
the restoration of the transforming growth factor-beta-induced proapoptotic
pathway. In vivo, individual administration of either antisense oligonucleotides 
or rapamycin significantly delayed tumor development, and the combined treatment 
with antisense oligonucleotides and rapamycin caused a considerably stronger
inhibition of tumor growth.
CONCLUSIONS: Concurrent administration of EWS/FLI-1 antisense oligonucleotides
and rapamycin efficiently induced the apoptotic death of EWS cells in culture
through a process involving transforming growth factor-beta. In vivo experiments 
conclusively showed that the combined treatment with antisense oligonucleotides
and rapamycin caused a significant inhibition of tumor growth in mice. These
results provide proof of principle for further exploration of the potential of
this combined therapeutic modality as a novel strategy for the treatment of
tumors of the Ewing's sarcoma family.

PMID: 17121899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Cancer Res. 2006 Nov;4(11):851-9.

NR0B1 is required for the oncogenic phenotype mediated by EWS/FLI in Ewing's
sarcoma.

Kinsey M(1), Smith R, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah, USA.

A number of solid tumors, such as alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma,
and myxoid liposarcoma, are associated with recurrent translocation events that
encode fusion proteins. Ewing's sarcoma is a pediatric tumor that serves as a
prototype for this tumor class. Ewing's sarcomas usually harbor the
(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation. The t(11;22) encodes the EWS/FLI fusion
oncoprotein. EWS/FLI functions as an aberrant transcription factor, but the key
target genes that are involved in oncogenesis are largely unknown. Although some 
target genes have been defined, many of these have been identified in
heterologous model systems with uncertain relevance to the human disease. To
understand the function of EWS/FLI and its targets in a more clinically relevant 
system, we used retroviral-mediated RNAi to "knock-down" the fusion protein in
patient-derived Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. By combining transcriptional
profiling data from three of these lines, we identified a conserved
transcriptional response to EWS/FLI. The gene that was most reproducibly
up-regulated by EWS/FLI was NR0B1. NR0B1 is a developmentally important orphan
nuclear receptor with no previously defined role in oncogenesis. We validated
NR0B1 as an EWS/FLI-dysregulated gene and confirmed its expression in primary
human tumor samples. Functional studies revealed that ongoing NR0B1 expression is
required for the transformed phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma. These studies define a
new role for NR0B1 in oncogenic transformation and emphasize the utility of
analyzing the function of EWS/FLI in Ewing's sarcoma cells.

PMID: 17114343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10824-32.

Oncogenic serine-threonine kinase receptor-associated protein modulates the
function of Ewing sarcoma protein through a novel mechanism.

Anumanthan G(1), Halder SK, Friedman DB, Datta PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center and 
Mass Spectrometry Research Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Although much is known about the oncogenic functions of chimeric Ewing sarcoma
(EWS) fusion proteins that result from chromosomal translocations, the cellular
role of the normal EWS protein is not well characterized. We have previously
identified a WD domain-containing protein, serine-threonine kinase
receptor-associated protein (STRAP), which inhibits transforming growth factor
beta (TGF-beta) signaling through interaction with receptors and Smad7 and
promotes growth and enhances tumorigenicity. Here, we report the interaction
between STRAP and EWS using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization,
time-of-flight and tandem mass spectrometry. Although STRAP is localized in both 
cytoplasm and nucleus, nuclear STRAP colocalizes and associates specifically with
EWS in the nucleus through its NH(2) and COOH termini. We have found that normal 
EWS protein is up-regulated in human cancers, which correlates with the
up-regulation of STRAP in 71% of colorectal cancers and 54% of lung cancers,
suggesting a cooperative role of these two proteins in human cancers. TGF-beta
has no effect on STRAP and EWS interaction. However, EWS, like STRAP, attenuates 
TGF-beta-dependent transcription. STRAP inhibits EWS-dependent p300-mediated
transactivation of EWS target genes, such as ApoCIII and c-fos, in a
TGF-beta-independent manner. Interestingly, we have shown that STRAP blocks the
interaction between EWS and p300, whereas the complex formation between STRAP and
EWS is not affected by p300. These results suggest that STRAP inhibits the
transactivation function of EWS by displacing p300 from the functional
transcriptional complex. Thus, this study provides a novel TGF-beta-independent
function of STRAP and describes a mechanism by which STRAP regulates the function
of oncogenic EWS protein.

PMID: 17108118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Proteomics. 2006 Nov;6(22):5962-72.

An in vitro enzymatic assay coupled to proteomics analysis reveals a new DNA
processing activity for Ewing sarcoma and TAF(II)68 proteins.

Guipaud O(1), Guillonneau F, Labas V, Praseuth D, Rossier J, Lopez B, Bertrand P.

Author information: 
(1)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, Département de Radiobiologie et
Radiopathologie, Fontenay aux Roses, France.

Based on structural and functional similarities, translocated in
liposarcoma/fusion (TLS/FUS) protein, Ewing sarcoma (EWS) protein and human TATA 
binding protein-associated factor (hTAF(II)68) have been grouped in the
TLS-EWS-TAF(II)68 (TET) protein family. Translocations involving their genes lead
to sarcomas. Polypyrimidine tract-binding protein-associated splicing factor
(PSF), although not grouped in this family, presents structural and functional
similarities with TET proteins and is involved in translocation leading to
carcinoma. Beside their role in RNA metabolism, the precise cellular functions of
these multifunctional proteins are not yet fully elucidated. We previously showed
that both TLS/FUS and PSF display activities able to pair homologous DNA on
membrane in an in vitro assay. In the present study, we address the question
whether EWS and hTAF(II)68 also display pairing on membrane activities, and to a 
larger extent whether other proteins also exhibit such activity. We applied the
pairing on membrane assay to 2-DE coupled to MS analysis for a global screening
of DNA pairing on membrane activities. In addition to TLS/FUS and PSF, this test 
allowed us to identify EWS and hTAF(II)68, but no other proteins, indicating a
feature specific to a protein family whose members share extensive structural
similarities. This common activity suggests a role for TET proteins and PSF in
genome plasticity control.

PMID: 17106916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Br J Cancer. 2006 Nov 20;95(10):1326-33. Epub 2006 Oct 31.

Incidence and prognostic value of tumour cells detected by RT-PCR in peripheral
blood stem cell collections from patients with Ewing tumour.

Vermeulen J(1), Ballet S, Oberlin O, Peter M, Pierron G, Longavenne E, Laurence
V, Kanold J, Chastagner P, Lejars O, Blay JY, Marec-Berard P, Michon J, Delattre 
O, Schleiermacher G.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Oncologie Pédiatrique, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

To retrospectively evaluate the incidence of tumour cell contamination of
peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) collections and to correlate these data with
the clinical outcome after high-dose chemotherapy (HDCT) with stem cell rescue in
patients with a high-risk Ewing tumour. Peripheral blood stem cell collections
obtained from 171 patients were analysed. Tumour contamination was assessed by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The files of 88
patients who underwent HDCT followed by PBSC reinfusion were reviewed in detail, 
and their outcome compared to the PBSC RT-PCR results. Seven of 88 PBSC
collections (8%) contained tumour cells as detected by RT-PCR. Peripheral blood
stem cells were collected after a median of five cycles of chemotherapy. No
clinical factor predictive of tumour cell contamination of PBSC harvest could be 
identified. Event-free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS) of the whole
study population were 45.3 % and 51.8 % at 3 years from the date of the graft,
respectively. Forty-five patients relapsed with a median time of 15 months after 
graft, only four of whom had tumour cell contamination of the PBSC harvest.
Tumour cell contamination of PBSC collection is rare and does not seem to be
associated with a significantly poorer EFS or OS in this high-risk population.

PMCID: PMC2360590
PMID: 17088915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Adv Anat Pathol. 2006 Nov;13(6):286-92.

Clear cell sarcoma of tendons and aponeuroses: a historical perspective and
tribute to the man behind the entity.

Meis-Kindblom JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Orthopaedic Hospital NHS Trust, Department of Musculoskeletal Pathology,
Division of Cancer Studies, Department of Pathology, University of Birmingham
Medical School, Birmingham, United Kingdom. jeanne.meiskinblom@roh.nhs.uk

Clear cell sarcoma of tendons and aponeuroses is a unique sarcoma initially
described by Dr Franz M. Enzinger. The tumor has a proclivity to involve the
tendons and aponeuroses of distal extremities of relatively young individuals and
is characterized by multiple local recurrences with late metastases and a high
rate of tumor deaths. Since its seminal description in 1965, there have been many
studies verifying the uniqueness of this entity and probing its differentiation. 
Ultrastructural and immunohistochemical studies have shown melanocytic
differentiation, whereas molecular genetic studies have shown cytogenetic
rearrangements resulting in a EWSR1-ATF1 fusion gene that is characteristic but
not entirely unique for clear cell sarcoma (similar fusion genes are also seen in
angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma). Detection of this fusion gene and the absence 
of BRAF gene mutations clearly distinguish clear cell sarcoma from cutaneous
melanoma. Adverse prognostic factors identified to date include larger tumor size
and any microscopic tumor necrosis. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment for this
high grade sarcoma, with chemotherapy having little effect. Although the
melanocytic differentiation of clear cell sarcoma is indisputable, its precise
lineage remains unclear. Thus, clear cell sarcoma maintains the status of a
unique yet enigmatic clinicopathologic entity of ever increasing complexity 40
years after its original description by an extraordinarily gifted man.

PMID: 17075294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 15;66(20):9937-47.

Caveolin-1 (CAV1) is a target of EWS/FLI-1 and a key determinant of the oncogenic
phenotype and tumorigenicity of Ewing's sarcoma cells.

Tirado OM(1), Mateo-Lozano S, Villar J, Dettin LE, Llort A, Gallego S, Ban J,
Kovar H, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Department of Radiation Medicine,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Tumors of the Ewing's sarcoma family (ESFT), such as Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) and
primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET), are highly aggressive malignancies
predominantly affecting children and young adults. ESFT express chimeric
transcription factors encoded by hybrid genes fusing the EWS gene with several
ETS genes, most commonly FLI-1. EWS/FLI-1 proteins are responsible for the
malignant phenotype of ESFT, but only few of their transcriptional targets are
known. Using antisense and short hairpin RNA-mediated gene expression knockdown, 
array analyses, chromatin immunoprecipitation methods, and reexpression studies, 
we show that caveolin-1 (CAV1) is a new direct target of EWS/FLI-1 that is
overexpressed in ESFT cell lines and tumor specimens and is necessary for ESFT
tumorigenesis. CAV1 knockdown led to up-regulation of Snail and the concomitant
loss of E-cadherin expression. Consistently, loss of CAV1 expression inhibited
the anchorage-independent growth of EWS cells and markedly reduced the growth of 
EWS cell-derived tumors in nude mice xenografts, indicating that CAV1 promotes
the malignant phenotype in EWS carcinogenesis. Reexpression of CAV1 or E-cadherin
in CAV1 knockdown EWS cells rescued the oncogenic phenotype of the original EWS
cells, showing that the CAV1/Snail/E-cadherin pathway plays a central role in the
expression of the oncogenic transformation functions of EWS/FLI-1. Overall, these
data identify CAV1 as a key determinant of the tumorigenicity of ESFT and imply
that targeting CAV1 may allow the development of new molecular therapeutic
strategies for ESFT patients.

PMID: 17047056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 15;66(20):9862-9.

Single-chain antibodies to the EWS NH(2) terminus structurally discriminate
between intact and chimeric EWS in Ewing's sarcoma and interfere with the
transcriptional activity of EWS in vivo.

Aryee DN(1), Kreppel M, Bachmaier R, Uren A, Muehlbacher K, Wagner S, Breiteneder
H, Ban J, Toretsky JA, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, Vienna, Austria.

The chimeric protein EWS-FLI1, arising from chromosomal translocation in Ewing's 
sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), acts as an aberrant tumorigenic transcription
factor. The transforming activity of EWS-FLI1 minimally requires an ETS DNA
binding domain and the EWS NH(2) terminus. Proteins interacting with the EWS
portion differ between germ-line and chimeric EWS despite their sharing identical
sequences in this domain. We explored the use of the phage display technology to 
isolate anti-EWS-FLI1 specific single-chain antibody fragments (scFvs). Using
recombinant EWS-FLI1 as bait, 16 independent specific antibody clones were
isolated from combinatorial phage display libraries, of which six were
characterized in detail. Despite differing in their complementarity-determining
region sequences, all six scFvs bound to the same epitope spanning residues 51 to
75 within the shared minimal transforming EWS domain. Whereas all six scFvs bound
efficiently to cellular EWS, reactivity with ESFT-expressed EWS-FLI1 was weak and
restricted to denatured protein. One scFv, scFv-I85, when expressed as an
intrabody, efficiently suppressed EWS-dependent coactivation of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4- and OCT4-mediated transcription in vivo but no effect on known 
EWS-FLI1 target genes was observed. These data suggest that a prominent EWS
epitope exposed on recombinant EWS-FLI1 structurally differs between germ-line
and chimeric EWS in mammalian cells and that this region is functionally involved
in the transcriptional activity of EWS. Thus, we have generated a tool that will 
prove useful to specifically differentiate between normal and rearranged EWS in
functional studies.

PMID: 17047047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Future Oncol. 2006 Oct;2(5):659-65.

Novel approaches for the management of patients with Ewing sarcoma.

Avigad S(1), Yaniv I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology, Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Schneider Children's 
Medical Center of Israel, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Petah-Tikva, Israel. savigad@post.tan.ac.il

The concepts of tailored therapy according to genetic profiling and response
based on minimal residual disease evaluation during therapy are attracting
increasing interest in modern clinical oncology. Children with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia are being stratified to various treatment arms with
different intensities according to the genetic characteristics of their leukemia 
and their response to therapy as measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Our ability to quickly identify patients with Ewing sarcoma who have a poor
prognosis, and to offer them aggressive therapeutic modalities, such as stem cell
transplantation, may result in an improved cure rate. Based on the knowledge
gained by gene expression profiling and gene silencing techniques we can expect
the emergence of new specific drugs that will target malignant cells without
causing damage to normal tissue, resulting in improved cancer therapy.

PMID: 17026457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9786; author reply 9786.

CD99-positive "Ewing's sarcoma" from mouse-bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
progenitor cells?

Kovar H, Bernard A.

Comment on
    Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;65(24):11459-68.

PMID: 17018640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Virchows Arch. 2006 Nov;449(5):579-84. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing's sarcoma with EWS-FLI1 fusion gene: a case report.

Fujii H(1), Honoki K, Enomoto Y, Kasai T, Kido A, Amano I, Kumamoto M, Morishita 
T, Mii Y, Nonomura A, Takakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho,
Kashihara, Nara 634-8521, Japan.

Recent studies have advocated the genotypic and phenotypic delineation of a novel
Ewing's sarcoma histologic variant showing epithelial features defined as
"adamantinoma-like Ewing's sarcoma". We described an 18-year-old girl with a
primary small round-cell sarcoma of the right tibia showing polyphenotypic
differentiation with epithelioid features. The neoplastic cells had mainly round 
or oval nuclei with fine chromatin with a portion of epithelial arrangements. The
immunohistochemical analysis showed the epithelial markers of cytokeratin 5/6/18,
AE1/AE3, and cytokeratin high molecular weight were stained especially in the
foci with epithelioid features, as well as MIC2, S100, and NSE. The diagnosis of 
the lesion was confirmed as Ewing's sarcoma by the presence of the EWS-FLI1
fusion transcript, and could be defined as the so-called "adamantinoma-like
Ewing's sarcoma". After wide excision and high-dose chemotherapy with peripheral 
blood stem cell transfusion, the patient has been well and continuously
event-free for 3 years since the initial diagnosis.

PMID: 17016721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 15;12(18):5356-62.

EWS-CREB1: a recurrent variant fusion in clear cell sarcoma--association with
gastrointestinal location and absence of melanocytic differentiation.

Antonescu CR(1), Nafa K, Segal NH, Dal Cin P, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, and Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) usually arises in the lower extremities of
young adults and is typically associated with a t(12;22) translocation resulting 
in the fusion of EWS (EWSR1) with ATF1, a gene encoding a member of the cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) family of transcription factors.
CCS arising in the gastrointestinal tract is rare and its pathologic and
molecular features are not well defined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We report a novel variant fusion of EWS to CREB1, a gene at 
2q32 encoding another CREB family member highly related to ATF1, detected in
three women with gastrointestinal CCS. All three cases contained an identical
EWS-CREB1 fusion transcript that was shown by reverse transcription-PCR. In two
of the cases tested, EWS gene rearrangement was also confirmed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization and the EWS-CREB1 genomic junction fragments were isolated by 
long-range DNA PCR.
RESULTS: Morphologically, all three tumors lacked melanin pigmentation. By
immunohistochemistry, there was a strong and diffuse S100 protein reactivity,
whereas all melanocytic markers were negative. Ultrastructurally, two of the
cases lacked melanosomes. The melanocyte-specific transcript of MITF was absent
in two cases, and only weakly expressed in the third case. The Affymetrix gene
expression data available in one case showed lower expression of the melanocytic 
genes MITF, TYR, and TYRP1, compared with four EWS-ATF1-positive CCSs of
non-gastrointestinal origin.
CONCLUSIONS: EWS-CREB1 may define a novel subset of CCS that occurs
preferentially in the gastrointestinal tract and shows little or no melanocytic
differentiation. Thus, evidence of melanocytic lineage or differentiation is not 
a necessary feature of sarcomas with gene fusions involving CREB family members.

PMID: 17000668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2006 Oct;25(4):373-7.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the uterus: a case report and review of
literature.

Varghese L(1), Arnesen M, Boente M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Allina Hospitals and Clinics Pathology Associates,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. varg0053@umn.edu

A case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor arising in the uterine corpus of a
43-year-old woman is presented. The tumor mass was 13.3 cm and extended to the
uterine serosa, endocervical stroma, and left adnexa. Histologically, the tumor
was composed of small blue cells with scant cytoplasm, indistinct cell borders,
hyperchromatic round nuclei, and inconspicuous nucleoli focally forming
pseudorosettes, suggestive of neuroectodermal origin. The tumor cells displayed
strong immunoreactivity for CD99 and FLI1. Cytogenetic fluorescence in situ
hybridization study revealed presence of an EWS-FLI1 fusion gene. To the best of 
our knowledge, this is the first case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the
uterus with diagnosis confirmed by FLI1 immunohistochemical labeling and
demonstration of t (11; 22) by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

PMID: 16990715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2006 Oct 15;454(2):146-54. Epub 2006 Aug 31.

N-terminal acylation of the SV40 nuclear localization signal peptide enhances its
oligonucleotide binding and membrane translocation efficiencies.

Laczkó I(1), Váró G, Bottka S, Bálint Z, Illyés E, Vass E, Bertrand JR, Malvy C, 
Hollósi M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Biological Research Center, Szeged, Hungary.
laczko@nucleus.szbk.u-szeged.hu

Octanoyl and palmitoyl groups were coupled to the N-terminus of an analog of the 
SV40 nuclear localization signal peptide, SV126-133(Ser128), to study the effect 
of the fatty acid chain length on the complex formation with a single-stranded
antisense oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) and on the cellular uptake of the complex.
The strongest binding affinity was observed for the palmitoylated peptide,
indicating the better accessibility of the positively charged lysyl and arginyl
side-chains to the phosphate groups due to the turn structures stabilized by the 
palmitoyl group. On increase of the peptide to ODN molar ratio (rM), gradual
unstacking of the bases was observed, the maximal rate being reached at rM=10. At
rM>10 restacking of the nucleotide bases was detected and the ODN was completely 
encapsulated in a liposome-like structure made up of palmitoylated peptides. Cell
translocation experiments revealed a highly efficient cell transport of the ODN
by palmitoylated SV40 peptide at rM>10.

PMID: 16987492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cell Cycle. 2006 Sep;5(18):2049-53. Epub 2006 Sep 15.

Identification of target genes in their native cellular context: an analysis of
EWS/FLI in Ewing's sarcoma.

Owen LA(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is the second most common tumor of bone in children and young
adults, and requires highly intensive chemotherapy along with surgery and/or
radiation for successful treatment. Because these therapies are associated with
significant short- and long-term side effects, new therapeutic approaches are
needed. Most cases of Ewing's sarcoma contain somatic translocations between
chromosomes 11 and 22 that result in the t(11;22)(q24;q12). This translocation
encodes the EWS/FLI fusion protein. EWS/FLI formation appears to be the critical 
oncogenic event in the development of Ewing's sarcoma. It is hoped that an
in-depth understanding of the mechanism that EWS/FLI uses to cause oncogenic
transformation will result in new therapies for this disease. Unfortunately, this
hope has not been realized. One difficulty has been the lack of an appropriate
model system in which to study the fusion oncoprotein. We recently described and 
validated the use of retroviral RNA interference approaches to study EWS/FLI in
Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. We now put this model into a historical context, and 
describe the benefits (both perceived and observed) of this model over previous
approaches using heterologous cell types.

PMID: 16969112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Mol Biol. 2006 Oct 13;363(1):27-38. Epub 2006 Aug 11.

Identification and characterization of the nuclear localization/retention signal 
in the EWS proto-oncoprotein.

Zakaryan RP(1), Gehring H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Ewing sarcoma (EWS) protein, a member of a large family of RNA-binding proteins, 
contains an N-terminal transcriptional activation domain (EAD) and a C-terminal
RNA-binding domain (RBD). Due to its multifunctional properties EWS protein is
involved in processes such as gene expression, RNA processing and transport, and 
cell signaling. Chimeric EWS proteins generated by chromosomal translocations
cause malignant tumors. EWS protein is located predominantly in the nucleus, but 
was found also in the cytosol and associated with the cell membrane. The
determinants responsible for the nuclear localization of the protein were as yet 
unknown. We identified the nuclear localization signal of EWS protein at its C
terminus (C-NLS), which is required for the nuclear import and retention of the
protein. The C-NLS sequence is conserved in related proto-oncoproteins suggesting
an NLS function also in these proteins. Two arginine residues, due to their
positive charge, a proline residue and a tyrosine residue are essential for C-NLS
function. The nuclear localization of EWS protein is independent of the regions
in RBD containing numerous arginine methylation sites, RNA-recognition and zinc
finger motifs. Regions in EAD guide the subnuclear partition of EWS protein and
contain another but different NLS that allows nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the 
N-terminal domain.

PMID: 16965792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 15;26(12):1802-10. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

Ewing's sarcoma fusion protein, EWS/Fli-1 and Fli-1 protein induce PLD2 but not
PLD1 gene expression by binding to an ETS domain of 5' promoter.

Kikuchi R(1), Murakami M, Sobue S, Iwasaki T, Hagiwara K, Takagi A, Kojima T,
Asano H, Suzuki M, Banno Y, Nozawa Y, Murate T.

Author information: 
(1)Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University School of
Health Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.

It was reported that short interfering RNA (siRNA) of EWS/Fli-1 downregulated
phospholipase D (PLD)2 in Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) cell line, suggesting that PLD2
is the target of aberrant transcription factor, EWS/Fli-1. Here, we further
investigated the regulation of PLD2 gene expression by EWS/Fli-1 and Fli-1 in
another EWS cell line, and also in EWS/Fli-1- or Fli-1-transfected cell line.
EWS/Fli-1- or Fli-1-overexpressed cells showed higher PLD2 but not PLD1 protein
expression and enhanced cell proliferation as compared to mock transfectant. The 
treatment of these cells with 1-butanol or siRNA of PLD2 inhibited cell growth,
suggesting the pivotal role of PLD in cell growth promotion. PLD2 but not PLD1
mRNA level was also increased in EWS/Fli-1 or Fli-1-transfectants. After
determining the transcription initiation points, we cloned the 5' promoter of
both PLD1 and PLD2 and analysed promoter activities. Results showed that
EWS/Fli-1 and Fli-1 increase PLD2 gene expression by binding to an erythroblast
transformation-specific domain (-126 to -120 bp from the transcription initiation
site) of PLD2 promoter, which is the minimal and most powerful region.
Electrophoresis mobility shift assay using truncated proteins showed that both
DNA-binding domain and trans-activating domain were necessary for the enhanced
gene expression of PLD2.

PMID: 16964281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2006 May-Jun;9(3):229-33.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor with postchemotherapy
neuroblastoma-like differentiation.

Weissferdt A(1), Neuling K, English M, Arul S, McMullan D, Ely A, Bründler MA,
Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Birmingham Children's Hospital, Department of Histopathology, West Midlands,
UK. aweissferdt@doctors.org.uk

We report the case of an 11-year-old girl with a retroperitoneal tumor in the
left upper quadrant. The girl was admitted to hospital with weight loss and a
painless abdominal mass that on biopsy was diagnosed as a peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma (pPNET/EWS) of the soft tissue. The patient
underwent chemotherapy followed by surgical resection of the tumor 5 months after
diagnosis. The posttreatment residual viable tumor showed a morphologic
appearance resembling a neuroblastoma. Interphase and metaphase fluorescent in
situ hybridization (FISH) studies performed on the pretreatment and posttreatment
samples showed the presence of a t(11;22) rearrangement resulting in EWSR1/FLI1
gene fusion consistent with pPNET/EWS in both specimens. This case is unusual in 
the sense of showing the typical gene fusion for pPNET/EWS both in the pretherapy
sample with the typical morphological appearance of this tumor and in the
posttherapy specimen showing neural differentiation suggestive of a
neuroblastoma.

PMID: 16944972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mod Pathol. 2006 Nov;19(11):1409-13. Epub 2006 Aug 25.

Solid pseudopapillary neoplasms of the pancreas are associated with FLI-1
expression, but not with EWS/FLI-1 translocation.

Tiemann K(1), Kosmahl M, Ohlendorf J, Krams M, Klöppel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
k.peters@path.uni-kiel.de

Solid pseudopapillary neoplasms of the pancreas are rare pancreatic tumors with
mostly benign behavior, affecting almost exclusively women. Their histogenetic
origin is still unsolved, but a recently reported EWS/FLI-1 translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q21) and the consistent expression of CD56 and the progesterone
receptor, both genes located on the long arm of chromosome 11, point to
chromosome 11q as a potential locus of gene aberration in solid pseudopapillary
neoplasms. To further elucidate this issue, we studied 30 cases of solid
pseudopapillary neoplasms by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), fluorescent
in situ hybridization (FISH) and immunohistochemistry. Immunohistochemically, 38%
showed nuclear expression of FLI-1 and all cases revealed positivity for CD56 and
the progesterone receptor, whereas no solid pseudopapillary neoplasm expressed
CD34. No translocation of the EWS gene was found by FISH and no gross chromosomal
gain or loss was detected by CGH. It is concluded that FLI-1 expression in solid 
pseudopapillary neoplasms is not associated with an EWS/FLI-1 translocation. In
addition, there are no chromosomal gains or losses, especially on chromosome 11, 
where the FLI-1 gene is located adjacent to the gene for CD56 (NCAM). These data 
add another feature to the complex phenotypic appearance of solid pseudopapillary
neoplasms.

PMID: 16941013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 22;348(2):437-40. Epub 2006 Jul 28.

A novel type of EWS-CHOP fusion gene in myxoid liposarcoma.

Matsui Y(1), Ueda T, Kubo T, Hasegawa T, Tomita Y, Okamoto M, Myoui A, Kakunaga
S, Yasui N, Yoshikawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Japan. ymatsui@sb4.so-net.ne.jp

The cytogenetic hallmark of myxoid type and round cell type liposarcoma consists 
of reciprocal translocation of t(12;16)(q13;p11) and t(12;22)(q13;q12), which
results in fusion of TLS/FUS and CHOP, and EWS and CHOP, respectively. Nine
structural variations of the TLS/FUS-CHOP chimeric transcript have been reported,
however, only two types of EWS-CHOP have been described. We describe here a case 
of myxoid liposarcoma containing a novel EWS-CHOP chimeric transcript and
identified the breakpoint occurring in intron 13 of EWS. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and direct sequence showed that exon 13
of EWS was in-frame fused to exon 2 of CHOP. Genomic analysis revealed that the
breaks were located in intron 13 of EWS and intron 1 of CHOP.

PMID: 16884691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Neoplasia. 2006 Jul;8(7):613-22.

Constitutive activation of neuregulin/ERBB3 signaling pathway in clear cell
sarcoma of soft tissue.

Schaefer KL(1), Brachwitz K, Braun Y, Diallo R, Wai DH, Zahn S, Schneider DT,
Kuhnen C, Vollmann A, Brockhoff G, Gabbert HE, Poremba C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue (CCSST) represents a highly malignant tumor of 
the musculoskeletal system that is characterized by the chromosomal translocation
t(12;22)(q13;q12) of the Ewing sarcoma gene (EWSR1) and activating transcription 
factor 1 (ATF1). In a former microarray expression study, we identified ERBB3, a 
member of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family, as a promising new 
diagnostic marker in the differential diagnosis of CCSST. Here we show that,
besides ErbB3, all CCSST cell lines (n = 8) also express the ErbB2 receptor or
the ErbB4 receptor, representing an adequate coreceptor of ErbB3. The
phosphorylation status of ErbB3 revealed these receptor pairs to be either
constitutively activated in CCSST cells with high neuregulin-1 (NRG1) expression 
(n = 4) or activatable by exogenic NRG1 in cells showing low amounts of NRG1 mRNA
(n = 4). Exogenous NRG1 stimulated the growth of a subset of CCSST cells but did 
not affect the kinetics of another subset. This difference was not strictly
dependent on endogenous NRG1 expression; however, the growth-inhibiting effect of
the pan-ErbB tyrosine kinase inhibitor CI-1033 or PD158780 clearly correlated
with NRG1 expression indicating an autocrine growth stimulation loop which may
constitute an interesting target of new therapeutic strategies in this tumor
entity.

PMCID: PMC1601931
PMID: 16867224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Int J Oncol. 2006 Sep;29(3):689-93.

Participation of nuclear localization signal 2 in the 3'-ETS domain of FLI1 in
nuclear translocation of various chimeric EWS-FLI1 oncoproteins in Ewing tumor.

Honsei N(1), Ikuta T, Kawana K, Kaneko Y, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Clinical Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, Ina, Saitama 
362-0806, Japan.

A t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is present in 90% of Ewing's sarcoma, and
results in the formation of the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene encoding an oncogenic
transcription factor. To clarify the function of chimeric EWS-FLI1 proteins, an
identification of a nuclear localization signal (NLS) in the EWS, FLI1 and
EWS-FLI1 proteins is important because the chimeric oncoprotein may lose or gain 
NLS function different from native proteins resulting in different subcellular
localization, and in deregulated gene expression. Furthermore, some studies
reported that patients with one type of fusion gene ('type 1') had better overall
survival than those with other types, suggesting that functional differences may 
be present among various fusion proteins. There has been only one study reporting
a NLS in EWS, but none reporting those in FLI1 and EWS-FLI1. To clarify the
molecular mechanisms of Ewing tumor development, we first identified the NLSs of 
EWS and FLI1. We allocated the NLS to amino acid residues 632-656 near the
C-terminal region of EWS that is different from the previous study, and
identified two NLSs of FLI1, NLS1 (63-90) in the N-terminal domain and NLS2
(319-360) in the 3'-ETS domain. In addition, the present study showed that all of
the EWS-FLI1 fusion proteins completely reside in the nucleus without affecting
the frequency of nuclear localization among variants, suggesting that NLS2 of
FLI1 was used for nuclear translocation of various EWS-FLI1 fusion proteins.

PMID: 16865286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 15;66(14):7016-23.

Expression of the FUS-CHOP fusion protein in primary mesenchymal progenitor cells
gives rise to a model of myxoid liposarcoma.

Riggi N(1), Cironi L, Provero P, Suvà ML, Stehle JC, Baumer K, Guillou L,
Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

A subset of sarcomas is associated with specific chromosomal translocations that 
give rise to fusion genes believed to participate in transformation and
oncogenesis. Identification of the primary cell environment that provides
permissiveness for the oncogenic potential of these fusion genes is essential to 
understand sarcoma pathogenesis. We have recently shown that expression of the
EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein in primary mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPCs) suffices 
to develop Ewing's sarcoma-like tumors in mice. Because most sarcomas bearing
unique chromosomal translocations are believed to originate from common
progenitor cells, and because MPCs populate most organs, we expressed the
sarcoma-associated fusion proteins FUS/TLS-CHOP, EWS-ATF1, and SYT-SSX1 in MPCs
and tested the tumorigenic potential of these cells in vivo. Whereas expression
of EWS-ATF1 and SYT-SSX1 failed to transform MPCs, FUS-CHOP-expressing cells
formed tumors resembling human myxoid liposarcoma. Transcription profile analysis
of these tumors revealed induction of transcripts known to be associated with
myxoid liposarcoma and novel candidate genes, including PDGFA, whose expression
was confirmed in human tumor samples. MPC(FUS-CHOP) and the previously described 
MPC(EWS-FLI-1) tumors displayed distinct transcription profiles, consistent with 
the different target gene repertoires of their respective fusion proteins.
Unexpectedly, a set of genes implicated in cell survival and adhesion displayed
similar behavior in the two tumors, suggesting events that may be common to
primary MPC transformation. Taken together, our observations suggest that
expression of FUS-CHOP may be the initiating event in myxoid liposarcoma
pathogenesis, and that MPCs may constitute one cell type from which these tumors 
originate.

PMID: 16849546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Struct Biol. 2006 Sep;155(3):493-504. Epub 2006 Jun 2.

Localization of genetic elements of intact and derivative chromosome 11 and 22
territories in nuclei of Ewing sarcoma cells.

Taslerová R(1), Kozubek S, Bártová E, Gajdusková P, Kodet R, Kozubek M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Optical Microscopy, Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, 
Botanická 68a, 602 00 Brno, and Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Faculty Hospital
Motol, Praha 5, Czech Republic.

Recurring chromosomal abnormalities are associated with specific tumour types.
The EWSR1 and FLI1 genes are involved in balanced translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12), which is present in more than 85% of Ewing sarcomas. In our
previous study, we have found that the fusion genes pertaining to both derivative
chromosomes 11 and 22 in Ewing sarcoma cell nuclei are shifted to the midway
nuclear position between the native EWSR1 and FLI1 genes. In this contribution we
focused our attention at nuclear positioning of other genetic elements of
chromosomes 11 and 22 in order to find if the whole derivative chromosomes or
only their translocated parts change their nuclear positions in comparison with
the native chromosomes. Using repeated fluorescence in situ hybridization and
high-resolution cytometry, 2D radial positions of EWSR1, BCR, FLI1, BCL1 genes
and fluorescence weight centres of chromosome territories were compared for
intact and derivative chromosomes 11 and 22 in nuclei of three Ewing sarcoma
samples. Significant radial shift was obtained for the derivative EWSR1, FLI1 and
BCL1 genes and for the derivative chromosome 11 compared with the intact ones and
not very significant for chromosome 22 and the BCR gene. Our results also suggest
that the mean nuclear positions of fusion genes are determined by the final
structure of the derivative chromosomes and do not depend on the location of the 
translocation event.

PMID: 16837212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Clin Pathol. 2006 Jul;59(7):775-8.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumour of the urinary bladder: a
clinico-pathological study emphasising immunohistochemical, ultrastructural and
molecular analyses.

Lopez-Beltran A(1), Pérez-Seoane C, Montironi R, Hernández-Iglesias T, Mackintosh
C, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Reina Sofia University Hospital, Cordoba, Spain.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumours (PNETs) of the bladder are extremely
rare and aggressive neoplasms, and only six examples have been reported in the
literature. The case of a 21-year-old woman, who remains disease free 3 years
after tumour resection, is reported here. Morphological features were found to
correspond to a small round blue cell tumour without rosette formation and with
extensive areas of necrosis. Strong expression of CD99, vimentin and CD117
(c-kit), and focal reactivity to cytokeratin and S-100 protein was observed in
tumour cells. Ultrastructurally, sparse neurosecretory granules were observed.
Diagnosis of PNET was supported by molecular genetic analysis, showing the
EWS-FLI-1 fusion transcript type 2 by RT-PCR and EWS gene rearrangement by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation. A normal genetically balanced genotype was
shown by comparative genomic hybridisation, which, together with the expression
of c-kit, a known therapeutic target for imatinib, may have prognostic and
therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC1860413
PMID: 16803953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Hum Pathol. 2006 Jul;37(7):845-53. Epub 2006 May 19.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing's sarcoma of the craniospinal
vault: case reports and review.

Mobley BC(1), Roulston D, Shah GV, Bijwaard KE, McKeever PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA
94035, USA.

The peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing's sarcoma family tumor
(pPNET/ESFT) group includes small round cell tumors of the bone, soft tissue, and
nerve with morphological attributes of the germinal neuroepithelium. Peripheral
PNETs/ESFTs also occur within the craniospinal vault, a region including the
central nervous system, the meninges, and the cranial and spinal nerve roots.
Gene rearrangements between the EWS gene on chromosome 22q12 and members of the
ETS gene family are common in and specific to pPNETs/ESFTs. Another defining
characteristic of pPNETs/ESFTs is their membranous expression of the MIC2 gene
product. We describe 2 cases of pPNETs within the craniospinal vault. An
intradural tumor arising from the nerve roots of the cauda equina was discovered 
in a 32-year-old man presenting with radiculopathic back pain and lower-extremity
weakness. An intracranial pPNET that mimicked a meningioma was found in a
21-year-old man presenting with headache and visual disturbances. MIC2 gene
product expression and EWS/ETS gene rearrangement were detected in both case
patients. The literature with regard to pPNETs/ESFTs arising within the
craniospinal vault is reviewed.

PMID: 16784984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2006 Mar;5(1):8-14. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

TLS, EWS and TAF15: a model for transcriptional integration of gene expression.

Law WJ(1), Cann KL, Hicks GG.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology and the University of Manitoba, 675
McDermot Avenue, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.

Multifunctional proteins are demonstrating that gene expression is not a series
of compartmentalized events beginning with transcription and culminating in
delivery of mature mRNA into the cytoplasm, but an integrated pathway of
transcription, splicing, RNA metabolism and subcellular targeting of translation.
One such multifunctional family is made up of the RNA-binding proteins TLS, EWS
and TAF15. These three proteins each contribute a potent transcriptional
activation domain to oncogenic fusion proteins, and the formation of these fusion
genes are thought to be the primary causes of their associated cancers. Wild-type
TLS, EWS and TAF15 can function as classical transcription factors in addition to
their better-known functions in splicing and mRNA transport. The interaction
between TLS and the stress-response protein YB-1 is an example of how these
proteins can induce a multi-faceted change in gene expression, as they can
interact to induce changes in both transcription and splicing of target genes.
Investigating the multiple functions of TLS, EWS and TAF15 will enhance our
understanding of gene expression as a whole, and also allow us to better
understand how these proteins may be contributing to the oncogenic pathways the
associated fusion proteins initiate.

PMID: 16769671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cancer Cell. 2006 Jun;9(6):473-84.

Oncogenic MITF dysregulation in clear cell sarcoma: defining the MiT family of
human cancers.

Davis IJ(1), Kim JJ, Ozsolak F, Widlund HR, Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Granter SR, Du J,
Fletcher JA, Denny CT, Lessnick SL, Linehan WM, Kung AL, Fisher DE.

Author information: 
(1)Melanoma Program in Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) harbors a pathognomonic chromosomal translocation fusing
the Ewing's sarcoma gene (EWS) to the CREB family transcription factor ATF1 and
exhibits melanocytic features. We show that EWS-ATF1 occupies the MITF promoter, 
mimicking melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) signaling to induce expression of 
MITF, the melanocytic master transcription factor and an amplified oncogene in
melanoma. Knockdown/rescue studies revealed that MITF mediates the requirement of
EWS-ATF1 for CCS survival in vitro and in vivo as well as for melanocytic
differentiation. Moreover, MITF and TFE3 reciprocally rescue one another in lines
derived from CCS or pediatric renal carcinoma. Seemingly unrelated tumors thus
employ distinct strategies to oncogenically dysregulate the MiT family,
collectively broadening the definition of MiT-associated human cancers.

PMID: 16766266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Oligonucleotides. 2006 Summer;16(2):158-68.

Antisense oligonucleotide nanocapsules efficiently inhibit EWS-Fli1 expression in
a Ewing's sarcoma model.

Toub N(1), Bertrand JR, Malvy C, Fattal E, Couvreur P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physicochimie, Pharmacotechnie et Biopharmacie, UMR CNRS 8612, 
Faculté de Pharmacie, 92286 Châtenay-Malabry Cedex, France.

The cytogenetic abnormality of Ewing's sarcoma is related to the presence of a
balanced t(11;22) translocation expressing the EWS-Fli1 chimeric fusion protein. 
Oligonucleotides (ODNs) are specific compounds that inhibit gene expression at
the transcriptional level. They possess a poor bioavailability and are degraded
by nucleases very rapidly. Therefore, there is a strong need for the development 
of ODN drug delivery systems. In the present study, polyisobutylcyanoacrylate
nanocapsules entrapping ODNs in their aqueous core were prepared, with high
encapsulation yield (99%). Previous studies have demonstrated that such complexes
were able to inhibit tumor growth in mice. Nevertheless, no information was
available about their mode of action at the cellular level. The aim of this study
was to investigate the efficacy of these ODN nanocapsules on cultured tumor
cells. We found that nanocapsules were capable of protecting ODN against
degradation. Using confocal microscopy, we observed that cell uptake and nuclear 
accumulation of ODNs were importantly enhanced when ODNs were associated with
these nanocapsules. Consequently, a specific cellular growth inhibition and
suppression of EWSFli1 fusion gene expression was noticed. In conclusion, it was 
demonstrated that nanocapsules as nonviral vectors show great potential for the
delivery of ODNs to cells.

PMID: 16764539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jul 21;346(1):306-13. Epub 2006 Jun 2.

Serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) induction by the
EWS/NOR1(NR4A3) fusion protein.

Poulin H(1), Filion C, Ladanyi M, Labelle Y.

Author information: 
(1)Human and Molecular Genetic Research Unit, Saint-François d'Assise Hospital,
CHUQ, Que., Canada G1L 3L5.

The NR4A3 nuclear receptor (also known as NOR1) is involved in tumorigenesis by
the t(9;22) chromosome translocation encoding the EWS/NOR1 fusion protein found
in approximately 75% of all cases of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMC). 
Several observations suggest that one role of EWS/NOR1 in tumorigenesis may be to
deregulate the expression of specific target genes. We have shown previously that
constitutive expression of EWS/NOR1 in CFK2 fetal rat chondrogenic cells induces 
their transformation as measured by growth beyond confluency and growth in soft
agar. To identify genes regulated by the fusion protein in this model, we have
generated a CFK2 cell line in which the expression of EWS/NOR1 is controlled by
tetracycline. Using the differential display technique, we have identified the
serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) mRNA as being up-regulated in
the presence of EWS/NOR1. Co-immunocytochemistry confirmed over-expression of the
SGK1 protein in cells expressing EWS/NOR1. Significantly, immunohistochemistry of
10 EMC tumors positive for EWS/NOR1 showed that all of them over-express the SGK1
protein in contrast to non-neoplastic cells in the same biopsies and various
other sarcoma types. These results strongly suggest that SGK1 may be a genuine in
vivo target of EWS/NOR1 in EMC.

PMID: 16756948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 1;66(11):5574-81.

Oncoprotein EWS-FLI1 activity is enhanced by RNA helicase A.

Toretsky JA(1), Erkizan V, Levenson A, Abaan OD, Parvin JD, Cripe TP, Rice AM,
Lee SB, Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, District of Columbia, USA. jat42@georgetown.edu

RNA helicase A (RHA), a member of the DEXH box helicase family of proteins, is an
integral component of protein complexes that regulate transcription and splicing.
The EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein is expressed as a result of the chromosomal
translocation t(11;22) that occurs in patients with the Ewing's sarcoma family of
tumors (ESFT). Using phage display library screening, we identified an EWS-FLI1
binding peptide containing homology to RHA. ESFT cell lines and patient tumors
highly expressed RHA. GST pull-down and ELISA assays showed that EWS-FLI1
specifically bound RHA fragment amino acids 630 to 1020, which contains the
peptide region discovered by phage display. Endogenous RHA was identified in a
protein complex with EWS-FLI1 in ESFT cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments showed both EWS-FLI1 and RHA bound to EWS-FLI1 target gene promoters.
RHA stimulated the transcriptional activity of EWS-FLI1 regulated promoters,
including Id2, in ESFT cells. In addition, RHA expression in mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells stably transfected with EWS-FLI1 enhanced the
anchorage-independent phenotype above that with EWS-FLI1 alone. These results
suggest that RHA interacts with EWS-FLI1 as a transcriptional cofactor to enhance
its function.

PMID: 16740692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cancer Lett. 2007 Mar 8;247(1):84-90. Epub 2006 May 30.

A novel EWS-WT1 gene fusion product in desmoplastic small round cell tumor is a
potent transactivator of the insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) gene.

Werner H(1), Idelman G, Rubinstein M, Pattee P, Nagalla SR, Roberts CT Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978 Tel Aviv, Israel.
hwerner@post.tau.ac.il

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a primitive sarcoma characterized 
by a recurrent chromosomal translocation, t(11;22)(p13;q12), which fuses the 5'
exons of the EWS gene to the 3' exons of the WT1 gene. EWS-WT1 chimeras are
heterogeneous as a result of fusions of different regions of the EWS gene to the 
WT1 gene. We report here a rare and novel EWS-WT1 variant, EWS-WT1 5/10, in a
6-year-old boy diagnosed with DSRCT and analyze the potential transactivation
effect of the fusion oncoprotein. The predicted product is comprised of the
N-terminal transactivation domain of EWS and lacks any sequence derived from the 
WT1 gene product. Nonetheless, the truncated protein was able to stimulate
expression of the insulin-like growth factor-I receptor gene, a potent
antiapoptotic receptor tyrosine kinase with potentially important roles in DSRCT 
etiology. These findings raise the possibility that the oncogenic potential of
EWS-WT1 fusions is not necessarily a consequence of the fusion protein product
per se.

PMID: 16730884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Cancer. 2006 Jul 1;107(1):201-6.

Ewing sarcoma-family tumors that arise after treatment of primary childhood
cancer.

Spunt SL(1), Rodriguez-Galindo C, Fuller CE, Harper J, Krasin MJ, Billups CA,
Khoury JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105-2794, USA. sheri.spunt@stjude.org

BACKGROUND: Unlike osteosarcoma, the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) has
rarely been reported as secondary malignant neoplasms after treatment of
childhood cancer. ESFT arising as a second cancer was reviewed and characterized 
at our childhood cancer center.
METHODS: A retrospective review was undertaken of 11,183 patients age <21 years
who were treated for a primary cancer between March 1962 and December 2003 at St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital. All cases of ESFT were confirmed to have a
rearranged EWS gene.
RESULTS: Six cases of ESFT (1.3% of 479 second cancers) were identified in
patients previously treated for lymphoma (n = 3), leukemia (n = 1),
retinoblastoma (n = 1), or Wilms tumor (n = 1). None of these patients had a
family history suggestive of a familial cancer syndrome. The median time between 
diagnosis of primary cancer and diagnosis of ESFT was 5.9 years (range, 3.1-18.3 
years). ESFT occurred in typical anatomic locations: rib (n = 2), chest wall soft
tissues (n = 2), pelvis (n = 1), and extremity (n = 1). One tumor arose at the
margin of a previous radiotherapy field and 1 arose distant from previous
radiotherapy fields; all other patients had not received radiotherapy. Three
patients are alive at the time of this report, including 2 whose ESFT was
diagnosed more than 8 years ago.
CONCLUSIONS: ESFT occurs rarely after treatment of a primary cancer during
childhood, and most cases do not appear to be related to radiation therapy.
Long-term survival can be achieved in some patients, and therefore secondary ESFT
should be treated with curative intent.

Copyright 2006 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 16721801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Oncologist. 2006 May;11(5):503-19.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors: current management.

Bernstein M(1), Kovar H, Paulussen M, Randall RL, Schuck A, Teot LA, Juergens H.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Hematology/Oncology, Ste-Justine Hospital, University of Montreal, 
3175 Cote Ste. Catherine Road, Montreal, Quebec, H3T 1C5, Canada.
mark.lawrence.bernstein@umontreal.ca

Ewing's sarcoma is the second most frequent primary bone cancer, with
approximately 225 new cases diagnosed each year in patients less than 20 years of
age in North America. It is one of the pediatric small round blue cell tumors,
characterized by strong membrane expression of CD99 in a chain-mail pattern and
negativity for lymphoid (CD45), rhabdomyosarcoma (myogenin, desmin, actin) and
neuroblastoma (neurofilament protein) markers. Pathognomonic translocations
involving the ews gene on chromosome 22 and an ets-type gene, most commonly the
fli1 gene on chromosome 11, are implicated in the great majority of cases.
Clinical presentation is usually dominated by local bone pain and a mass. Imaging
reveals a technetium pyrophosphate avid lesion that, on plain radiograph, is
destructive, diaphyseal and classically causes layered periosteal calcification. 
Magnetic resonance best defines the extent of the lesion. Biopsy should be
undertaken by an experienced orthopedic oncologist. Approximately three quarters 
of patients have initially localized disease. About two thirds survive
disease-free. Management, preferably at a specialist center with a
multi-disciplinary team, includes both local control-either surgery, radiation or
a combination-and systemic chemotherapy. Chemotherapy includes cyclic
combinations, incorporating vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide,
etoposide, ifosfamide and occasionally actinomycin D. Topotecan in combination
with cyclophosphamide has shown preliminary activity. Patients with initially
metastatic disease fare less well, with about one quarter surviving. Studies
incorporating intensive therapy followed by stem cell infusion show no clear
benefit. New approaches include anti-angiogenic therapy, particularly since
vascular endothelial growth factor is an apparent downstream target of the
ews-fli1 oncogene.

PMID: 16720851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Pharm Res. 2006 May;23(5):892-900. Epub 2006 May 2.

Efficacy of siRNA nanocapsules targeted against the EWS-Fli1 oncogene in Ewing
sarcoma.

Toub N(1), Bertrand JR, Tamaddon A, Elhamess H, Hillaireau H, Maksimenko A,
Maccario J, Malvy C, Fattal E, Couvreur P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physicochimie, Pharmacotechnie et Biopharmacie, Faculté de
Pharmacie, UMR CNRS 8612, 92286, Châtenay-Malabry, France.

The EWS-Fli1 fusion gene encodes for a chimeric oncogenic transcription factor
considered to be the cause of the Ewing sarcoma. The efficiency of small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeted toward the EWS-Fli1 transcript (at the
junction point type 1) was studied, free or encapsulated into recently developed 
polyisobutylcyanoacrylate aqueous core nanocapsules. Because this mRNA sequence
is only present in cancer cells, it therefore constituted a relevant target.
Studies of the intracellular penetration by confocal microscopy in NIH/3T3
EWS-Fli1 cells showed that nanocapsules improved the intracellular penetration of
siRNA with mainly a cytoplasmic localization. These biodegradable siRNA-loaded
nanocapsules were then tested in vivo on a mice xenografted EWS-Fli1-expressing
tumor; they were found to trigger a dose-dependant inhibition of tumor growth
after intratumoral injection. A specific inhibition of EWS-Fli1 was observed,
too. These findings now open new prospects for the treatment of experimental
cancers with junction oncogenes.

PMID: 16715379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):405-16.

Expression profiling of EWS/FLI identifies NKX2.2 as a critical target gene in
Ewing's sarcoma.

Smith R(1), Owen LA, Trem DJ, Wong JS, Whangbo JS, Golub TR, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Children, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2007 Jan;11(1):97.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):331-2.

Our understanding of Ewing's sarcoma development mediated by the EWS/FLI fusion
protein has been limited by a lack of knowledge regarding the tumor cell of
origin. To circumvent this, we analyzed the function of EWS/FLI in Ewing's
sarcoma itself. By combining retroviral-mediated RNA interference with
reexpression studies, we show that ongoing EWS/FLI expression is required for the
tumorigenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma. We used this system to define the full 
complement of EWS/FLI-regulated genes in Ewing's sarcoma. Functional analysis
revealed that NKX2.2 is an EWS/FLI-regulated gene that is necessary for oncogenic
transformation in this tumor. Thus, we developed a highly validated
transcriptional profile for the EWS/FLI fusion protein and identified a critical 
target gene in Ewing's sarcoma development.

PMID: 16697960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):331-2.

Ewing's sarcoma: general insights from a rare model.

Davis S(1), Meltzer PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):405-16.

Ewing's sarcoma is characterized by the presence of fusion oncoproteins involving
EWSR1 and an ETS gene, most commonly FLI1. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Smith et
al. have combined RNA interference with expression profiling to study the pattern
of gene expression downstream of the most common of these fusions, EWS/FLI. Using
this strategy, Smith et al. have identified a homeobox gene, NKX2.2, which is
both highly expressed in Ewing's sarcoma and essential for the transforming
activity of EWS/FLI.

PMID: 16697953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Neurosurgery. 2006 May;58(5):E992; discussion E992.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the cavernous sinus: case report.

Attabib NA(1), West M, Rhodes RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Section of Neurosurgery, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNET
family) are small, round, blue cell tumors that have a decided predilection for
young patients and commonly arise in bone and soft tissue. We are reporting a
rare case of cavernous sinus pPNET in a 48-year-old woman.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A 48-year-old woman presented with headache, ipsilateral
maxillary, and ophthalmic and oculomotor nerve palsies. Neuroimaging revealed a
cavernous sinus lesion.
INTERVENTION: The patient underwent debulking of the tumor, and the diagnosis of 
a pPNET was made based on histological, immunohistochemical, and molecular
genetics (EWS-FLI1 fusion gene) findings. Bone scans, bone marrow aspiration, and
biopsy and chest computed tomographic scans showed no evidence of systemic
involvement. The patient had adjuvant treatment with radiotherapy and
chemotherapy. After 14 months, the patient had no neurological deficits, and
neuroimaging showed stable disease, although some chemotherapy complications
occurred.
CONCLUSION: This is a case of cavernous sinus pPNET in a 48-year-old woman, in
whom the diagnosis is supported by the presence of EWS-FLI1 fusion gene. This
seems to be the first reported case of a cavernous sinus pPNET confirmed by
molecular genetic analysis.

PMID: 16639307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Apr 15;166(2):173-9.

Molecular cytogenetic characterization of four previously established and two
newly established Ewing sarcoma cell lines.

Szuhai K(1), Ijszenga M, Tanke HJ, Rosenberg C, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box
9600, 2300RC, Leiden, The Netherlands. k.szuhai@lumc.nl

Most Ewing family tumors are identified by the characteristic translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12), resulting in a fusion protein EWS/FLI1 that acts as an
aberrant transcription factor. In a minority of cases, the EWS gene is fused to
another member of the ETS gene (ERG, ETV1, E1AF, and FEV). Though the oncogenic
transforming capability of the EWS/FLI1 protein is highly suggestive, the exact
pathway behind remains to be elucidated. The availability of cell lines may help 
in the understanding of underlying cellular processes. In this study, we have
established two new Ewing sarcoma cell lines and characterized them with
molecular cytogenetic tools. This technology was also applied on four other
previously published Ewing sarcoma cell lines. Our findings in relation to
previous data on similar tumors are discussed.

PMID: 16631476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Future Oncol. 2005 Aug;1(4):521-8.

Ewing's sarcoma oncoprotein EWS-FLI1: the perfect target without a therapeutic
agent.

Uren A(1), Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown University School of Medicine, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer
Center, 3970 Reservoir Road North West, New Research Building, Room W316,
Washington DC, WA 20057, USA. au26@georgetown.edu

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) affect patients between the ages of 3 and
40 years, with most cases occurring in the second decade of life. ESFTs are
characterized by a translocation that occurs in 95% of tumors. This translocation
joins the Ewing's sarcoma gene (EWS) located on chromosome 22 to an ets family
gene; either friend leukemia insertion (FLI)1 located on chromosome 11, t(11;22),
or ets-related gene (ERG) located on chromosome 21, t(21;22). The EWS-FLI1 fusion
transcript encodes a 68 kDa protein with two primary domains. The EWS domain is a
potent transcriptional activator, while the FLI1 domain contains a highly
conserved ets DNA binding domain. ESFT presents a clinical challenge, especially 
in patients with metastatic disease in which dose-intensifying chemotherapy with 
bone-marrow transplantation does not improve survival. EWS-FLI1 is only present
in ESFT cells and does not exist in any normal cell of the body. Experiments
using ESFT cell lines or animal xenograft models have proven that EWS-FLI1 is
required for tumor survival. Therefore, ESFT contains a unique protein generated 
by a tumor-specific translocation that has great potential as a molecular target 
for therapy. However, therapeutic applications directed towards eliminating or
inactivating EWS-FLI1 have not reached the clinic. EWS-FLI1 has been a very
difficult molecule to directly analyze in vitro due to poor solubility. Recent
advances in generating recombinant EWS-FLI1 and novel data on the cellular
functions of EWS-FLI1 should enhance progress towards understanding and
application.

PMID: 16556028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Am J Surg Pathol. 2006 Mar;30(3):351-6.

Generation of the novel monoclonal antibody against TLS/EWS-CHOP chimeric
oncoproteins that is applicable to one of the most sensitive assays for myxoid
and round cell liposarcomas.

Oikawa K(1), Ishida T, Imamura T, Yoshida K, Takanashi M, Hattori H, Ishikawa A, 
Fujita K, Yamamoto K, Matsubayashi J, Kuroda M, Mukai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

The fusion oncoproteins, TLS-CHOP and EWS-CHOP, are characteristic markers for
myxoid and round cell liposarcomas (MLS/RCLS). Especially, the peptide sequence
of 26 amino acids corresponding to the normally untranslated CHOP exon 2 and
parts of exon 3 (5'-UTR) is a unique structure for these chimeric proteins. In
this report, we have generated monoclonal antibodies against the unique peptide
sequence of TLS/EWS-CHOP oncoproteins. These antibodies reacted with TLS-CHOP
fusion protein, but not reacted with normal TLS and CHOP proteins by Western blot
analysis. In addition, one of the antibodies also recognized the chimeric
oncoprotein in archival paraffin-embedded tissue samples of MLS/RCLS. The
oncoprotein was detectable by the antibody even in the paraffin-embedded tissue
samples whose mRNAs were too degraded to be detected by a nested reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction-based assay. Thus, the molecular assay
using the novel antibody is expected to be one of the most sensitive diagnostic
assays for MLS/RCLS.

PMID: 16538055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(7):2467-78.

Cooperative DNA binding with AP-1 proteins is required for transformation by
EWS-Ets fusion proteins.

Kim S(1), Denny CT, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology and UC Davis Cancer Center, University of
California at Davis, USA.

A key molecular event in the genesis of Ewing's sarcoma is the consistent
presence of chromosomal translocations that result in the formation of proteins
in which the amino terminus of EWS is fused to the carboxyl terminus, including
the DNA binding domain, of one of five different Ets family proteins. These
fusion proteins function as deregulated transcription factors, resulting in
aberrant control of gene expression. Recent data indicate that some EWS-Ets
target promoters, including the uridine phosphorylase (UPP) promoter, harbor
tandem binding sites for Ets and AP-1 proteins. Here we show that those Ets
family proteins that participate in Ewing's sarcoma, including Fli1, ERG, and
ETV1, cooperatively bind these tandem elements with Fos-Jun while other Ets
family members do not. Analysis of this cooperativity in vitro shows that (i)
many different spatial arrangements of the Ets and AP-1 sites support cooperative
binding, (ii) the bZIP motifs of Fos and Jun are sufficient to support this
cooperativity, and (iii) both the Ets domain and carboxy-terminal sequences of
Fli1 are important for cooperative DNA binding. EWS-Fli1 activates the expression
of UPP mRNA, is directly bound to the UPP promoter, and transforms 3T3
fibroblasts; in contrast, a C-terminally truncated mutant form of EWS-Fli1 that
cannot cooperatively bind DNA with Fos-Jun is defective in all of these
properties. The results show that the ability of EWS-Ets proteins to
cooperatively bind DNA with Fos-Jun is critical to the biologic activities of
these proteins. The results have implications for understanding the pathogenesis 
of Ewing's sarcoma. In addition, they may be relevant to the mechanisms of
Ras-dependent activation of genes that harbor tandem Ets and AP-1 binding sites.

PMCID: PMC1430316
PMID: 16537893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2006 Apr-May;23(3):263-7.

Spinal epidural extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma in an adolescent boy: a case report.

Athanassiadou F(1), Tragiannidis A, Kourti M, Papageorgiou T, Kotoula V,
Kontopoulos V, Christoforidis J.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Pediatric Department, Hematology-Oncology Unit, AHEPA Hospital, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. atragian@hotmail.com

Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma (EES) represents a rare soft tissue malignant
neoplasm histologically similar to skeletal Ewing sarcoma. It occurs mainly in
adolescents and young adults and commonly affects the paravertebral regions. The 
differential diagnosis includes other small, blue round cells tumors. The authors
report a case of an EES involving the spinal epidural and paravertebral spaces in
an adolescent boy. EES diagnosis was confirmed by features of histologic analysis
and immunohistochemistry and by the presence of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal
translocation by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.

PMID: 16517542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Apr 15;312(7):1194-204. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Interaction partners for human ZNF384/CIZ/NMP4--zyxin as a mediator for p130CAS
signaling?

Janssen H(1), Marynen P.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Laboratory, Department of Human Genetics, University of Leuven,
Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), VIB4, Campus
Gasthuisberg O&N 06, Herestraat 49 Box 602, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Transcription factor ZNF384/CIZ/NMP4 was first cloned in rat as a p130Cas-binding
protein and has a role in bone metabolism and spermatogenesis. It is recurrently 
involved in translocations in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Translocations
t(12;17) and t(12;22) fuse ZNF384 to RNA-binding proteins TAF15 and EWSR1, while 
a translocation t(12;19) generates an E2A/ZNF384 fusion. We screened for ZNF384
interacting proteins using yeast two-hybrid technology. In contrast to its rat
homolog, human ZNF384 does not interact with p130CAS. Zyxin, PCBP1, and vimentin,
however, were identified as ZNF384-binding partners. Given the interaction
between human zyxin and p130CAS, these results suggest that zyxin indirectly
enables the interaction of ZNF384 with p130CAS which is described in rat.

PMID: 16510139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Histopathology. 2006 Mar;48(4):363-76.

Ewing's sarcoma of bone: the detection of specific transcripts in a large,
consecutive series of formalin-fixed, decalcified, paraffin-embedded tissue
samples using the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.

Mangham DC(1), Williams A, McMullan DJ, McClure J, Sumathi VP, Grimer RJ, Davies 
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Musculoskeletal Pathology, Royal Orthopaedic Hospital, The
Medical School, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
chas.mangham@rjah.nhs.uk

AIMS: (i) To report on the routine use of the reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) technique on decalcified or non-decalcified,
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue (FFPET) for translocation detection,
with particular emphasis on improved RNA extraction methodology and the use of
PCR primers designed to generate small amplicons. (ii) To report on the relative 
incidences of translocation types and transcript variants in a large, single
institution series of Ewing's sarcoma of bone.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using RT-PCR to detect specific transcript variants, we
analysed FFPET from 54 consecutive cases of Ewing's sarcoma of bone. We used
'gold standard' detection methods on corresponding fresh and fresh frozen tissue 
to validate the technique. We have demonstrated the effective use of RT-PCR on
decalcified and non-decalcified FFPET samples for sarcoma-specific translocation 
detection (96% sensitivity, 100% specificity). Tissue decalcification did not
affect the detection rate. The relative incidence of Ewing's sarcoma-specific
translocation types and transcript variants was entirely consistent with
previously published data.
CONCLUSIONS: With equal effectiveness, RT-PCR can be applied to both acid
decalcified and non-decalcified FFPET for (Ewing's sarcoma) translocation
detection and the technique can be introduced into routine practice in
histopathology departments.

PMID: 16487358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Pathol. 2006 Apr;208(5):624-32.

STAT3 is activated in a subset of the Ewing sarcoma family of tumours.

Lai R(1), Navid F, Rodriguez-Galindo C, Liu T, Fuller CE, Ganti R, Dien J, Dalton
J, Billups C, Khoury JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

STAT3 is an oncogene that regulates critical cellular processes and whose
constitutive activation has been demonstrated to correlate with biological and
clinical features in many types of human malignancy. In this study, STAT3
activation was assessed in the Ewing sarcoma family of tumours (ESFT), which is
characterized by fusion of the EWS gene with one of several Ets transcription
factors, most commonly EWS-FLI1. STAT3 activation was assessed by
immunohistochemistry using a monoclonal antibody specific for
tyrosine(705)-phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3(tyr705)) and a tissue microarray
containing 49 paraffin-embedded ESFT tumours with known EWS translocations.
Twenty-five (51%) tumours were pSTAT3(tyr705)-positive, as defined by more than
10% tumour cell immunostaining. STAT3 activation correlated with tumour site at
presentation, with pSTAT3(tyr705)-negative ESFT involving axial sites
predominantly (p = 0.008). Notably, among 31 patients who presented with
localized disease, high-level STAT3 activation correlated with better overall
survival (p = 0.02). STAT3 activation was not directly related to EWS-FLI1
expression, since EWS-FLI1 transfection did not result in STAT3 activation.
Furthermore, detailed molecular analysis indicated that STAT3 activation may be
seen with EWS-FLI1 or EWS-ERG and appears to be independent of EWS-FLI1 fusion
type. In conclusion, STAT3 activation is present in approximately half of ESFT
and correlates with clinical features. The role of STAT3 activation in ESFT
pathogenesis seems to be independent of the type of EWS/Ets translocation.

PMID: 16463269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 15;66(2):803-11.

The possible role of EWS-Fli1 in evasion of senescence in Ewing family tumors.

Matsunobu T(1), Tanaka K, Nakamura T, Nakatani F, Sakimura R, Hanada M, Li X,
Okada T, Oda Y, Tsuneyoshi M, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, 812-8582 Fukuoka, Japan.

The chromosomal translocation t(11;22) yields the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene and is
associated with oncogenesis of Ewing family tumors (EFT). In this study, using
the RNA interference method, we show that EWS-Fli1-targeting small interfering
RNAs (siRNA) depleted EWS-Fli1 protein and caused growth inhibition in EFT cells 
with the accumulation of p27 protein and the down-regulation of Skp2 protein in
dose-dependent, time-dependent, and sequence-specific manners. Depletion of
EWS-Fli1 subacutely elicited a senescence-like phenotype, but not apoptosis, in
EFT cells. Furthermore, not only the knockdown of p27, but also the forced
expression of Skp2, reduced the expression levels of p27 protein and partially
rescued senescence-like phenotype caused by EWS-Fli1-targeting siRNAs. The
accumulation of p27 protein in EWS-Fli1-depleted cells inhibited cdk2 kinase
activity and was related to the stability of p27 protein, which resulted from a
decrease in Skp2 protein. Immunohistochemical analysis of p27 and Skp2 proteins
in EFT samples revealed that there was an inverse relationship between the
expression profiles of p27 and Skp2 proteins. These findings indicate an
important role of EWS-Fli1 in the prevention of senescence, leading to the
unlimited growth and oncogenesis of EFT cells through a decrease in the stability
of p27 protein due to increased action of Skp2-mediated 26S proteasome
degradation.

PMID: 16424012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Hematol Oncol. 2006 Mar;24(1):14-21.

Regulation of apoptosis and proliferation in Ewing's sarcoma--opportunities for
targeted therapy.

Kontny U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany.
kontny@kikli.uni-freiburg.de

The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors are malignant tumors of bone and soft tissue
which occur predominantely in children and adolescents. Whereas cure rates for
patients with localized tumors are around 70%, survival rates for patients with
metastases or relapse are poor in spite of intensive chemo- and radiation
therapy, demonstrating a clear need for new, more effective therapies. Insights
into the biology of the tumors of the Ewing's sarcoma family with identification 
of the EWS/ETS gene rearrangement as the key event in malignant transformation
and its influence on the regulation of various pathways involved in
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis has led to the identification of
potential targets for the development of new molecular therapeutics. This review 
will focus on the regulation of major pathways of proliferation and apoptosis in 
tumors of the Ewing's sarcoma family and point out how modulation of these
pathways might be of potential use for future therapy.

Copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 16400699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Nov;1058:52-61.

In vivo potentialities of EWS-Fli-1 targeted antisense
oligonucleotides-nanospheres complexes.

Maksimenko A(1), Polard V, Villemeur M, Elhamess H, Couvreur P, Bertrand JR,
Aboubakar M, Gottikh M, Malvy C.

Author information: 
(1)Bioalliance Pharma SA, Paris 75015, France.

The EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene, resulting from a t(11;22) translocation, plays a key
role in the pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma. Previously, we have shown that
antisense oligonucleotides designed against EWS-Fli-1 inhibited tumor growth in
nude mice provided they were delivered intratumorally by nanocapsules or by
CTAB-coated nanospheres. In this study, we have used two types of nanospheres
(designated as type 1 and type 2 nanospheres) stabilized with chitosan for both
intratumoral and systemic administration of oligonucleotides. Inhibition of the
tumor growth in vivo was found to be dependent on the carrier type as well as on 
antisense oligonucleotide modification. Indeed, whereas both types of nanospheres
were efficient in reducing tumor growth after intratumoral injection, we have
obtained only with type 2 nanospheres an antitumoral effect after intravenous
injection in a preliminary experiment. Additionally, the anticancer efficacy of a
localized modification of the EWS-Fli-1 phosphodiester/phosphorothioate chimeric 
antisense oligonucleotide was demonstrated. In cell culture the oligonucleotides 
inhibit cell growth by their antisense activity. Further investigations are
needed in vivo to learn the mechanism of action of the complexes.

PMID: 16394125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;65(24):11459-68.

Development of Ewing's sarcoma from primary bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
progenitor cells.

Riggi N(1), Cironi L, Provero P, Suvà ML, Kaloulis K, Garcia-Echeverria C,
Hoffmann F, Trumpp A, Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Division, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9786; author reply 9786.

Ewing's sarcoma is a member of Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) and the second most
common solid bone and soft tissue malignancy of children and young adults. It is 
associated in 85% of cases with the t(11;22)(q24:q12) chromosomal translocation
that generates fusion of the 5' segment of the EWS gene with the 3' segment of
the ETS family gene FLI-1. The EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein behaves as an aberrant
transcriptional activator and is believed to contribute to EFT development.
However, EWS-FLI-1 induces growth arrest and apoptosis in normal fibroblasts, and
primary cells that are permissive for its putative oncogenic properties have not 
been discovered, hampering basic understanding of EFT biology. Here, we show that
EWS-FLI-1 alone can transform primary bone marrow-derived mesenchymal progenitor 
cells and generate tumors that display hallmarks of Ewing's sarcoma, including a 
small round cell phenotype, expression of EFT-associated markers, insulin like
growth factor-I dependence, and induction or repression of numerous EWS-FLI-1
target genes. These observations provide the first identification of candidate
primary cells from which EFTs originate and suggest that EWS-FLI-1 expression may
constitute the initiating event in EFT pathogenesis.

PMID: 16357154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005 Dec 1;6 Suppl 4:S14.

Mining published lists of cancer related microarray experiments: identification
of a gene expression signature having a critical role in cell-cycle control.

Finocchiaro G(1), Mancuso F, Muller H.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.
Giacomo.finocchiaro@ifom-ieo-campus.it

BACKGROUND: Routine application of gene expression microarray technology is
rapidly producing large amounts of data that necessitate new approaches of
analysis. The analysis of a specific microarray experiment profits enormously
from cross-comparing to other experiments. This process is generally performed by
numerical meta-analysis of published data where the researcher chooses the
datasets to be analyzed based on assumptions about the biological relations of
published datasets to his own data, thus severely limiting the possibility of
finding surprising connections. Here we propose using a repository of published
gene lists for the identification of interesting datasets to be subjected to more
detailed numerical analysis.
RESULTS: We have compiled lists of genes that have been reported as
differentially regulated in cancer related microarray studies. We searched these 
gene lists for statistically significant overlaps with lists of genes regulated
by the tumor suppressors p16 and pRB. We identified a highly significant overlap 
of p16 and pRB target genes with genes regulated by the EWS/FLI fusion protein.
Detailed numerical analysis of these data identified two sets of genes with
clearly distinct roles in the G1/S and the G2/M phases of the cell cycle, as
measured by enrichment of Gene Ontology categories.
CONCLUSION: We show that mining of published gene lists in the absence of
numerical detail about gene expression levels constitutes a fast, easy to
perform, widely applicable, and unbiased route towards the identification of
biologically related gene expression microarray datasets.

PMCID: PMC1866394
PMID: 16351740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2005 Dec;35(12):753-6. Epub 2005 Dec 6.

Cytogenetic confirmation of a gastrointestinal stromal tumor and ewing
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in a single patient.

Kondo S(1), Yamaguchi U, Sakurai S, Ikezawa Y, Chuman H, Tateishi U, Furuta K,
Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Divison of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

We report a rare case in which two tumor entities, a gastrointestinal stromal
tumor (GIST) and Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET), with
distinct cytogenetic features occurred in a single patient. The patient was a
72-year-old woman. The first tumor was a submucosal gastric tumor and was
diagnosed as a low-risk group GIST based on morphological characteristics and the
results of an immunohistochemical analysis for c-kit and CD34. Further
cytogenetic analysis revealed that this tumor had a point mutation (D842V
substitution) in exon 18 of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha
gene. The second tumor was found more than 4 years after the appearance of the
first tumor. ES/PNET was highly suspected both morphologically and
immunohistochemically, and the diagnosis was confirmed by the detection of an EWS
rearrangement using a fluorescence in situ hybridization technique. Although the 
cytogenetic correlations of these two tumors are unclear, accurate histologic
recognition is of clinical importance because the treatments for these two tumors
differ.

PMID: 16332719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Leuk Res. 2006 Aug;30(8):1037-42. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

ELF4 is fused to ERG in a case of acute myeloid leukemia with a
t(X;21)(q25-26;q22).

Moore SD(1), Offor O, Ferry JA, Amrein PC, Morton CC, Dal Cin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We report a novel chromosomal translocation in AML, t(X;21)(q25-26;q22),
resulting in a fusion transcript between two ETS domain family members, ELF4 (at 
Xq25) and ERG (at 21q22). ERG has been associated previously with other fusion
partners, specifically FUS and EWSR1, and implicated in both AML and Ewing's
sarcoma. RT-PCR analysis of RNA isolated from bone marrow samples from the
patient demonstrates that the translocation occurs within intron 1 of ERG isoform
1 (ERG-1) and intron 2 of ELF4 resulting in an in-frame fusion joining exon 2
from ELF4 with exon 2 of ERG. This is the first reported case of an ELF4-ERG
fusion and identification of the specific ERG exon involved in the fusion that
differentiates ERG isoforms. In addition, this case also directly implicates a
new role for ELF4 in cancer.

PMID: 16303180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Neurooncol. 2006 Mar;77(1):65-72. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumours (PNETs) located in the spinal canal; the
relevance of classification as central or peripheral PNET : case report of a
primary spinal PNET occurrence with a critical literature review.

Kampman WA(1), Kros JM, De Jong TH, Lequin MH.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Hospital of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (AZVUB), Brussels,
Belgium. kampmanwendy@hotmail.com

Intraspinal location of central PNET (cPNET) is very rare. We present a case,
critically review all publications of primary intraspinal cPNET occurrence and
discuss tendencies in clinical presentation. In several previous attempts to
summarise, authors often confused cPNET with peripheral PNET (pPNET). cPNET and
pPNET are different entities with different immunohistochemical profiles and
genetic backgrounds. Clinically, they are both aggressive tumours, but exhibit
different characteristics in their local manifestation and metastatic spread.
Survival rates are quite similar provided that treatment is applied according to 
the established protocols. Protocols in cPNET treatment differ from those for
pPNET as regards the order of the treatment sub-modalities, specific
chemotherapeutic regimen and intensity, radiation dose and its extent and
consequently, the side effects. Therefore, failure to distinguish cPNET from
pPNET leads to clinical guidance and treatment proposals based on false
assumptions, which might effect outcomes. Often, distinguishing between cPNET and
pPNET is easy, because they occur in different location. In the case of
intraspinal tumour location, however, the differentiation is crucial because both
primary cPNET and pPNET can occur intraspinally, even though this is rare.
Nowadays, demonstrating the expression of MIC2 glycoprotein by immunocytochemical
staining (CD99) showing the specific EWS-FLI1 chimeric gene presence in pPNET,
offers an easy way of making a differential diagnosis between cPNET and pPNET.

PMID: 16292490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mod Pathol. 2006 Jan;19(1):1-8.

Molecular diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in routinely
processed tissue: a comparison of two FISH strategies and RT-PCR in malignant
round cell tumors.

Bridge RS(1), Rajaram V, Dehner LP, Pfeifer JD, Perry A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Lauren V Ackerman Laboratory of
Surgical Pathology, Barnes-Jewish Hospital, Washington University Medical Center,
St Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET) is a diagnostically
challenging malignant round cell tumor with signature translocations involving
the EWS gene. These translocations are detectable with both reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. However, RT-PCR 
is less sensitive in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded than frozen tissue.
Similarly, commercial FISH probes have recently become available, but have yet to
be rigorously tested in the clinical setting. Therefore, we have compared RT-PCR 
with FISH using 'home brew' fusion probes for Ewing sarcoma (EWS)-FLI1 and a
commercial EWS break apart probe set in 67 archival round cell tumors, including 
27 EWS/PNETs. Sensitivities and specificities for both FISH assays were 91 and
100%, respectively, whereas RT-PCR had a sensitivity of 54% and a specificity of 
85%. The break apart strategy was easier to interpret than probe fusion approach.
We conclude that FISH is a more sensitive and reliable ancillary technique than
RT-PCR for the diagnosis of EWS/PNET in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue, 
although the latter provides additional information regarding fusion transcript
subtype and prognosis. The commercial break apart probe set is both readily
available and easy to interpret, making it particularly attractive. Nonetheless, 
complex round cell tumors often benefit from molecular testing with multiple
methods.

PMID: 16258512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mod Pathol. 2005 Dec;18(12):1585-90.

Dual-color, break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization for EWS gene
rearrangement distinguishes clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue from malignant
melanoma.

Patel RM(1), Downs-Kelly E, Weiss SW, Folpe AL, Tubbs RR, Tuthill RJ, Goldblum
JR, Skacel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
30355, USA. rmpate5@emory.edu

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue (malignant melanoma of soft parts) is a soft
tissue sarcoma with melanocytic differentiation that typically occurs in the
tendons and aponeuroses of young adults. As demonstrated by cytogenetics and
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, between 70% and over 90% of
clear cell sarcomas have a t(12;22) translocation, fusing the EWS and ATF1 genes 
on chromosomes 22q12 and 12q13, respectively. Identification of this
translocation distinguishes clear cell sarcoma from histologic mimics, most
importantly conventional malignant melanoma. We report our experience with a
commercially available, dual-color, break-apart fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) probe, which allows detection of EWS (22q12) gene
rearrangement in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues. Histologically and
immunophenotypically well-characterized cases of clear cell sarcoma (n = 10) and 
malignant melanoma (n = 32) were evaluated with a 22q12 dual-color, break-apart
probe (Vysis, Downer's Grove, IL, USA), which spans the known common breakpoints 
in the EWS gene on chromosome 22 (introns 7-10). Signals from tumor cell nuclei
were counted under a fluorescence microscope and the presence of red-green
break-apart signals was recorded. Of the clear cell sarcoma cases, seven of 10
showed evidence of an EWS gene rearrangement with a mean of 81.6% positive cells 
per sample (range: 60-95%). All cases of malignant melanoma (n = 32) showed
virtually absent break-apart signals in the EWS gene (less than 4% cells per
case). FISH detects EWS gene rearrangement in a substantial proportion of clear
cell sarcomas, with excellent specificity. Importantly, EWS FISH is negative in
malignant melanoma, a clinically dissimilar tumor, which may closely mimic clear 
cell sarcoma histologically and immunohistochemically. As the studied probe can
be utilized in routinely processed tissue, FISH provides an excellent alternative
to reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction in cases where fresh tissue is
unavailable.

PMID: 16258500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2005 Nov;6(6):461-71.

The potential for molecular therapeutic targets in Ewing's sarcoma.

McAllister NR(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Room 4242, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 
84112, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is an uncompromising tumor of children and young adults. Before
the introduction of chemotherapy for Ewing's sarcoma, nearly all patients
succumbed to their disease, even with highly aggressive approaches to local
control. The realization that most patients have micrometastatic disease at
presentation, and the identification of active chemotherapeutic agents for this
tumor, have resulted in significant improvements in patient survival. Modern
therapy for Ewing's sarcoma combines high-dose chemotherapy for systemic control 
of disease, with advanced surgical and/or radiation therapeutic approaches for
local control. Current therapy remains imperfect. Despite optimal management, the
cure rate for localized disease is only approximately 70%, whereas the cure rate 
for metastatic disease at presentation is less than 30%. Patients who experience 
long-term disease-free survival are at risk for significant side effects of
therapy, including infertility, limb dysfunction, and an increased risk for
second malignancies. More effective and less toxic therapies are needed. This
report presents an overview of dysregulated molecular pathways in Ewing's sarcoma
and highlights the possibility that they may serve as therapeutic targets for the
disease. Although a great deal of additional investigation is required before
most of these approaches can be assessed in the clinic, we think that these
potential new targets offer a great deal of hope for patients with Ewing's
sarcoma.

PMID: 16242051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 30;280(52):42863-76. Epub 2005 Oct 14.

The proto-oncoprotein SYT interacts with SYT-interacting protein/co-activator
activator (SIP/CoAA), a human nuclear receptor co-activator with similarity to
EWS and TLS/FUS family of proteins.

Perani M(1), Antonson P, Hamoudi R, Ingram CJ, Cooper CS, Garrett MD, Goodwin GH.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Institute of Cancer Research and Cancer
Research UK Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
Surrey, SM2 5NG, United Kingdom. michela.perani@icr.ac.uk

The proto-oncoprotein SYT is involved in the unique translocation t(X;18) found
in synovial sarcoma SYT-SSX fusions. SYT has a conserved N-terminal domain (SNH
domain) that interacts with the human paralog of Drosophila Brahma (hBRM) and
Brahma-related gene 1 (BRG1) chromatin remodeling proteins and a C-terminal
transactivating sequence rich in glutamine, proline, glycine, and tyrosine (QPGY 
domain). Here we reported the isolation of the ribonucleoprotein SYT-interacting 
protein/co-activator activator (SIP/CoAA), which specifically binds the QPGY
domain of SYT and also the SYT-SSX2 translocation fusion. SIP/CoAA is a general
nuclear co-activator and an RNA splicing modulator that contains two RNA
recognition motifs and multiple hexapeptide repeats. We showed that the region
consisting of the hexapeptide motif (YQ domain) is similar to the hexapeptide
repeat domain found in EWS and in TLS/FUS family proteins. The YQ domain also
resembles the QPGY region of SYT itself and like all these other domains acts as 
a transcriptional activator in reporter assays. Most interestingly, the last 84
amino acids adjacent to YQ down-modulate by 25-fold the YQ transactivation of the
reporter gene, and both domains are important for SIP/CoAA binding to SYT. In
addition, SYT acts together with SIP/CoAA in stimulating estrogen and
glucocorticoid receptor-dependent transcriptional activation. Activation is
hormone-dependent and requires functional hBRM and/or BRG1. The stimulation is
strongly reduced if the N-terminal region of hBRM/BRG1 (amino acids 1-211) is
deleted. This region encompasses the SNF11 binding domain (amino acids 156-211), 
which interacts specifically with SYT in vivo and in vitro.

PMID: 16227627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2005 Oct;27(10):537-42.

Gene expression profile of ewing sarcoma cell lines differing in their EWS-FLI1
fusion type.

Bandrés E(1), Malumbres R, Escalada A, Cubedo E, González I, Honorato B, Zarate
R, García-Foncillas J, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacogenomics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
ebandres@unav.es

The t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is present in up to 95% of Ewing tumor
patients and results in the formation of an EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene that encodes a 
chimeric transcription factor. Many alternative forms of EWS-FLI-1 exist because 
of variations in the location of the EWS and FLI-1 genomic breakpoints. Previous 
reports have shown that the type 1 fusion is associated with a significantly
better prognosis than the other fusion types. It has been suggested that the
observed clinical discrepancies result from different transactivation potentials 
of the various EWS-FLI-1 fusion proteins. In an attempt to identify genes whose
expression levels are differentially modulated by structurally different
EWS-FLI-1 transcription factors, we have used microarray technology to
interrogate 19,000 sequence genes to compare gene expression profile of type 1 or
non-type 1 Ewing sarcoma cell lines. Data analysis showed few qualitative
differences on gene expression; expression of only 41 genes (0.215% of possible
sequences analyzed) differed significantly between Ewing tumor cell lines
carrying EWS-FLI-1 fusion type 1 with respect to those with non-type 1 fusion.

PMID: 16217257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Cancer. 2006 Mar 15;118(6):1381-9.

The orphan nuclear receptor DAX1 is up-regulated by the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and 
is highly expressed in Ewing tumors.

Mendiola M(1), Carrillo J, García E, Lalli E, Hernández T, de Alava E, Tirode F, 
Delattre O, García-Miguel P, López-Barea F, Pestaña A, Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas A. Sols CSIC-UAM, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

The Ewing family of tumors harbors chromosomal translocations that join the
N-terminal region of the EWS gene with the C-terminal region of several
transcription factors of the ETS family, mainly FLI1, resulting in chimeric
transcription factors that play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of Ewing
tumors. To identify downstream targets of the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein, we
established 293 cells expressing constitutively either the chimeric EWS/FLI1 or
wild type FLI1 proteins and used cDNA arrays to identify genes differentially
regulated by EWS/FLI1. DAX1 (NR0B1), an unusual orphan nuclear receptor involved 
in gonadal development, sex determination and steroidogenesis, showed a
consistent up-regulation by EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein, but not by wild type FLI1.
Specific induction of DAX1 by EWS/FLI1 was confirmed in two independent cell
systems with inducible expression of EWS/FLI1. We also analyzed the expression of
DAX1 in Ewing tumors and derived cell lines, as well as in other nonrelated small
round cell tumors. DAX1 was expressed in all Ewing tumor specimens analyzed, and 
in seven out of eight Ewing tumor cell lines, but not in any neuroblastoma or
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma. Furthermore, silencing of EWS/FLI1 by RNA
interference in a Ewing tumor cell line markedly reduced the levels of DAX1 mRNA 
and protein, confirming that DAX1 up-regulation is dependent upon EWS/FLI1
expression. The high levels of DAX1 found in Ewing tumors and its potent
transcriptional repressor activity suggest that the oncogenic effect of EWS/FLI1 
may be mediated, at least in part, by the up-regulation of DAX1 expression.

PMID: 16206264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 1;65(19):8984-92.

Sequence-specific knockdown of EWS-FLI1 by targeted, nonviral delivery of small
interfering RNA inhibits tumor growth in a murine model of metastatic Ewing's
sarcoma.

Hu-Lieskovan S(1), Heidel JD, Bartlett DW, Davis ME, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90027, USA.

The development of effective, systemic therapies for metastatic cancer is highly 
desired. We show here that the systemic delivery of sequence-specific small
interfering RNA (siRNA) against the EWS-FLI1 gene product by a targeted, nonviral
delivery system dramatically inhibits tumor growth in a murine model of
metastatic Ewing's sarcoma. The nonviral delivery system uses a
cyclodextrin-containing polycation to bind and protect siRNA and transferrin as a
targeting ligand for delivery to transferrin receptor-expressing tumor cells.
Removal of the targeting ligand or the use of a control siRNA sequence eliminates
the antitumor effects. Additionally, no abnormalities in interleukin-12 and
IFN-alpha, liver and kidney function tests, complete blood counts, or pathology
of major organs are observed from long-term, low-pressure, low-volume tail-vein
administrations. These data provide strong evidence for the safety and efficacy
of this targeted, nonviral siRNA delivery system.

PMID: 16204072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 1;65(19):8698-705.

Expression of the EWS/FLI-1 oncogene in murine primary bone-derived cells Results
in EWS/FLI-1-dependent, ewing sarcoma-like tumors.

Castillero-Trejo Y(1), Eliazer S, Xiang L, Richardson JA, Ilaria RL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, Department of Pathology,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most common malignant pediatric bone tumor. Over 80% 
of Ewing sarcoma contain the oncogene EWS/FLI-1, which encodes the EWS/FLI-1
oncoprotein, a hybrid transcription factor comprised of NH2-terminal sequences
from the RNA-binding protein EWS and the DNA-binding and COOH-terminal regions of
the Ets transcription factor FLI-1. Although numerous genes are dysregulated by
EWS/FLI-1, advances in Ewing sarcoma cancer biology have been hindered by the
lack of an animal model because of EWS/FLI-1-mediated cytotoxicity. In this
study, we have developed conditions for the isolation and propagation of murine
primary bone-derived cells (mPBDC) that stably express EWS/FLI-1. Early-passage
EWS/FLI-1 mPBDCs were immortalized in culture but inefficient at tumor induction,
whereas later-passage cells formed sarcomatous tumors in immunocompetent
syngeneic mice. Murine EWS/FLI-1 tumors contained morphologically primitive cells
that lacked definitive lineage markers. Molecular characterization of murine
EWS/FLI-1 tumors revealed that some but not all had acquired a novel, clonal
in-frame p53 mutation associated with a constitutive loss of p21 expression.
Despite indications that secondary events facilitated EWS/FLI-1 mPBDC
tumorigenesis, cells remained highly dependent on EWS/FLI-1 for efficient
transformation in clonogenic assays. This Ewing sarcoma animal model will be a
useful tool for dissecting the molecular pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma and
provides rationale for the broader use of organ-specific progenitor cell
populations for the study of human sarcoma.

PMID: 16204038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Gene. 2005 Dec 19;363:1-14. Epub 2005 Oct 3.

EWS-ETS oncoproteins: the linchpins of Ewing tumors.

Janknecht R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. janknecht.ralf@mayo.edu

Ewing tumors, which comprise Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumors, are highly aggressive and mostly affect children and
adolescents. Their molecular signature is a chromosomal translocation leading to 
the generation of EWS-ETS (or very rarely FUS-ETS) fusion proteins that are
capable of transforming cells. These oncoproteins act as aberrant transcription
factors due to the fusion of an ETS DNA binding domain to a highly potent EWS (or
FUS) transactivation domain. Accordingly, many EWS-ETS target genes have been
identified whose dysregulation could contribute to the development of tumor
formation. Furthermore, EWS-ETS oncoproteins may impact on RNA splicing or affect
other proteins through disturbing their ability to form functional complexes. The
molecular knowledge gained so far from studying EWS-ETS oncoproteins has not only
broadened our understanding of Ewing tumors but also improved the diagnosis of
these highly undifferentiated tumors. In addition, several potential prognostic
markers have been uncovered and novel therapies are suggested that may improve
the still dismal survival rate of Ewing tumor patients.

PMID: 16202544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Brain Pathol. 2005 Jul;15(3):265-7.

A 15-year-old female with progressive myelopathy.

Siami-Namini K, Shuey-Drake R, Wilson D, Francel P, Perry A, Fung KM.

March 2005. A 15-year-old female presented with urinary retention, inability to
walk and low back pain. MRI disclosed an elongated epidural mass in the thoracic 
spine with cord compression and invasion into the surrounding bone and soft
tissue. Cytologic preparation at intraoperative consultation disclosed a rather
monotonous small tumor cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and vacuolated cytoplasm.
These vacuoles were best visualized with DiffQuick stain. Pathologic studies
revealed an Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/pPNET) 
with typical features including periodic acid Schiff positive diastase sensitive 
cytoplasmic substance; strong membranous pattern of immunoreactivity for CD99,
and a reciprocal translocation of t(11;22)(q24;q12) that was demonstrated by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). The vacuolated cytoplasm was produced
by glycogen as demonstrated by electron microscopy. Although primary vertebral
EWS/pPNETs are uncommon, they should be considered in the differential diagnoses 
of extradural/epidural mass of the spine in young patients.

PMID: 16196395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Clin Pathol. 2005 Oct;58(10):1051-6.

A practical approach to the clinical diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumour and other small round cell tumours sharing EWS
rearrangement using new fluorescence in situ hybridisation probes for EWSR1 on
formalin fixed, paraffin wax embedded tissue.

Yamaguchi U(1), Hasegawa T, Morimoto Y, Tateishi U, Endo M, Nakatani F, Kawai A, 
Chuman H, Beppu Y, Endo M, Kurotaki H, Furuta K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orthopaedic Oncology, National Cancer Centre Hospital and Research
Institute, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Over 90% of Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumour
(ES/PNET) cases have the t(11;22) chromosomal rearrangement, which is also found 
in other small round cell tumours, including desmoplastic small round cell tumour
(DSRCT) and clear cell sarcoma (CCS). Although this rearrangement can be analysed
by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) using routinely formalin fixed,
paraffin wax embedded (FFPE) tissues when fresh or frozen tissues are not
available, a sensitive and convenient detection method is needed for routine
clinical diagnosis.
AIMS: To investigate the usefulness of newly developed probes for detecting EWS
rearrangement resulting from chromosomal translocations using FISH and FFPE
tissue in the clinical diagnosis of ES/PNET, DSRCT, and CCS.
METHODS: Sixteen ES/PNETs, six DSRCTs, and six CCSs were studied. Three poorly
differentiated synovial sarcomas, three alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, and three
neuroblastomas served as negative controls. Interphase FISH analysis was
performed on FFPE tissue sections with a commercially available EWSR1 (22q12)
dual colour, breakapart rearrangement probe.
RESULTS: One fused signal and one split signal of orange and green, demonstrating
rearrangement of the EWS gene, was detected in 14 of 16 ES/PNETs, all six DRSCTs,
and five of six CCSs, but not in the negative controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Interphase FISH using this newly developed probe is sensitive and
specific for detecting the EWS gene on FFPE tissues and is of value in the
routine clinical diagnosis of ES/PNET, DSRCT, and CCS.

PMCID: PMC1770737
PMID: 16189150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Chin Med J (Engl). 2005 Aug 20;118(16):1323-9.

Molecular detection of EWS-Ets fusion transcripts and their clinicopathologic
significance in Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Wang H(1), Zheng J, Wang YP, Yang Y, You JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100083, China.

BACKGROUND: Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/pPNET)
is often difficult to distinguish from other small round cell tumors. The EWS-Ets
gene fusions that result from chromosomal translocations in this tumor provide
potential molecular diagnostic markers. To apply these molecular markers to
commonly available archival materials, we evaluated the feasibility of detecting 
EWS-Ets including EWS-Fli1 and EWS-ERG fusion transcripts in paraffin-embedded
tissues and its diagnostic value for detecting ES/pPNET.
METHODS: Thirteen paraffin-embedded samples of ES/pPNETs were retrieved from
archives. Thirteen cases of other tumors with small round cell features
(including rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, lymphoma, small cell carcinoma, and
desmoplastic small round cell tumor) were used as negative controls. Beta-actin
and beta2-microglobulin were used as internal controls. A nested reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-based assay was performed to
detect the EWS-Fli1 and EWS-ERG fusion transcripts.
RESULTS: Beta-actin and beta2-microglobulin were detected in 10/13 and 13/13
ES/pPNETs, respectively. EWS-Fli1 fusion transcripts were detected in 11 of 13
(85%) ES/pPNETs. Three chimeric transcripts, all EWS-Fli1, were detected in
ES/pPNET samples. Among 11 EWS-Fli1-positive cases, 7 cases had a type I fusion
transcript involving fusion of EWS exon 7 with Fli1 exon 6, 2 cases had a type II
fusion transcript involving EWS exon 7 with Fli1 exon 5, and 2 cases expressed
fusion transcripts involving EWS exon 7 and Fli1 exon 8. Type I EWS-Fli1 fusion
predominated over other types. Fusion types could not be distinguished in the
remaining 2 cases. Thirteen negative controls did not show detectable chimeric
messages. There was a significant relationship between EWS-Fli1 fusion
transcripts and CD99 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular detection of EWS-Fli1 fusion transcripts in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded material by nested RT-PCR is feasible and is useful for the
diagnosis and differential diagnosis of ES/pPNETs.

PMID: 16157025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cancer Lett. 2005 Sep 28;227(2):185-91. Epub 2005 Jan 8.

The PLAGL1 gene is down-regulated in human extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma
tumors.

Poulin H(1), Labelle Y.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de recherche en génétique humaine et moléculaire, Hôpital Saint-François
d'Assise, CHUQ, Que., Canada G1L 3L5.

In approximately 70% of human extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) tumors, a
t(9;22) chromosome translocation gives rise to a fusion protein, named EWS/NOR1, 
containing the amino-terminal domain of EWS fused to the complete amino acid
sequence of the nuclear receptor NOR1. Several observations suggest that one role
of EWS/NOR1 in EMC may be to deregulate the expression of specific genes involved
in the tumoral process. In order to identify these genes, we have used a CFK2
chondrogenic cell line over-expressing EWS/NOR1. A differential display analysis 
has identified the PLAGL1 gene as being down-regulated in the CFK2(EWS/NOR1) cell
line compared to native CFK2 cells. RT-PCR analyses show that whereas the PLAGL1 
mRNAs encoding the two isoforms of the protein are highly expressed in four human
chondrocyte immortalized cell lines and two human chondrocyte primary cultures,
they are strongly down-regulated in six EMC tumors. We conclude that
down-regulation of PLAGL1 may be a significant contributing factor in the
development of EMC tumors.

PMID: 16112421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Korean Med Sci. 2005 Aug;20(4):687-90.

Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma of the hard palate.

Kang MS(1), Yoon HK, Choi JB, Eum JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Pusan Paik Hospital, College of Medicine, Inje
University, Busan, Korea. pathkang@inje.ac.kr

Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma (EES) is a rare soft tissue tumor morphologically
indistinguishable from the more common Ewing's sarcoma of bone. We report a case 
of EES arising in the hard palate of 34-yr-old male patient. Microscopically, the
monotonous small round cells without neuronal differentiation showed membranous
positive immunoreactivity for MIC2/CD99 and vimentin. Ultrastructurally, the
tumor cells showed a few intracytoplasmic organelles without evidence of
neurosecretory granules or neurofilaments. The EWS-FLI1 chimeric gene was
identified using the nested reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.

PMCID: PMC2782172
PMID: 16100468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Adv Anat Pathol. 2005 Jul;12(4):212-20.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors.

Khoury JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA. Joseph.Khoury@stjude.org

The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) comprises morphologically heterogeneous
tumors that are characterized by nonrandom chromosomal translocations involving
the EWS gene and one of several members of the ETS family of transcription
factors. The translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) is the most common and leads to the 
formation of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein, which contributes to ESFT pathogenesis 
by modulating the expression of target genes. Tumors may be composed of small
uniform cells with minimal morphologic evidence of differentiation, or they may
be composed of larger, less uniform cells with varying degrees of neuroectodermal
differentiation. CD99 expression is identified in nearly all ESFT and constitutes
a useful positive marker when used as part of a panel of immunostains that can
help rule out other differential diagnostic considerations. Molecular diagnostic 
tests commonly used to detect the presence of ESFT-specific translocations
include RT-PCR and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Current therapy for
patients with ESFT includes chemotherapy and surgery with or without radiation
therapy. At present, the most significant prognostic factor for patients with
ESFT is whether the disease is localized or metastatic.

PMID: 16096383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2005 Aug;63(8):1216-21.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the mandible with cytogenetic and
molecular biology aberrations.

Alrawi SJ(1), Tan D, Sullivan M, Winston J, Loree T, Hicks W, Rigual N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo,
NY 14263, USA. sadir.alrawi@roswellpark.org

PMID: 16094594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biosci. 2005 Jun;30(3):371-6.

Type 1 (11;22)(q24:q12) translocation is common in Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral
neuroectodermal tumour in south Indian patients.

Parija T(1), Shirley S, Uma S, Rajalekshmy KR, Ayyappan S, Rajkumar T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute (WIA), Adyar, Chennai 600
020, India.

The Ewing's sarcoma family can present diagnostic difficulties. In the past the
basis of diagnosis has been a exclusion. Identification of a specific
translocation especially t(11;22) (EWS-FLI 1 fusion gene), which is seen in
nearly 85 percent of Ewing's sarcoma cases can help in precise diagnosis. We have
carried out a study on twenty patient samples diagnosed to have Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumour (PNET)/small round cell malignant
tumour. The study involved RT-PCR analysis for the fusion transcript, followed by
sequencing to identify the specific type of fusion. Ninety percent (18/20) of the
samples tested were found to be t(11;22) translocations involving EWS-FLI 1
genes. Sixty-one percent (11/18) were found to be type 1 fusion and seven were
type 2 (39 percentage). This is the first study in India with quantitative
information about the types of EWS-FLI 1 translocations present in Ewing's family
of tumours in south Indian patients.

PMID: 16052075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Proteins. 2005 Oct 1;61(1):164-75.

Different methylation characteristics of protein arginine methyltransferase 1 and
3 toward the Ewing Sarcoma protein and a peptide.

Pahlich S(1), Bschir K, Chiavi C, Belyanskaya L, Gehring H.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemisches Institut, Universität Zürich, Switzerland.

The multifunctional Ewing Sarcoma (EWS) protein, a member of a large family of
RNA-binding proteins, is extensively asymmetrically dimethylated at arginine
residues within RGG consensus sequences. Using recombinant proteins we examined
whether type I protein arginine methyltransferase (PRMT)1 or 3 is responsible for
asymmetric dimethylations of the EWS protein. After in vitro methylation of the
EWS protein by GST-PRMT1, we identified 27 dimethylated arginine residues out of 
30 potential methylation sites by mass spectrometry-based techniques (MALDI-TOF
MS and MS/MS). Thus, PRMT1 recognizes most if not all methylation sites of the
EWS protein. With GST-PRMT3, however, only nine dimethylated arginines, located
mainly in the C-terminal region of EWS protein, could be assigned, indicating
that structural determinants prevent complete methylation. In contrary to
previous reports this study also revealed that trypsin is able to cleave after
methylated arginines. Pull-down experiments showed that endogenous EWS protein
binds efficiently to GST-PRMT1 but less to GST-PRMT3, which is in accordance to
the in vitro methylation results. Furthermore, methylation of a peptide
containing different methylation sites revealed differences in the site
selectivity as well as in the kinetic properties of GST-PRMT1 and GST-PRMT3.
Kinetic differences due to an inhibition effect of the methylation inhibitor
S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine could be excluded by determining the corresponding K(i)
values of the two enzymes and the K(d) values for the methyl donor
S-adenosyl-L-methionine. The study demonstrates the strength of MS-based methods 
for a qualitative and quantitative analysis of enzymic arginine methylation, a
posttranslational modification that becomes more and more the object of
investigations.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16044463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2005 Jun;22(4):297-308.

Identification of an immunogenic EWS-FLI1-derived HLA-DR-restricted T helper cell
epitope.

Meyer-Wentrup F(1), Richter G, Burdach S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Munich
University of Technology, München, Germany.
friederike.meyer-wentrup@medizin.uni-halle.de

Immunotherapy with tumor-specific peptide-loaded dendritic cells represents a
promising therapeutic approach for patients with multifocal primary or early
relapsed Ewing family tumors (EFT). The authors therefore screened a peptide
library derived from the fusion region of the EFT-specific chimeric transcription
factor EWS-FLI1 for immunogenic peptides. T-cell priming with 10 peptides was
evaluated using IFN(gamma) video-assisted automated enzyme-linked immunospot
technique. The authors report the identification of the first EFT-specific
immunogenic T-cell epitope so far. Its identification will lead to a better
understanding of EFT immunology and may improve DC-based immunotherapy.

PMID: 16020117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 1;65(11):4633-44.

EWS-FLI1 fusion protein up-regulates critical genes in neural crest development
and is responsible for the observed phenotype of Ewing's family of tumors.

Hu-Lieskovan S(1), Zhang J, Wu L, Shimada H, Schofield DE, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90027, USA.

Tumor-specific translocations are common in tumors of mesenchymal origin. Whether
the translocation determines the phenotype, or vice versa, is debatable. Ewing's 
family tumors (EFT) are consistently associated with an EWS-FLI1 translocation
and a primitive neural phenotype. Histogenesis and classification are therefore
uncertain. To test whether EWS-FLI1 fusion gene expression is responsible for the
primitive neuroectodermal phenotype of EFT, we established a
tetracycline-inducible EWS-FLI1 expression system in a rhabdomyosarcoma cell line
RD. Cell morphology changed after EWS-FLI1 expression, resembling cultured EFT
cells. Xenografts showed typical EFT features, distinct from tumors formed by
parental RD. Neuron-specific microtubule gene MAPT, parasympathetic marker
cholecystokinin, and epithelial marker keratin 18 were up-regulated. Conversely, 
myogenesis was diminished. Comparison of the up-regulated genes in RD-EF with the
Ewing's signature genes identified important EWS-FLI1 downstream genes, many
involved in neural crest differentiation. These results were validated by
real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis and RNA interference technology
using small interfering RNA against EWS-FLI1 breakpoint. The present study shows 
that the neural phenotype of Ewing's tumors is attributable to the EWS-FLI1
expression and the resultant phenotype resembles developing neural crest. Such
tumors have a limited neural phenotype regardless of tissue of origin. These
findings challenge traditional views of histogenesis and tumor origin.

PMID: 15930281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Nov;45(6):850-6.

Intracranial Ewing sarcoma.

Mazur MA(1), Gururangan S, Bridge JA, Cummings TJ, Mukundan S, Fuchs H, Larrier
N, Halperin EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The occurrence of primary extraosseous Ewing sarcoma (EES) of the central nervous
system (CNS) has only rarely been reported in the literature. It is important to 
distinguish this entity from the more common central primitive neuroectodermal
tumor (PNET) of brain, since the management of these tumors is different from
that of EES. We present the clinical, radiologic, and pathologic features of two 
cases of EES occurring in the brain. The diagnosis was further confirmed by
detection of a rearrangement of the FLI1 and/or EWS gene loci in tumors from both
patients using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). Although rare, the
possibility of EES should be considered particularly when tumors that arise near 
the meningeal surface of the brain and have the pathologic appearance of a PNET. 
Demonstration of t(11;22)(q24;q12) by molecular analysis essentially confirms the
diagnosis and enables the oncologist to choose appropriate therapy.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15929128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Nov;45(6):846-9.

Concomitant Ewing sarcoma and acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a 5-year-old girl.

Masjosthusmann K(1), Bielack SS, Köhler G, Florax A, Schiborr M, Bruch J,
Reinhardt D, Kuhn N, Paulussen M, Jürgens H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's
Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

Malignancies from the Ewing family of tumors and acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) are not known to be associated with each other. A 5-year-old girl was
incidentally found to suffer from acute lymphoblastic leukemia during bone marrow
staging for Ewing sarcoma of the radius. The simultaneous presence of two
distinct neoplasms was confirmed by RT-PCR, with EWS/FLI1 type 1 rearrangement in
the bone tumor and TEL/AML1 rearrangement in the marrow. She was treated with
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgery and was in remission of both diseases 31 
months after diagnosis.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15926159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 29;280(30):27544-51. Epub 2005 May 26.

Inhibition of platelet-derived growth factor-induced cell growth signaling by a
short interfering RNA for EWS-Fli1 via down-regulation of phospholipase D2 in
Ewing sarcoma cells.

Nozawa S(1), Ohno T, Banno Y, Dohjima T, Wakahara K, Fan DG, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University School of Medicine, 1-1
Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

EWS-Fli1, a fusion gene resulting from a chromosomal translocation t(11;22,
q24;q12) and found in Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumors, encodes
a transcriptional activator and promotes cellular transformation. However, the
precise biological functions of its products remain unknown. To investigate the
role of EWS-Fli1 in cell growth signaling, we transfected Ewing sarcoma TC-135
cells with short interfering RNAs for EWS-Fli1. EWS-Fli1 knockdown reduced cell
growth and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB-induced activation of the
growth signaling enzymes. Interestingly, phospholipase D2 (but not the PDGF-BB
receptor) showed marked down-regulation in the EWS-Fli1-knocked down TC-135 cells
compared with the control cells. In Ewing sarcoma TC-135 cells, the
PDGF-BB-induced phosphorylation of growth signaling involving extracellular
signal-regulated kinase, Akt, p70S6K, and the expression of cyclin D3 were
markedly inhibited by transfection with short interfering RNA phospholipase
(PL)-D2. The PDGF-BB-induced activation of growth signaling was also suppressed
by 1-butanol, which prevents the production of phosphatidic acid by phospholipase
D (but not by t-butyl alcohol), thereby implicating PLD2 in PDGF-BB-mediated
signaling in TC-135 cells. These results suggest that EWS-Fli1 may play a role in
the regulation of tumor proliferation-signaling enzymes via PLD2 expression in
Ewing sarcoma cells.

PMID: 15919668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Stem Cells. 2005 Jun-Jul;23(6):738-51.

Stimulation of Oct-4 activity by Ewing's sarcoma protein.

Lee J(1), Rhee BK, Bae GY, Han YM, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science,
Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea.

The Oct-4 gene encodes a transcription factor that is expressed in embryonic stem
(ES) cells and germ cells. Oct-4 is known to function as a transcriptional
activator of genes involved in maintaining an undifferentiated totipotent state
and possibly in preventing expression of genes activated during differentiation. 
In addition, it is a putative proto-oncogene and a critical player in the genesis
of human testicular germ cell tumors. Although much effort has gone toward
characterizing Oct-4, there is still little known about the molecular mechanisms 
and the proteins that regulate Oct-4 function. To identify cofactors that control
Oct-4 function in vivo, we used a recently developed bacterial two-hybrid
screening system and isolated a novel ES cell-derived cDNA encoding Ewing's
sarcoma protein (EWS). EWS is a proto-oncogene and putative RNA-binding protein
involved in human cancers. By using glutathione-S-transferase (GST) pull-down
assays, we were able to confirm the interaction between Oct-4 and EWS in vitro,
and moreover, coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization studies have shown that
these proteins also associate in vivo. We have mapped the EWS-interacting region 
to the POU domain of Oct-4. In addition, three independent sites on EWS are
involved in binding to Oct-4. In this study, we report that Oct-4 and EWS are
coexpressed in the pluripotent mouse and human ES cells. Consistent with its
ability to bind to and colocalize with Oct-4, ectopic expression of EWS enhances 
the transactivation ability of Oct-4. Moreover, a chimeric protein generated by
fusion of EWS (1-295) to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain significantly increases
promoter activity of a reporter containing GAL4 DNA-binding sites, suggesting the
presence of a strong activation domain within EWS. Taken together, our results
suggest that Oct-4-mediated transactivation is stimulated by EWS.

PMID: 15917470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Apr;4(4):456-8. Epub 2005 Apr 28.

Looking downstream of sarcoma-associated chimeric transcription factors: when is 
a target really a target?

Mercado GE(1), Barr FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6082, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Apr;4(4):449-55.

PMID: 15908795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Jun;159(2):177-80.

Cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic studies of a variant of t(21;22),
ins(22;21)(q12;q21q22), with a deletion of the 3' EWSR1 gene in a patient with
Ewing sarcoma.

Lee J(1), Hopcus-Niccum DJ, Mulvihill JJ, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most common malignant bone tumor in children and
young adults. Cytogenetic analysis to identify a common t(11;22)(q23;q12) or less
frequently a t(21;22)(q22;q12) or t(7;22)(p22;q12) plays an important role in the
confirmation of the clinical diagnosis. We report a case of a 10-year-old female 
who had extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma. Conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed
that 11 out of 20 cells had a derivative chromosome 22, possibly due to an
insertion of the long arm of the 21q21 approximately q22. This finding was
confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) utilizing whole chromosome
paint probes specific for chromosomes 21 and 22. Hybridization utilizing LSI
EWSR1, dual-color break-apart rearrangement probe unexpectedly revealed that the 
3' EWSR1 gene was lost on the derivative chromosome 22. This finding suggests
that the insertion of chromosome 21 is another mechanism that could lead to
EWS-ERG gene fusion. To our knowledge, this is the first case report of an
insertion of a segment of 21q21 approximately q22 into the long arm of 21q12 with
a loss of a DNA segment around the breakpoint on the derivative chromosome 22 in 
Ewing sarcoma.

PMID: 15899394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Sep;44(1):97-102.

Fusion of the EWSR1 and ATF1 genes without expression of the MITF-M transcript in
angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma.

Hallor KH(1), Mertens F, Jin Y, Meis-Kindblom JM, Kindblom LG, Behrendtz M, Kalén
A, Mandahl N, Panagopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
karolin.Hansen_Hallor@med.lu.se

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue tumor that usually
occurs in children and young adults. Only two cases of AFH with genetic
rearrangements have been reported previously; both of these had a FUS-ATF1 fusion
gene. We have studied an AFH from a 9-year-old boy whose tumor displayed a
t(12;22)(q13;q12) as the sole cytogenetic aberration. FISH,RT-PCR, and sequence
analyses revealed an EWSR1-ATF1 fusion gene that has previously been reported in 
clear cell sarcoma (CCS), a soft tissue sarcoma that is morphologically and
clinically distinct from AFH. This study thus has demonstrated that the
EWSR1-ATF1 chimera represents a fusion gene that can be associated with different
tumor types. Simultaneous expression of the EWSR1-ATF1 and MITF-M transcripts in 
CCS has led to the proposal that the MITF-M promoter is transactivated by
EWSR1-ATF1. The AFH, however, did not express the MITF-M transcript, supporting
the theory that MITF-M expression in CCS is a reflection of its cellular origin, 
rather than a consequence of the presence of an EWSR1-ATF1 fusion protein.
Activation of the EWSR1-ATF1 oncogene is probably an early step in the
transformation process, but the overall gene expression patterns are likely to
vary considerably between AFH and CCS, in keeping with their clinicopathologic
differences.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15884099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 May 4;97(9):627.

RNA-based nanoparticle treatment shows promise in Ewing's sarcoma model.

Hede K.

PMID: 15870430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Apr;4(4):449-55. Epub 2005 Apr 21.

Aberrant laminin beta3 isoforms downstream of EWS-ETS fusion genes in Ewing
family tumors.

Irifune H(1), Nishimori H, Watanabe G, Yoshida K, Ikeda T, Matsui C, Morohashi M,
Kawaguchi S, Nagoya S, Wada T, Yamashita T, Nakamura Y, Tokino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Apr;4(4):456-8.

Ewing family tumors (EFTs) are associated with a chromosomal translocation
resulting in a fusion of the amino-terminus of EWS with the DNA-binding domain of
an ETS transcription factor. Although previous reports suggested that these
chimeric proteins would act as aberrant transcription factors, their downstream
targets have not been fully elucidated. To identify downstream targets of these
EWS-ETS fusion proteins, we introduced EWS-ETS fusion constructs into a human
fibrosarcoma cell line, HT-1080, by retroviral transduction. Here we report that 
the LAMB3 gene encoding the beta3 chain of basement membrane protein laminin-5 is
induced to a significantly higher level in cells expressing EWS-ETSs than in
cells expressing normal ETSs. Additionally through use of an antisense
oligonucleotide for EWS-ERG in the W-ES EFT cell line, laminin beta3 protein was 
reduced coordinately with EWS-ERG fusion protein expression. Furthermore, we
found small mRNAs were preferentially transcribed from the LAMB3 gene in EFT cell
lines. Molecular cloning of the entire coding region shows that the alternative
transcripts from different promoter(s) located within the intron 14, which encode
small proteins, likely are major products of the LAMB3 gene in EFT cells. We show
that the small isoforms conferred increased anchorage-independent proliferation
to NIH3T3 cells. Together with previous studies showing that laminin-5 is
involved in the invasive and malignant phenotype of several tumor types, our data
suggest that the oncogenic effect of EWS-ETS may be mediated in part by
upregulation of LAMB3 expression.

PMID: 15846078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Semin Cancer Biol. 2005 Jun;15(3):197-205.

The EWS-WT1 gene fusion in desmoplastic small round cell tumor.

Gerald WL(1), Haber DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA. geraldw@mskcc.org

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a poorly understood neoplasm with 
distinctive clinical, histologic and immunophenotypic features. It is associated 
with a novel, specific chromosomal abnormality, t(11;22)(p13;q12) that fuses EWS 
with WT1 leading to production of a chimeric protein with transcriptional
regulatory activity. This chimeric transcription factor has unique DNA-binding
properties and regulates expression of specific target genes. Several of these
have been identified and their biological role characterized. The dysregulated
expression of EWS-WT1 targets contribute to the malignant phenotype of DSRCT and 
provide valuable insight regarding the molecular mechanisms underlying the
development and progression of this distinct translocation associated tumor.

PMID: 15826834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Semin Cancer Biol. 2005 Jun;15(3):189-96.

Context matters: the hen or egg problem in Ewing's sarcoma.

Kovar H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Kinderspitalgasse
6, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. heinrich.kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

Ewing's sarcoma and related tumors (ESFT) are characterized by rearrangements of 
EWS with ets family genes. While detection of these gene fusions greatly
facilitated diagnosis, it has not provided any clues about the tissue of origin. 
Immunological and gene expression profiling studies favour a neuroectodermal
histogenesis. These investigations did not appreciate the impact of EWS-ets
proteins on the tumor phenotype. Introduction of EWS-ets into different cellular 
models resulted in diverse outcomes ranging from the induction of cell cycle
arrest or apoptosis to transformation and tumorigenicity, and from blocked
differentiation to trans-differentiation. Thus, the molecular signature of
EWS-ets proteins depends on the cell type. The hen or egg problem in ESFT,
therefore, is whether ESFT reflect the phenotype of the tumor stem cell that is
blocked in differentiation by the activity of the EWS-ets gene fusion or if the
oncogene imposes an incomplete differentiation program on a pluripotent precursor
cell. This article addresses the problem by considering the tissue distribution
of FLI1 and ERG expression and by reviewing evidence for combinatorial control of
EWS-ets activity.

PMID: 15826833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Int J Cancer. 2005 Sep 1;116(3):385-94.

Transactivation of cyclin E gene by EWS-Fli1 and antitumor effects of cyclin
dependent kinase inhibitor on Ewing's family tumor cells.

Li X(1), Tanaka K, Nakatani F, Matsunobu T, Sakimura R, Hanada M, Okada T,
Nakamura T, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

Chromosomal translocation t(11; 22)(q24; q12) is detected in approximately 90% of
Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) including Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor. This results in the formation of the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene,
which produces EWS-Fli1 fusion protein. This chimerical gene product acts as an
aberrant transcriptional activator, which may be responsible for the
tumorigenesis of EFTs. We have previously reported that cyclin E expression was
upregulated in EFT cells and in EWS-Fli1 transformed fibroblastic cells. However,
the mechanism of the overexpression of cyclin E by EWS-Fli1 is still unknown. In 
our study, we investigated the mechanism of transactivation of the cyclin E gene 
in EFT cells. We found that EWS-Fli1 enhanced the activity of the cyclin E gene
promoter partially through E2F binding sites in the promoter. In addition, the
basic transcriptional factor, Sp1, might also be involved in the transactivation 
of the cyclin E gene by EWS-Fli1. To study the biological significance of cyclin 
E overexpression in EFT cells, we used flavopiridol, a pan-cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK) inhibitor and found that flavopiridol efficiently suppressed the
growth of EFT cells in vitro and in vivo by the inhibition of cyclinE/CDK2 kinase
activity and the induction of apoptosis. These results suggest that targeting of 
the cyclin/CDK complex may provide new insight into treatment of EFTs.

PMID: 15818598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Histopathology. 2005 Apr;46(4):472-4.

An unusual case of clear cell sarcoma arising in the jejunum highlights the
diagnostic value of molecular genetic techniques in establishing a correct
diagnosis.

Achten R, Debiec-Rychter M, De Wever I, Sciot R.

PMID: 15810965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Oncogene. 2005 Apr 14;24(16):2715-22.

PTPL1 is a direct transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1 and modulates Ewing's
Sarcoma tumorigenesis.

Abaan OD(1), Levenson A, Khan O, Furth PA, Uren A, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Ewing's Sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are characterized by a translocation
t(11:22) forming an aberrant transcription factor EWS-FLI1. Protein tyrosine
phosphatase L1 (PTPL1) was identified as a gene upregulated by EWS-FLI1 in
transfected cells by microarray. Our results show that PTPL1 is a transcriptional
target of EWS-FLI1 both by chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter activation 
studies. We demonstrate that PTPL1 is highly expressed in ESFT cells and patient 
tumors compared with normal tissues, with a trend towards higher expression in
metastatic versus primary tumors. Reduction of PTPL1 protein in ESFT cells
correlated with a significant reduction in both monolayer and soft-agar cell
growth. In addition, these PTPL1-reduced cells were more sensitive to
etoposide-induced apoptosis than the controls. We therefore report a novel
transcriptional activation of a phosphatase involved in the oncogenesis of ESFT. 
Increasing interest in specific phosphatase inhibitors would allow PTPL1 to be
evaluated as a therapeutic target in ESFT.

PMID: 15782144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Apr 1;304(2):443-56. Epub 2004 Dec 13.

The actin cytoskeleton-associated protein zyxin acts as a tumor suppressor in
Ewing tumor cells.

Amsellem V(1), Kryszke MH, Hervy M, Subra F, Athman R, Leh H, Brachet-Ducos C,
Auclair C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et Pharmacologie génétique appliquée, CNRS UMR
8113, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan, 61 avenue du Président Wilson, 94230
Cachan, France. vamsel@igr.fr

Changes in cell architecture, essentially linked to profound cytoskeleton
rearrangements, are common features accompanying cell transformation. Supporting 
the involvement of the microfilament network in tumor cell behavior, several
actin-binding proteins, including zyxin, a potential regulator of actin
polymerization, may play a role in oncogenesis. In this work, we investigate the 
status of zyxin in Ewing tumors, a family of pediatric malignancies of bone and
soft tissues, which are mainly associated with a t(11;22) chromosomal
translocation encoding the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein. We observe that
EWS-FLI1-transformed murine fibroblasts, as well as human Ewing tumor-derived
SK-N-MC cells, exhibit a complete disruption of their actin cytoskeleton,
retaining very few stress fibers, focal adhesions and cell-to-cell contacts. We
show that within these cells, zyxin is expressed at very low levels and remains
diffusely distributed throughout the cytoplasm, instead of concentrating in
actin-rich dynamic structures. We demonstrate that zyxin gene transfer into
EWS-FLI1-transformed fibroblasts elicits reconstitution of zyxin-rich focal
adhesions and intercellular junctions, dramatic reorganization of the actin
cytoskeleton, decreased cell motility, inhibition of anchorage-independent growth
and impairment of tumor formation in athymic mice. We observe similar phenotypic 
changes after zyxin gene transfer in SK-N-MC cells, suggesting that zyxin has
tumor suppressor activity in Ewing tumor cells.

PMID: 15748890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Mar 2;33(4):1323-31. Print 2005.

RGG-boxes of the EWS oncoprotein repress a range of transcriptional activation
domains.

Alex D(1), Lee KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong University of Science & Technology Clear
Water Bay, Kowloon Hong Kong, SAR, China.

The Ewings Sarcoma Oncoprotein (EWS) interacts with several components of the
mammalian transcriptional and pre-mRNA splicing machinery and is also found in
the cytoplasm and even on the cell surface. The apparently diverse cellular
functions of EWS are, however, not well characterized. EWS harbours a potent
N-terminal transcriptional activation domain (the EAD) that is revealed in the
context of oncogenic EWS-fusion proteins (EFPs) and a C-terminal RNA-binding
domain (RBD) that recruits pre-mRNA splicing factors and may couple transcription
and splicing. In contrast to EFPs, the presumed transcriptional role of normal
EWS remains enigmatic. Here, we report that multiple RGG-boxes within the RBD are
necessary and sufficient for cis-repression of the EAD and that RGG-boxes can
also repress in-trans, within dimeric partners. Lys can functionally substitute
for Arg, indicating that the basic nature of the Arg side chain is the critical
determinant of RGG-box-mediated repression. In addition to the EAD, RGG-boxes can
repress a broad range of activation domains (including those of VP16, E1a and
CREB), but repression can be alleviated by the simultaneous presence of more than
one activation domain. We therefore propose that a key function of RGG boxes
within native EWS is to restrict promiscuous activation by the EAD while still
allowing EWS to enter functional transcription complexes and participate in other
transactions involving pre-mRNAs.

PMCID: PMC552958
PMID: 15743974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 8;329(2):653-60.

Transcriptional down-regulation through nuclear exclusion of EWS methylated by
PRMT1.

Araya N(1), Hiraga H, Kako K, Arao Y, Kato S, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, Graduate School of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Ten-noudai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8577, Japan.

The EWS gene is known to be chromosomally translocated and fused to various
members of the DNA-binding transcription factors in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor. The product of this gene encodes the N-terminal
transcriptional activation domain and the C-terminal RNA-binding domain
containing an RNA-recognition motif and three arginine-glycine-glycine rich (RGG)
motifs. Recently, we demonstrated EWS as a coactivator for hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4 (HNF4)-mediated transcription. However, regulatory factors controlling
EWS function are poorly characterized. In this study, we found that a protein
arginine methyltransferase, PRMT1, physically interacts with EWS, whose cellular 
localization depends upon its RGG motifs targeted for methylation. Overexpression
of PRMT1 down-regulates coactivator activity of EWS for HNF4-mediated
transcription, because of the cytoplasmic retention of EWS from the nucleus.
These results suggest that PRMT1 plays a post-translationally important role in
regulating the transcriptional activity.

PMID: 15737635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Int J Surg Pathol. 2005 Jan;13(1):43-50.

Keratin-positive Ewing's sarcoma: an ultrastructural study of 12 cases.

Srivastava A(1), Rosenberg AE, Selig M, Rubin BP, Nielsen GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tufts-New England Medical Center, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET) is an aggressive
neoplasm of bone and soft tissue. Histologically, it is characterized by the
presence of small round blue cells, which usually express MIC-2 and FLI-1
immunohistochemically. The most specific feature for diagnosis, however, is
cytogenetic or molecular evidence of a consistent abnormality, the
t(11;22)(q24;q12), or variants thereof. The immunohistochemical expression of
keratins in a significant proportion of these cases has been highlighted in
several recent studies. The ultrastructural features of these keratin-positive
tumors have not, however, been characterized in detail. In this study we analyzed
the ultrastructural features of 12 well-documented EWS/PNETs that stained
strongly for pankeratin by immunohistochemistry. Ultrastructurally, the tumor
cells contained a few organelles, which included a small number of mitochondria, 
poorly developed Golgi complexes, free ribosomes, and inconspicuous
rough-endoplasmic reticulum. Rudimentary cell junctions were seen in 2 tumors
while prominent junctions were observed in the remaining 10. Five tumors
contained intracytoplasmic filaments, and definite tonofibrils were identified in
2. Well-developed basal lamina around tumor cells were also demonstrated in 2
tumors. Follow-up information was available for all cases. Seven patients died of
disease, 2 are alive with disease, and 3 have no current evidence of disease. The
cohort includes 5 patients with a type-1 translocation, which has been associated
with a better prognosis in some studies; 4 of these patients have died of their
disease, and 1 is alive with recurrent disease. This study shows that
keratin-positive EWS/PNETs have evidence of epithelial differentiation
ultrastructurally, and may possibly represent a more aggressive subset of the
EWS/PNET group of tumors.

PMID: 15735854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Oncogene. 2005 Apr 7;24(15):2512-24.

EWS-FLI1 target genes recovered from Ewing's sarcoma chromatin.

Siligan C(1), Ban J, Bachmaier R, Spahn L, Kreppel M, Schaefer KL, Poremba C,
Aryee DN, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), St Anna Kinderspital,
Kinderspitalgasse 6, Vienna A1090, Austria.

In all, 85% of Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), a neoplasm of unknown
histogenesis, express EWS-FLI1 transcription factor gene fusions. To characterize
direct target genes avoiding artificial model systems, we cloned genomic DNA from
ESFT chromatin precipitating with EWS-FLI1. We now present a comprehensive list
of 99 putative transcription factor targets identified, for the first time, by a 
hypothesis-free approach based on physical interaction. Gene-derived chromatin
fragments co-precipitating with EWS-FLI1 were nonrandomly distributed over the
human genome and localized predominantly to the upstream region and the first two
introns of the genes. At least 20% of putative direct EWS-FLI1 targets were
neural genes. One-third of genes recovered showed a significant ESFT-specific
expression pattern and were found to be altered upon RNAi-mediated knockdown of
EWS-FLI1. Among them, MK-STYX, encoding a MAP kinase phosphatase-like protein,
was consistently expressed in ESFT. EWS-FLI1 was found to drive MK-STYX
expression by binding to a single ETS binding motif within the first gene intron.
MK-STYX serves as precedence for successful recovery of direct EWS-FLI1 targets
from the authentic ESFT cellular context, the most relevant system to study
oncogenic mechanisms for the discovery of new therapeutic targets in this
disease.

PMID: 15735734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Jun;43(2):217-22.

EWSR1 is fused to POU5F1 in a bone tumor with translocation t(6;22)(p21;q12).

Yamaguchi S(1), Yamazaki Y, Ishikawa Y, Kawaguchi N, Mukai H, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2008 Mar;47(3):266.

POU5F1(OCT3/4) is a sequence-specific transcription factor that is essential for 
keeping germ cells and embryonic stem cells in an immature and pluripotent
status. In this article, we report that POU5F1 was fused to EWSR1 in a case of
undifferentiated sarcoma derived from pelvic bone with chromosomal translocation 
t(6;22)(p21;q12). The EWSR1-POU5F1 chimera consists of exons 1-6 of EWSR1 and
exons 2-5 and a part of exon 1 of POU5F1. The predicted amino acid sequence
indicates that the chimera is composed of the N-terminal QSY domain of EWS that
functions as a transcriptional activation domain and the C-terminal POU
DNA-binding domains derived from POU5F1. The t(6;22) tumor does not belong to any
known categories of bone and soft-tissue tumors (BSTs). It is suggested that
EWS-POU5F1 may act as an oncogenic transcription factor and that its expression
may contribute to undifferentiated and immature phenotypes of BST.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15729702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2005 Mar;14(1):23-8.

Molecular diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues by RT-PCR and fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Qian X(1), Jin L, Shearer BM, Ketterling RP, Jalal SM, Lloyd RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Recent studies have suggested that formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissues can be used for molecular analyses by fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) and RT-PCR. We analyzed 18 cases of ES/PNET for the t(11;22)(q24;q12) and 
t(21;22)(q22;q12) fusion transcripts by RT-PCR and analyzed for EWS translocation
by interphase FISH with a dual color fusion probe to compare these two approaches
directly. RT-PCR detected 13 (72%) EWS-FLI-1 fusions (type I=10, type II=3) and 2
(11%) EWS-ERG fusions. Three cases could not be evaluated because the
housekeeping gene phosphoglycerate kinase (internal mRNA control) was not
amplified. FISH was diagnostic in 15 of 18 cases (83%). There were three
discordant cases between RT-PCR and FISH (concordance of 83%). Using a
combination of RT-PCR and FISH, the results were complementary. One advantage of 
RT-PCR analysis was that subtypes of EWS translocation could be determined
specifically (type I, type II and ERG). These findings indicate that because of
the difficulties and limitations associated with the molecular analysis of FFPE
tissues, a combination of RT-PCR and FISH may be a better approach to enhance the
sensitivity and accuracy of detecting ES/PNET translocations in FFPE tissues with
suboptimally preserved nucleic acids.

PMID: 15714060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 2004;42(4):229-34.

Heterogeneity of extraparenchymal primitive neuroectodermal tumors within the
craniospinal axis.

Izycka-Swieszewska E(1), Kloc W, Plata-Nazar K, Stefanowicz J, Drozynska E,
Wozniak A, Gasecki D, Debiec-Rychter M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical University, Gdansk. eczis@wp.pl

Four cases of primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) with unusual localization 
(three intraspinal extramedullary and one pontocerebellar) are reviewed.
Histologically, they were small round blue cell tumors with diverse patterns.
Immunohistochemically, all tumors were positive for at least two neuronal
markers, two cases were Mic-2 positive and one showed glial differentiation. The 
paraffin-embedded tumor specimens were examined by interphase FISH using
dual-color probes specific for EWS, HER-2 and BCR loci. Molecular cytogenetic
study revealed the presence of EWS rearrangement in two cases and the presence of
i(17q) in one tumor. Three tumors exhibited 22 disomy and one was 22 polyploid.
Extraparenchymal PNETs within craniospinal axis are heterogeneous from the
clinical, histological, immunohistochemical and molecular point of view. These
PNETs can be of a central or peripheral type. Multidisciplinary approach is of a 
basic importance in differential diagnosis of such cases.

PMID: 15704649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Am J Dermatopathol. 2005 Feb;27(1):51-5.

Myxoid clear cell sarcoma.

Kim YC(1), Vandersteen DP, Jung HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
maychan@ajou.ac.kr

Clear cell sarcoma is a rare soft-tissue tumor presenting typically in the
extremities of young adults. It has been also known as malignant melanoma of the 
soft parts because of the presence of melanin and cytoplasmic melanosomes.
However, clear cell sarcoma is, at present, usually considered as a unique lesion
because the t(12;22)(q13;q12) translocation is present only in clear cell
sarcoma. Myxoid malignant melanoma is now a well-recognized morphologic variant
of malignant melanoma. However, a myxoid variant of clear cell sarcoma has not
been well described yet. We report a case of myxoid clear cell sarcoma occurring 
on the heel in a 22-year-old man. The tumor was composed of nests and fascicles
of oval to fusiform cells with clear to pale eosinophilic cytoplasm, often
separated by fibrous septa. The tumor cells were reactive for S-100 protein,
HMB-45, and MART-1. Variably sized cysts lined by one or several layers of tumor 
cells were observed. Alcian blue and mucicarmine stains demonstrated prominent
mucin deposition in the tumor stroma and especially in the lumen of the cysts.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization for the Ewing sarcoma gene showed
rearrangement in nearly all of the neoplastic cells.

PMID: 15677980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Apr 15;94(6):1112-25.

Cellular transformation of NIH3T3 fibroblasts by CIZ/NMP4 fusions.

Corveleyn A(1), Janssen H, Martini A, Somers R, Cools J, Marynen P.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Laboratory, Department of Human Genetics, Flanders
Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven, Herestraat 49, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Molecular cloning of the translocations t(12;22)(p13;q12) and t(12;17)(p13;q11)
in acute leukaemia showed that either EWSR1 or its homologue TAF15 are fused to
the transcription factor CIZ. EWSR1 and TAF15 belong to the TET family (TLS/FUS, 
EWSR1 and TAF15) of proteins. TET fusions have been identified in both solid
tumours and acute myeloid leukaemia. The novel 12p translocations directly
implicated TET fusions in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia as well, and demonstrated
the involvement of CIZ in haematopoietic malignancies. In addition, a new fusion 
E2A-CIZ was recently cloned as a result of a t(12;19)(p13;p13) in a patient with 
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. NIH3T3 cells stably expressing TET-CIZ fusions
display a transformed phenotype in a focus formation assay. We show here that
E2A-CIZ also transforms 3T3 fibroblasts, suggesting that the addition of a
transactivation domain to the CIZ protein is involved in this phenotype. An
artificial VP16-CIZ construct reveals similar transforming properties, supporting
this. We have then analysed the domains within TAF15-CIZ that are necessary for
3T3 fibroblast transformation. Deletion of the zinc fingers of CIZ resulted in
loss of both DNA-binding and transforming properties of TAF15-CIZ, whereas
deletion of the other functional domains of CIZ had no effect. Fusion of a
transactivation domain to CIZ is suggestive for a transactivating function in
transformation. Luciferase experiments indeed showed that E2A-CIZ as well as
VP16-CIZ transactivates the MMP7 promoter. Taken together, our results reported
here suggest that transformation of 3T3 fibroblasts by CIZ fusions is dependent
on DNA-binding and might involve transactivation of CIZ target genes.

Copyright (c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15669012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2005 Feb;17(1):14-9.

Pediatric malignancies provide unique cancer therapy targets.

Uren A(1), Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Improving overall survival and reducing morbidity are major
goals of childhood cancer research. This review explores an old idea that
increased survival in childhood cancer can be achieved by inhibiting specific
cancer targets. Specific therapeutic targeting would theoretically cause reduced 
morbidity as well as increased survival. Tumor-specific translocation-generated
fusion proteins appear to be ideal tumor-specific therapeutic targets. This
review will describe advances in aspects of target identification, potential for 
small molecule screening, and the evolution of clinical resistance to this new
generation of pharmaceuticals.
RECENT FINDINGS: Advances in molecular biology have identified new protein
targets along with increased understanding of the biologic role of these
proteins. Ewing sarcoma family of tumors research has benefited from new target
discovery and enhanced biologic understanding of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein.
Congenital (infantile) fibrosarcoma and cellular mesoblastic nephroma have been
grouped based on the presence of a common translocation fusion protein,
ETV6-NTRK3. Functional knowledge of ETV6-NTRK3 has advanced so that strategies
for screening small molecule inhibitors can proceed. Patients with chronic
myeloid leukemia have benefited from the discovery of the BCR-ABL kinase
inhibitor imatinib mesylate (Gleevec), thus showing how a molecular therapeutic
target can be inactivated for improved therapy. This review will describe
challenges raised by clinical resistance to imatinib mesylate as a paradigm for
how resistance might evolve in other disease models. This review also describes
how patients with synovial sarcoma might benefit from future therapy directed
towards the SYT-SSX family of fusion proteins.
SUMMARY: The increased utilization of small molecules to disrupt or inactivate
tumor-specific molecular targets is rapidly evolving. The use of these small
molecules to probe biology and treat disease is advancing towards a new
generation of anticancer therapies.

PMID: 15659957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Jan 20;23(3):548-58.

Ewing sarcomas with p53 mutation or p16/p14ARF homozygous deletion: a highly
lethal subset associated with poor chemoresponse.

Huang HY(1), Illei PB, Zhao Z, Mazumdar M, Huvos AG, Healey JH, Wexler LH,
Gorlick R, Meyers P, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Ave, New York, NY 10021, USA.

PURPOSE: EWS-FLI1 fusion type, p53 mutation, and homozygous deletion of
p16/p14ARF have each been shown to be prognostically significant in Ewing sarcoma
(ES). We provide the first combined prognostic analysis of these three molecular 
parameters in ES.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied 60 patients with ES (stage: localized in 54,
metastatic in six). All cases were confirmed to contain the EWS-FLI1 (29 type 1, 
12 type 2, 14 other types) or EWS-ERG fusions (five cases). Homozygous deletion
of p16/p14ARF, and p53 mutations were determined by fluorescent in situ
hybridization and Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) p53 GeneChip microarray
hybridization, respectively.
RESULTS: Eight cases (13.3%) contained point mutations of p53, and eight cases
(13.3%) showed p16/p14ARF deletion, including one case with both alterations.
Among 32 cases with data on histologic chemoresponse, all 10 with alterations in 
p53 or p16/p14ARF showed a poor chemoresponse (P = .03). Variables predicting
poorer overall survival included p53 mutation alone (P < .001), either p53 or
p16/p14ARF alteration (P < .001), and stage (P < .01). In multivariate analysis, 
alterations of p53 and/or p16/p14ARF as a single variable, was the most adverse
prognostic factor (P < .001), followed by stage (P = .04). In a multivariate
analysis with alterations of p53 and p16/p14ARF as separate variables, both were 
significant (P < .001 and P = .03, respectively). Six cases with p16/p14ARF
deletion were also studied for co-deletion of the contiguous methylthioadenosine 
phosphorylase gene, and this was detected in four cases.
CONCLUSION: Alterations in p53 or p16/p14ARF are found in a fourth of ES cases
and define a subset with highly aggressive behavior and poor chemoresponse.

PMID: 15659501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Jan 1;156(1):74-6.

Absence of mutations of the BRAF gene in malignant melanoma of soft parts (clear 
cell sarcoma of tendons and aponeuroses).

Panagopoulos I(1), Mertens F, Isaksson M, Mandahl N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, S-221 85 Lund,
Sweden. ioannis.panagopoulos@klingen.lu.se

Malignant melanoma of soft parts (MMSP), also called clear cell sarcoma of
tendons and aponeuroses, is cytogenetically characterized by the
t(12;22)(q13;q12) resulting in the chimeric EWSR1/ATF1 gene. MMSP shares a number
of morphologic, histologic, and immunohistochemical features with malignant
melanoma of the skin, causing diagnostic difficulties in the distinction between 
MMSP and metastatic malignant melanoma with an unknown primary site. Recently, a 
high incidence of activating mutations in the kinase domain of the BRAF gene has 
been reported in malignant melanoma of the skin. The most common mutation (V599E)
is the T1796A substitution in exon 15, leading to an exchange of valine for
glutamic acid at position 599. Because of the extensive clinical, histologic, and
immunohistochemic similarities with melanoma, we decided to analyze whether MMSP 
also has mutations in the BRAF gene. Eight MMSP with an EWSR1/ATF1 chimeric
transcript, one soft tissue metastasis of a malignant melanoma of the skin, and
one malignant melanoma cell line were examined. Both conventional melanomas had
the exon 15 T1796A (V599E) mutation, but none of the MMSP was found to harbor any
mutation in exon 11 or 15 of the BRAF gene. Our data further emphasize that MMSP 
and conventional malignant melanoma develop through different genetic pathways.

PMID: 15588860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Clin Neuropathol. 2004 Sep-Oct;23(5):232-7.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma of the jugular foramen.

Cummings TJ(1), Bridge JA, Fukushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA. cummi008@mc.duke.edu

OBJECTIVE: To report a case of an extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC)
arising from the jugular foramen. EMCs are tumors usually seen in the deep soft
tissues of the extremities and are rarely seen within the intracranial cavity.
The histological differential diagnosis includes chordoma, conventional
chondrosarcoma and chordoid meningioma, among others. A distinguishing feature of
EMC is their characteristic reciprocal translocation t(9;22)(q22;q12).
MATERIAL: A 63-year-old man presented with progressive hearing loss and gait
imbalance. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a heterogeneously enhancing 2.4 cm
mass in the cerebellopontine angle. A right far lateral transcondylar skull base 
approach with gross total removal of the tumor was performed. Intraoperative
findings showed that the mass appeared to arise from the glossopharyngeal nerve
within the jugular foramen.
METHOD: Histology, immunohistochemistry, and fluorescence in situ hybridization
studies were performed.
RESULTS: Histological and immunohistochemical studies were compatible with the
diagnosis of EMC. Fluorescence in situ hybridization studies showed disruption of
the EWS gene locus at 22q12 and added further support to the diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a rare case of EMC arising from the jugular foramen, and
the diagnosis of EMC can be supported by confirmation of disruption of the EWS
gene locus.

PMID: 15581026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Klin Padiatr. 2004 Nov-Dec;216(6):315-22.

Identification of various exon combinations of the ews/fli1 translocation: an
optimized RT-PCR method for paraffin embedded tissue -- a report by the CWS-study
group.

Stegmaier S(1), Leuschner I, Aakcha-Rudel E, Münch P, Kazanowska B, Bekassy A,
Treuner J, Koscielniak E.

Author information: 
(1)Olgahospital, Stuttgart, Germany. s.stegmaier@olgahospital.de

BACKGROUND: Chromosomal translocations t(11;22) (q24;q12) are characteristic of
about 80-90 % of Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors [bone and soft tissue Ewing's
sarcoma and peripheral neuroectodermal tumors (PNET)]. They generate ews/fli1
rearrangements showing great diversity in breakpoint exon combination. In about 5
% of Ewing's tumors, ews is fused to the erg gene at 21q22. The various chimeric 
proteins encoded may function as aberrant oncogenic transcription factors. These 
specific translocations can be used for exact molecular diagnosis in these poorly
differentiated small round-cell tumors. Moreover, the prognostic relevance of
different translocational variants has been previously suggested. Furthermore,
the sensitive molecular detection of minimal metastatic and residual disease and 
its clinical significance can be evaluated. To address these questions more
definitively in the large number of patients registered in multicenter studies,
it is often necessary to access archival paraffin-embedded tumor tissue if no
fresh or frozen tumor material is available for analysis by RT (reverse
transcription)-PCR. Specific problems arise from formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded tissue due to the degradation of RNA and insufficient
extraction efficiency. Therefore, primer distance and product size are limited
for successful PCR amplification. This conflicts with the requirement for
identification of various possible exon combinations by PCR simultaneously using 
one single primer pair with larger distance.
PATIENTS: We examined paraffin embedded soft part tumor tissue samples from 47
Ewing's tumor patients. Patients were treated according to either CWS
(Cooperative Weichteilsarkomstudie, CWS-91 or CWS-96) or Euro-E.W.I.N.G. 99
therapy protocols.
METHOD: We established a novel RT-PCR method, using 3 different exon specific
sets of PCR primer pairs, selected according to the coding ews and fli1
nucleotide sequences (NCBI database), suitable for RT-PCR identification of
variant ews/fli1 fusion transcripts in RNA isolated from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue. For use in combination with ews -primer, an erg
specific primer was selected to alternatively test for ews/erg fusion
transcripts. As positive control for the integrity of isolated mRNA, we used the 
ubiquitously expressed gapdh transcript for RT-PCR amplification in each sample.
RESULTS: In 31 cases (= 66 %) of 47 paraffin samples of Ewing's tumors analysed, 
gapdh control indicated adequate quality of RNA. In 16 cases no gapdh control
fragment was amplifiable, nevertheless in 2 of these 16 samples distinct ews
fusion products could be detected. In 23 cases we identified ews fusion
transcripts. Thereof in 65 % ews exon 7 being fused to fli1 exon 6 (fusion type
I), in 22 % to fli1 exon 5 (fusion type II). In 4 % each ews exon 10 being
juxtaposed to fli1 either exon 6 or exon 5, respectively. An ews/erg fusion was
detected in 4 % ( ews exon 7 fused to erg exon 6). In 10 samples, a gapdh
fragment was amplified, but no ews/fli1 or - erg fusion transcript could be
identified. The reference pathological review (I. L., Kiel, Germany) disproved
the primary histopathology in 5 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Using our different sets of exon specific primer pairs, it was
possible to detect 4 different breakpoints of ews/fli1 fusion transcripts and the
ews/erg fusion by RT-PCR in RNA isolates from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
Ewing's tumor tissue. This method can be a very useful alternative in clinical
situations (to ensure diagnosis and perform minimal metastatic and residual
disease investigations) and in order to assess prognostic significance of
translocation subtypes when no fresh tumor tissue is available.

PMID: 15565546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Sep 17;84(18):1518-21.

[Diagnostic significance and clinical application of specific chimeric genes in
soft tissue sarcomas by RT-PCR using paraffin-embedded tissues: a study of 103
specimens].

[Article in Chinese]

Li F(1), Li XX, Chang B, Pang LJ, Yang JH, Hu WH, Lu TC, Li HA, Wang J, Lu HF,
Sun MH, Shi DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic and Surgical Pathology, Shihezi University School of
Medicine, Shihezi 832002, China. patho-sh@mail.xj.cninfo.net

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of the chimeric genes resulting from the
specific chromosomal translocations in soft tissue sarcomas (STS) and its
diagnostic significance for STS.
METHODS: The variety of fusion transcripts were detected in 103 cases of STS,
including 30 cases of synovial sarcoma (SS), 15 cases of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), 
25 cases of Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(ES/pPNET), 12 cases of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP), 14 cases of
aveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS), 3 cases of leiomyosarcoma (LMS), 2 cases of
malignant fibrous histocytoma (MFH), and 2 cases of fibrosarcoma (FS); and 20
cases of control tumors by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) using formalin fixed, paraffin embedded specimens.
RESULTS: Of the 34 cases of SS 28 (93.3%) expressed SSX-SYT chimeric transcripts 
(14 were positive for SYT-SSX1, 9 for SYT-SSX2). Four of the six cases of
alveolar RMS had a PAX3/PAX7-FKHR fusion transcript. None of the 9 cases of
embryonic and polymorphic RMS expressed PAX3/PAX7-FKHR. Of the 25 cases of
ES/pPNET, 19 were positive for EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript and 1 for EWS-ERG
fusion transcript. COL1A1-PDGFB fusion transcript was expressed in 8 of the 12
cases (66.7%) of DFSP. Of the fourteen cases of ASPS, ten expressed ASPL-TFE3
fusion transcript. None of the 3 cases of LMS, 2 cases of MFH, 2 cases of FS, and
20 control cases contained any of the fusion transcript.
CONCLUSION: Chimeric gene transcript resulting from specific chromosomal
translocations is a reliable index for the molecular diagnosis of STS and RT-PCR 
assay for detection of specific fusion gene provides a useful tool for
confirmation of the diagnosis of STS in diagnostically difficult cases and in
retrospective studies.

PMID: 15500711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1349-55.

Abnormal expression of cell cycle regulators in FUS-CHOP carrying liposarcomas.

Olofsson A(1), Willén H, Göransson M, Engström K, Meis-Kindblom JM, Stenman G,
Kindblom LG, Aman P.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, Sahlgrenska 
University Hospital, Gula stråket 8, SE-413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.

Myxoid/round cell liposarcomas (MLS/RCLS) are characterized by chromosome
translocations that result in formation of FUS-CHOP or EWSR1-CHOP fusion
oncogenes. More than 95% of the tumors carry one of these fusion genes. FUS-CHOP 
transforms 3T3 cells and causes MLS/RCLS-like tumors in transgenic mice. The
fusion oncoproteins act as abnormal transcription factors and are believed to
induce abnormal expression of growth controlling genes as part of their
transforming activities. The aim of this study was to search for recurrent
abnormal expression patterns of cell cycle regulating proteins and growth factor 
receptors. A series of 14 MLS/RCLS, 2 MLS/RCLS derived cell lines and a FUS-CHOP 
transfected human sarcoma cell line were analyzed using immunohistochemistry,
Western blotting, and cDNA microarray based screening. The results revealed a
highly abnormal expression pattern of several growth controlling proteins. The G1
cyclins D1 and E and their associated kinases CDK4 and CDK2 were strongly
overexpressed in all of the tumors. High expression levels were also found for
Cdk4/6 inhibitor P16 and CDK2 inhibitors P27 and P57. The growth factor tyrosine 
kinase receptors PDGFRB and EGFR were present in most cells of all investigated
tumors. We conclude that deregulation of G1 controlling proteins is common in
MLS/RCLS and that aberrant expression of these proteins is of importance in the
pathogenesis of this tumor type.

PMID: 15492825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 15;64(20):7288-95.

The Ews/Fli-1 fusion gene changes the status of p53 in neuroblastoma tumor cell
lines.

Rorie CJ(1), Weissman BE.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Toxicology and Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

One hallmark of Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumors is the presence
of the Ews/Fli-1 chimeric oncogene. Interestingly, infection of neuroblastoma
tumor cell lines with Ews/Fli-1 switches the differentiation program of
neuroblastomas to Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumors. Here we
examined the status of cytoplasmically sequestered wt-p53 in neuroblastomas after
stable expression of Ews/Fli-1. Immunofluorescence revealed that in the
neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectant cell lines, p53 went from a punctate-pattern of
cytoplasmic sequestration to increased nuclear localization. Western blot
analysis revealed that PARC was down-regulated in one neuroblastoma cell line but
not expressed in the second. Therefore, decreased PARC expression could not fully
account for relieving p53 sequestration in the neuroblastoma tumor cells.
Neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectant cell lines showed marked increases in p53
protein expression without transcriptional up-regulation. Interestingly, p53 was 
primarily phosphorylated, without activation of its downstream target p21(WAF1). 
Western blot analysis revealed that whereas MDM2 gene expression does not change,
p14(ARF), a negative protein regulator of MDM2, increases. These observations
suggest that the downstream p53 pathway may be inactivated as a result of
abnormal p53. We also found that p53 has an extended half-life in the
neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectants despite the retention of a wild-type sequence 
in neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectant cell lines. We then tested the p53 response 
pathway and observed that the neuroblastoma parent cells responded to genotoxic
stress, whereas the neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectants did not. These results
suggest that Ews/Fli-1 can directly abrogate the p53 pathway to promote
tumorigenesis. These studies also provide additional insight into the
relationship among the p53 pathway proteins.

PMID: 15492248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Biochemistry. 2004 Oct 26;43(42):13579-89.

Recombinant EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein activates transcription.

Uren A(1), Tcherkasskaya O, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Research Building, Room W316, 3970 Reservoir Road, N.W., Box 571469, Washington, 
DC 20057-1469, USA. au26@georgetown.edu

The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) contains a characteristic
translocation the chimeric transcript of which is translated to become the
EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. EWS-FLI1 regulates transcription and posttranscriptional
splicing. Elimination of EWS-FLI1 protein from ESFT cells induces apoptosis and
reduces xenograft tumor growth. Therefore the production of a biologically active
recombinant EWS-FLI1 could lead to discoveries that would enhance our mechanistic
understanding of ESFT. We have cloned, expressed, and purified a biologically
active recombinant EWS-FLI1 in Escherichia coli using affinity column
chromatography. A refolding procedure was required to render the recombinant
EWS-FLI1 soluble in relatively native conditions. The structural alterations
induced by the refolding procedure were monitored by SDS-gel electrophoresis,
circular dichroism, and steady-state fluorescence spectroscopy. Recombinant
EWS-FLI1 under native conditions approaches a largely unfolded conformation.
Recombinant EWS-FLI1 protein under native conditions specifically binds to DNA
and transcribes RNA. Our biologically active recombinant EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein
will be useful to identify functional molecular partners and inhibitors.

PMID: 15491164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Proteome Res. 2004 Sep-Oct;3(5):949-57.

Riboproteomics of the hepatitis C virus internal ribosomal entry site.

Lu H(1), Li W, Noble WS, Payan D, Anderson DC.

Author information: 
(1)Rigel, Inc., South San Francisco, California 94066, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) protein translation is mediated by a cis-acting RNA, an
internal ribosomal entry site (IRES), located in the 5' nontranslated region of
the viral RNA. To examine proteins bound to the IRES, which could include
proteins important for its function as well as potential drug targets, we used
shotgun peptide sequencing to identify proteins in quadruplicate protein affinity
extracts of lysed Huh7 cells, obtained using a biotinylated IRES. Twenty-six
proteins bound the HCV IRES but not a reversed complementary sequence RNA or
vector RNA controls. These included five ribosomal subunits, nine eukaryotic
initiation factor 3 subunits, and novel interacting proteins such as the
cytoskeletal-related proteins actin, FHOS (formin homologue overexpressed in
spleen) and MIP-T3 (microtubule interacting protein that associates with TRAF3). 
Other novel HCV IRES-binding proteins included UNR (upstream of N-ras),
UNR-interacting protein, and the RNA-binding proteins PAI-1 (plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1) mRNA binding protein and Ewing sarcoma breakpoint 1 region
protein EWS. A large set of additional proteins bound both the HCV IRES and a
reversed complementary IRES sequence control, including the known HCV interactors
PTB (polypyrimidine tract binding protein), the La autoantigen, and nucleolin.
The discovery of these novel HCV IRES-binding proteins suggests links between
IRES biology and the cytoskeleton, signal transduction, and other cellular
functions.

PMID: 15473682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Aug;33(4):328-31.

[Detection of EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript in Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive 
neuroectodermal tumors by one-step RT-PCR using paraffin-embedded tissues].

[Article in Chinese]

Li F(1), Chang B, Li XX, Pang LJ, Lu HF, Wang J, Sun MH, Shi DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of Medicine, Xinjiang
832002, China. patho-sh@mail.xj.cninfo.net

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of EWS-FLI1/ERG fusion transcript
resulting from t(11;12)(q24;12) in paraffin-embedded tissues and its diagnostic
implication for Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(ES/pPNET).
METHODS: One-step reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was
employed to detect a characteristic EWS-FLI1/ERG fusion transcript in 25 cases of
ES/pPNET and 15 cases of other small round cell tumors (including 8 cases of
rhabdomyosarcoma, 4 cases of synovial sarcoma, 2 cases of neuroblastoma and 1
case of lymphoma) using formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues.
RESULTS: EWS-FLI1/ERG fusion transcript was detected in 20 of the 25 ES/pPNET
cases (80%). The 15 non-ES/pPNET control cases were negative for EWS-FLI1/ERG
fusion transcript.
CONCLUSIONS: Detection of EWS-FLI1/ERG fusion transcript is a reliable index for 
molecular diagnosis of ES/pPNET. One-step RT-PCR is a practical method for such
analysis in routine paraffin-embedded tumor tissues.

PMID: 15363317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2004 Jun;12(2):160-5.

Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor: adult abdominal tumors 
with an Ewing sarcoma gene rearrangement demonstrated by fluorescence in situ
hybridization in paraffin sections.

Gardner LJ(1), Ayala AG, Monforte HL, Dunphy CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology, St. Louis University
Health Sciences Center, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

The differential diagnosis of small round cell tumors is exhaustive and requires 
ancillary studies. Relatively recently, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
using probes for specific gene rearrangements has gained wide acceptance. This
technique is particularly useful in the differential diagnosis of Ewing
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) and desmoplastic small
round-cell tumor (DSRCT). In ES/PNET, the EWS gene is juxtaposed to the FLI-1
gene in 85% of cases and to the ERG gene in another 7% of cases; the EWS gene is 
juxtaposed to the WTI gene in DSRCT. Documentation of the EWS gene rearrangements
in EWS/PNET has previously been demonstrated in frozen tissue. We report 2
unusual cases of EWS/PNET diagnosed in abdominal tumors in adults. Although the
immunohistochemical results supported a diagnosis of ES/PNET, 1 case
morphologically resembled DSRCT. The diagnosis in these 2 cases was confirmed by 
the FISH demonstration of EWS/FLI-1 gene fusion in paraffin-embedded tissue.
Thus, the usefulness of FISH demonstration of an EWS gene rearrangement with
these specific probes in such unusual cases is supported and is demonstrated in
paraffin-embedded tissue.

PMID: 15354743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 1;64(17):6026-34.

Selective usage of D-Type cyclins by Ewing's tumors and rhabdomyosarcomas.

Zhang J(1), Hu S, Schofield DE, Sorensen PH, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90027, USA.

The genetic mechanisms that control proliferation of childhood musculoskeletal
malignancies, notably Ewing's tumor (ET) and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), remain
largely unknown. Most human cancers appear to overexpress at least one of the G1 
cyclins (cyclins D1, D2, D3, E1, and E2) to bypass normal regulation of cell
cycle G1 progression. We compared the gene expression profiles of 7 ET and 13 RMS
primary tumor samples and found overexpression of cyclin D1 in all 7 ET samples. 
In contrast, RMS samples expressed higher levels of cyclin D2, cyclin D3, and
cyclin E1. This was confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction and Western blot. The relative roles of RAS-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K)-AKT
pathways in the regulation of D-type cyclin expression in these tumors were then 
assessed. Inhibition of either pathway reduced expression of cyclins D1, D2, and 
D3 in RMS lines, whereas only PI3K inhibitors blocked cyclin D1, D2, and D3
expression in ET lines. Furthermore, PI3K-AKT appeared to regulate D-type cyclin 
transcription in RMS lines through FKHR and FKHRL1. Finally, the role of the
ET-associated EWS-FLI1 fusion gene in regulating D cyclin expression was studied.
Inhibition of EWS-FLI1 expression in the TC71 ET line decreased cyclin D1 levels 
but increased cyclin D3 levels. In contrast, induction of EWS-FLI1 expression in 
the RD RMS cell line increased cyclin D1 expression but decreased cyclin D3
expression. Our results demonstrate distinct regulation of D-type cyclins in ET
and RMS and indicate that EWS-FLI1 can modulate the expression of D-type cyclins 
independent of cellular backgrounds.

PMID: 15342383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Oct;41(2):155-62.

Divergent patterns of telomere maintenance mechanisms among human sarcomas:
sharply contrasting prevalence of the alternative lengthening of telomeres
mechanism in Ewing's sarcomas and osteosarcomas.

Ulaner GA(1), Hoffman AR, Otero J, Huang HY, Zhao Z, Mazumdar M, Gorlick R,
Meyers P, Healey JH, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, and Department of Medicine, 
Stanford University, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.
gary.ulaner@stanfordalumni.org

Two types of telomere maintenance mechanisms (TMMs) have been described in human 
tumors: telomerase activation and alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT).
Although the vast majority of epithelial tumors rely on telomerase activation,
many mesenchymal tumors rely on ALT for telomere maintenance, but within this
tumor group, the TMMs used by translocation-associated sarcomas have not been
systematically studied. We studied telomere lengths and telomerase expression and
activity in 30 uncultured tumor samples and in 10 cell lines of Ewing's sarcoma, 
a prototypical translocation-associated sarcoma, and compared the data to an
identical analysis of 60 osteosarcomas, the most common type of sarcoma lacking a
specific translocation. Telomerase activity was demonstrated in 21 Ewing's
sarcoma tumor samples (70%) and in 9 of 10 Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. Evidence
of ALT, indicated by the presence of long and heterogeneous telomeres, was
observed only in the cell line without telomerase activity and in none of the 30 
Ewing's sarcoma tumor samples. The 9 Ewing's sarcoma patients whose tumors lacked
detectable telomerase activity did not differ significantly from the remaining
patients in age, stage, EWSR1-FLI1 fusion type, prevalence of TP53 point
mutations, or overall survival. The low prevalence of ALT in Ewing's sarcoma
contrasted sharply with our data on TMMs in 60 osteosarcomas, which showed ALT in
38 of 60 cases (P<0.0001). The present study, together with emerging published
data on other sarcoma types, suggests that a predominance of telomerase
activation in the absence of ALT may characterize sarcomas with specific
chromosomal translocations (such as Ewing's sarcoma), whereas a high prevalence
of ALT appears typical of sarcomas with nonspecific complex karyotypes (such as
osteosarcoma).

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15287028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;24(16):7275-83.

EWS/FLI-1 silencing and gene profiling of Ewing cells reveal downstream oncogenic
pathways and a crucial role for repression of insulin-like growth factor binding 
protein 3.

Prieur A(1), Tirode F, Cohen P, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pathologie Moléculaire des Cancers, INSERM U509, Section de
Recherche, Institut Curie, 75248 Paris, France.

Ewing tumors are characterized by abnormal transcription factors resulting from
the oncogenic fusion of EWS with members of the ETS family, most commonly FLI-1. 
RNA interference targeted to the junction between EWS and FLI-1 sequences was
used to inactivate the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene in Ewing cells and to explore the
resulting phenotype and alteration of the gene expression profile. Loss of
expression of EWS/FLI-1 resulted in the complete arrest of growth and was
associated with a dramatic increase in the number of apoptotic cells. Gene
profiling of Ewing cells in which the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene had been inactivated 
identified downstream targets which could be grouped in two major functional
clusters related to extracellular matrix structure or remodeling and regulation
of signal transduction pathways. Among these targets, the insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 3 gene (IGFBP-3), a major regulator of insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1) proliferation and survival signaling, was strongly induced upon 
treating Ewing cells with EWS/FLI-1-specific small interfering RNAs. We show that
EWS/FLI-1 can bind the IGFBP-3 promoter in vitro and in vivo and can repress its 
activity. Moreover, IGFBP-3 silencing can partially rescue the apoptotic
phenotype caused by EWS/FLI-1 inactivation. Finally, IGFBP-3-induced Ewing cell
apoptosis relies on both IGF-1-dependent and -independent pathways. These
findings therefore identify the repression of IGFBP-3 as a key event in the
development of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC479730
PMID: 15282325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Oncogene. 2004 Sep 16;23(42):7087-94.

Role of protein-protein interactions in the antiapoptotic function of EWS-Fli-1.

Ramakrishnan R(1), Fujimura Y, Zou JP, Liu F, Lee L, Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Drexel University, Broad and Vine, Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA.

In the majority of Ewing's family tumors, chromosomal translocation t(11;22)
leads to aberrant fusion of RNA-binding protein EWS with DNA-binding ETS
transcriptional factor Fli-1. EWS-Fli-1 has altered the transcriptional activity 
and modulating its downstream target genes through this transcriptional activity 
is thought to be responsible for this tumor. We have previously shown that both
EWS-Fli-1 and Fli-1 have antiapoptotic activity against several apoptotic
inducers. Here, we show that the transcriptional activity of EWS-Fli-1 and Fli-1 
is not essential for its antiapoptotic activity. We also demonstrate that
EWS-Fli-1 and Fli-1 interact with CBP through its amino-terminal region and
inhibit the CBP-dependent transcriptional activity of RXR. This activity appears 
to be independent of DNA-binding activity of EWS-Fli-1. Introduction of the
dominant-negative form of CBP into Ewing's sarcoma cells sensitizes these cells
against genotoxic or retinoic-acid induced apoptosis. These results suggest that 
the ability of EWS-Fli-1/Fli-1 to target transcriptional cofactor(s) and modulate
apoptotic pathways may be responsible for its antiapoptotic and tumorigenic
activities.

PMID: 15273724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Jul 15;152(2):101-7.

Coexpression of NOR1 and SIX3 proteins in extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas
without detectable NR4A3 fusion genes.

Hisaoka M(1), Okamoto S, Yokoyama K, Hashimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu 
807-8555, Japan.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is a rare mesenchymal tumor
cytogenetically characterized by reciprocal translocations, such as
t(9;22)(q22;q12) and t(9;17)(q22;q11), which result in EWSR1/NR4A3 and
TAF15/NR4A3 fusion genes (alias EWS/NOR1, TAF2N/NOR1), respectively. NOR1 is an
orphan nuclear receptor and acts as a transcription factor that can bind to its
putative coactivator, SIX3. Although the NOR1 fusion protein has been implicated 
in oncogenesis of EMC, a small fraction of EMC lacks detectable rearrangements of
the NR4A3 gene or 9q22. We report a case of EMC with no detectable NR4A3 gene
alterations, as assessed with various molecular techniques including reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Southern blotting, interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization, and PCR single-strand conformation
polymorphism-but with coexpression of native NOR1 and SIX3. In our survey of
another 18 EMCs, we identified one more case expressing both NOR1 and SIX3 but
lacking NR4A3 fusion. Fourteen tumors with detectable NR4A3 fusion genes
(EWSR1-NR4A3; TAF15-NR4A3) expressed neither native NOR1 nor SIX3. SIX3
expression is normally confined specifically to the developing eye and fetal
forebrain, although the expression of NR4A3 is largely ubiquitous. Our data
suggest that aberrant coexpression of NOR1 and SIX3 is a potential alternative
mechanism underlying the development of EMC.

PMID: 15262426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Hum Pathol. 2004 Jun;35(6):773-5.

Abdominal small round cell tumor with osteoid and EWS/FLI1.

Oshima Y(1), Kawaguchi S, Nagoya S, Wada T, Kokai Y, Ikeda T, Nogami S, Oya T,
Hirayama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

In this report, we described a case of multiple intraperitoneal tumors.
Histologically, the tumors were composed of small round cells with malignant
phenotype, necrotic areas, and islands of osteoid matrix in the stroma. In
immunohistochemical and molecular analyses, the tumors expressed CD99 and
EWS-Fli1 fusion gene. Production of osteoid by small round tumor cells was
consistent with the histologic criteria of small-cell osteosarcoma, whereas
expression of EWS-Fli1 was a characteristic genetic feature of Ewing's sarcoma
family of tumor. Such tumors have been limited to a case in which histologically 
proven small-cell osteosarcoma of the scapula showed a chromosomal translocation,
t(11;22)(q24;q12).

PMID: 15188147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Orthop Res. 2004 Jul;22(4):910-7.

Targeting of EWS/FLI-1 by RNA interference attenuates the tumor phenotype of
Ewing's sarcoma cells in vitro.

Chansky HA(1), Barahmand-Pour F, Mei Q, Kahn-Farooqi W, Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A, 
Blackburn M, Chansky K, Conrad EU 3rd, Bruckner JD, Greenlee TK, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of Washington, 1660 S. Columbian Way, ORT112, Seattle, WA 98108, USA.
chansky@u.washington.edu

The defining cytogenetic abnormality of Ewing's sarcoma is the presence of a
balanced t(11;22) translocation expressing the EWS/FLI-1 chimeric fusion protein.
The effect of EWS/FLI-1 appears to be dominant negative since over-expression of 
EWS does not overcome the sarcoma phenotype. Previous studies have shown that
EWS/FLI-1 as well as related sarcoma fusion proteins are necessary and sufficient
to induce transformation both in vitro and in vivo. In this study we report that 
synthetic small interfering RNA (siRNA) specifically suppresses EWS/FLI-1 fusion 
gene expression in SK-ES Ewing's sarcoma cells. Knockdown of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion
protein is correlated with decreased cell proliferation and increased apoptosis. 
We demonstrate that Ewing's sarcoma tumors as well as Ewing's sarcoma cell lines 
predominantly express the CXCR4 chemokine receptor. Using an in vitro invasion
assay, the SDF-1 ligand of CXCR4 was shown to be a potent stimulus of invasion by
SK-ES cells. Knockdown of EWS/FLI-1 by RNA interference abrogates the
invasiveness of SK-ES cells. These experiments suggest that targeted silencing of
the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene by siRNA represents a promising strategy to study the
loss of EWS/FLI-1 protein in Ewing's sarcoma cells of otherwise identical genetic
background.

PMID: 15183454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cancer Res. 2004 May 15;64(10):3395-405.

Expression profiling of t(12;22) positive clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue cell 
lines reveals characteristic up-regulation of potential new marker genes
including ERBB3.

Schaefer KL(1), Brachwitz K, Wai DH, Braun Y, Diallo R, Korsching E, Eisenacher
M, Voss R, Van Valen F, Baer C, Selle B, Spahn L, Liao SK, Lee KA, Hogendoorn PC,
Reifenberger G, Gabbert HE, Poremba C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Dusseldorf, Germany.

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue (CCSST), also known as malignant melanoma of
soft parts, represents a rare lesion of the musculoskeletal system usually
affecting adolescents and young adults. CCSST is typified by a chromosomal
t(12;22)(q13;q12) translocation resulting in a fusion between the Ewing sarcoma
gene (EWSR1) and activating transcription factor 1 (ATF1), of which the activity 
in nontransformed cells is regulated by cyclic AMP. Our aim was to identify
critical differentially expressed genes in CCSST tumor cells in comparison with
other solid tumors affecting children and young adults to better understand
signaling pathways regulating specific features of the development and
progression of this tumor entity. We applied Affymetrix Human Genome U95Av2
oligonucleotide microarrays representing approximately 12,000 genes to generate
the expression profiles of the CCSST cell lines GG-62, DTC-1, KAO, MST2, MST3,
and Su-CC-S1 in comparison with 8 neuroblastoma, 7 Ewing tumor, and 6
osteosarcoma cell lines. Subsequent hierarchical clustering of microarray data
clearly separated all four of the tumor types from each other and identified
differentially expressed transcripts, which are characteristically up-regulated
in CCSST. Statistical analysis revealed a group of 331 probe sets, representing
approximately 300 significant (P < 0.001) differentially regulated genes, which
clearly discriminated between the CCSST and other tumor samples. Besides genes
that were already known to be highly expressed in CCSST, like S100A11 (S100
protein) or MITF (microphthalmia-associated transcription factor), this group
shows an obvious portion of genes that are involved in cyclic AMP response or
regulation, in pigmentation processes, or in neuronal structure and signaling.
Comparison with other expression profile analyses on neuroectodermal childhood
tumors confirms the high robustness of this strategy to characterize tumor
entities based on their gene expression. We found the avian erythroblastic
leukemia viral oncogene homologue 3 (ERBB3) to be one of the most dramatically
up-regulated genes in CCSST. Quantitative real-time PCR and Northern blot
analysis verified the mRNA abundance and confirmed the absence of the inhibitory 
transcript variant of this gene. The protein product of the member of the
epidermal growth factor receptor family ERBB3 could be shown to be highly present
in all of the CCSST cell lines investigated, as well as in 18 of 20 primary tumor
biopsies. In conclusion, our data demonstrate new aspects of the phenotype and
the biological behavior of CCSST and reveal ERBB3 to be a useful diagnostic
marker.

PMID: 15150091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jun 11;318(4):1045-51.

EWS differentially activates transcription of the Brn-3a long and short isoform
mRNAs from distinct promoters.

Thomas GR(1), Faulkes DJ, Gascoyne D, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Molecular Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Brn-3a long and short isoforms are known to be encoded by two distinct mRNA
transcripts derived from a single gene. Here we report that transcription of the 
two isoforms is differentially regulated. The short isoform has its own promoter,
though many elements in the 5' regulatory region are shared. The protein product 
of the EWS gene, translocations of which are associated with the Ewing's sarcoma 
family of tumours, is known to interact with Brn-3a via a direct protein-protein 
interaction. Here we show that EWS also regulates Brn-3a expression in an
isoform-specific manner. The implications of these results are discussed in terms
of the functional role of EWS and the distinct functional activities of the two
isoforms of Brn-3a.

PMID: 15147979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. FEBS Lett. 2004 Apr 23;564(1-2):188-98.

Stimulation of hTAFII68 (NTD)-mediated transactivation by v-Src.

Lee HJ(1), Kim S, Pelletier J, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science,
Sogang University, Seoul 121-743, South Korea.

The three genes hTAF(II)68, EWS, and TLS (called the TET family) encode related
RNA binding proteins containing an RNA recognition motif and three glycine-,
arginine-, and proline-rich regions in the C-terminus and a degenerated repeat
containing the consensus sequence Ser-Tyr-Gly-Gln-Ser in the N-terminus. In many 
human cancers, the N-terminal portion of hTAF(II)68, EWS, or TLS is fused to the 
DNA binding domain of one of several transcription factors including Fli-1, ERG, 
ETV1, E1AF, WT1, ATF-1, CHOP, or TEC. We have recognized the presence of several 
potential tyrosine phosphorylation sites within the amino-terminal domain of
hTAF(II)68 and have investigated the potential effects of cytoplasmic signaling
on hTAF(II)68 function. Herein, we find that hTAF(II)68 is phosphorylated on
tyrosine residue(s) by ectopic expression of v-Src protein tyrosine kinase in
vitro and in vivo. The hTAF(II)68 protein can associated with the SH3 domains of 
several cell signaling proteins, including v-Src protein tyrosine kinase. We also
document that full-length v-Src can stimulate hTAF(II)68-mediated transcriptional
activation, whereas deletion mutants of v-Src are unable to exert this effect. In
addition, cellular Src activity appears important for hTAF(II)68 function since
hTAF(II)68-mediated transactivation is reduced in a dose-dependent fashion by
ectopic overexpression of a dominant-negative mutant of Src. Taken together, our 
results suggest that the biological activities of hTAF(II)68 are linked to the
cytoplasmic Src signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 15094065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2004 May;42(5):404-9.

Tumor cells are present in stem cell harvests of Ewings sarcoma patients and
their persistence following transplantation is associated with relapse.

Yaniv I(1), Cohen IJ, Stein J, Zilberstein J, Liberzon E, Atlas O, Grunshpan A,
Sverdlov Y, Ash S, Zaizov R, Avigad S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Schneider Children's Medical
Center of Israel, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Tumor cells frequently contaminate autologous stem cell products in a
variety of malignancies, but their clinical significance remains controversial.
We retrospectively monitored tumor contamination in stem cell harvests from
patients with Ewing family of tumors (EFT) all harboring the specific
translocation EWS-FLI-1 that characterize these tumors.
PROCEDURE: Twenty- seven harvests from 11 patients were included in the study. In
addition, 6 and 19 bone marrow (BM) or peripheral blood (PBL) samples were
available before and after transplantation, respectively, for RT-PCR and nested
PCR analyzes.
RESULTS: All 11 patients had contaminating tumor cells in their harvests. All
samples prior to transplantation were RT-PCR positive. Two out of the 11 patients
who underwent transplantation died of complications. Out of the remaining nine
patients, two are alive and well 68 and 84 months from diagnosis, and are the
only patients with no detectable tumor cells in their samples after
transplantation. One of these patients harbored contaminating tumor cells in only
one of the two harvests collected. Seven patients relapsed after transplant, and 
in four patients BM/PBL samples were available prior to the clinical relapse. All
these samples harbored contaminating tumor cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest a possible correlation between the amount of
contaminating cells in the harvest and relapse after transplantation.
Quantitative RT-PCR studies of the chimeric transcripts are underway to explore
this issue.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15049010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2004 Mar;31(3):346-50.

[Ewing's sarcoma].

[Article in Japanese]

Goto T(1), Hozumi T, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery and Musculoskeletal Oncology, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Komagome Hospital, 3-18-22 Hon-Komagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8677, Japan.

Ewing's sarcomas account for 6.8% of all primary malignant bone tumors and are
probably a neurogenic, undifferentiated, high-grade malignancy, which usually
affects the bones of children 5-15 years of age. Pain and swelling are the most
common symptoms. Increase of CRP and erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
leucocytosis, and anemia are frequently seen. Radiologically, they show
permeative bone destruction on plain radiographs. When arising in the diaphysis
of long bones, laminated, "onion-skin" periosteal reaction is seen. The tumor
shows muscle density on CT, iso-signal intensity on T1-weighted MR images, and
high signal intensity on T2-weighted MR images. Intramedullary invasion and skip 
lesions can be detected on MR images. Histologically, the tumor is uniformly
composed of sheets of small round cells closely packed and without any matrix
product. Glycogen granules are demonstrated in the cytoplasm by periodic
acid-Schiff (PAS) and diastase reactions. Immunohistochemically, Ewing's sarcomas
are positive for vimentin and MIC-2 gene product (CD99). Reciprocal
translocation, i.e., t(11;22) (q24;q12), is seen in the tumor cells. EWS/FLI-1
fusion gene can be demonstrated, which can be a complementary method in
diagnosing this tumor. Because Ewing's sarcomas are chemosensitive and
radiosensitive, they are treated by a combination of chemotherapy, surgery, and
radiotherapy. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy consists of preoperative chemotherapy and 
postoperative chemotherapy. Preoperative chemotherapy aims at eradicating distant
micrometastasis, reducing the primary tumor volume, and evaluating the efficacy
of the chemotherapeutic agents. Surgery is performed as a local treatment by
excising the tumor using the wide procedure. If surgery is impractical, curative 
radiotherapy is performed instead of excision. When surgery is performed without 
complete wide procedure, adjuvant radiotherapy is carried out to eradicate the
residual tumor cells. Postoperative chemotherapy aims to eradicate the distant
micrometastasis. Recently, myeloablative, high-dose chemotherapy followed by
autologous bone marrow transplantation is being attempted for poor-prognosis
patients and good results have been reported.

PMID: 15045938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. N Engl J Med. 2004 Mar 25;350(13):1364-5.

A patient with two Ewing's sarcomas with distinct EWS fusion transcripts.

Bielack SS, Paulussen M, Köhler G.

PMID: 15044653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Oncogene. 2004 May 6;23(21):3830-40.

The effects of Brn-3a on neuronal differentiation and apoptosis are
differentially modulated by EWS and its oncogenic derivative EWS/Fli-1.

Gascoyne DM(1), Thomas GR, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Molecular Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, UCL, 30 Guilford
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK. d.gascoyne@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The Brn-3 family of POU (Pit-Oct-Unc) homeodomain transcription factors regulate 
differentiation of neuronal cell types. The transcriptional activator Brn-3a is
expressed in Ewing's sarcomas, which also express characteristic chimaeric
proteins as a consequence of fusion of the TET family gene EWS to one of several 
ETS genes. We have previously demonstrated a physical interaction between Brn-3a 
and EWS proteins, and show here that the C-terminal POU domain but not N-terminal
activation domain of Brn-3a can interact in vitro with the RNA-binding domain of 
EWS. Likely due to POU domain homology, the related factor Brn-3b can also
interact with EWS, but to a lesser extent than Brn-3a. Importantly, Brn-3a but
not Brn-3b interacts in vitro with chimaeric EWS/Fli-1, EWS/ATF-1 and EWS/ERG
proteins. Furthermore, overexpression of EWS/Fli-1 but not EWS or Fli-1 inhibits 
Brn-3a-associated growth arrest and neurite outgrowth in neuronal cells, and
specifically inhibits Brn-3a-dependent activation of p21 and SNAP-25
transcription. In contrast, upregulation of Bcl-2 expression and inhibition of
apoptosis by Brn-3a is antagonized more by EWS than by EWS/Fli-1. These data
demonstrate that oncogenic rearrangement of EWS to produce EWS/Fli-1 may enhance 
the antiapoptotic effect of Brn-3a and inhibit its ability to promote neuronal
differentiation.

PMID: 15021903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Feb 15;10(4):1344-53.

Vascular endothelial growth factor expression is up-regulated by EWS-ETS
oncoproteins and Sp1 and may represent an independent predictor of survival in
Ewing's sarcoma.

Fuchs B(1), Inwards CY, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

PURPOSE: Tumor markers ideally allow monitoring and prediction of disease
progression. In Ewing's sarcoma, a devastating childhood cancer, only a few
reliable prognostic markers have been identified. To this end, we analyzed the
expression of four tumor-promoting proteins, cyclin D1, HER2/Neu, Mdm2, and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), in Ewing's sarcoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS: Thirty-one tissue samples from patients with
Ewing's sarcoma were stained with antibodies against cyclin D1, HER2/Neu, Mdm2,
or VEGF. Whereas no significant expression of HER2/Neu and Mdm2 was detected,
positive cyclin D1 and VEGF staining was observed in 42% and 55% of all tumors,
respectively. Importantly, VEGF expression was found to be an independent
negative predictor of survival in Ewing's sarcoma patients, whereas cyclin D1
expression did not correlate with survival in these patients. Consistently, the
Ewing's sarcoma-specific EWS-ETS oncoproteins were capable of activating both the
cyclin D1 and VEGF promoters in transient transfections of tissue culture cells. 
Furthermore, this activation was enhanced by coexpression of the Sp1
transcription factor. Using a mammalian two-hybrid system, some evidence was
obtained that this may involve a physical interaction between EWS-ETS and Sp1
proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal that VEGF may serve as a prognostic marker in
Ewing's sarcoma patients and provide a molecular mechanism by which VEGF and
cyclin D1 expression is up-regulated in approximately half of all Ewing's
sarcomas.

PMID: 14977835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Cancer Res. 2004 Feb 15;64(4):1266-77.

The Ews/Fli-1 fusion gene switches the differentiation program of neuroblastomas 
to Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors.

Rorie CJ(1), Thomas VD, Chen P, Pierce HH, O'Bryan JP, Weissman BE.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Toxicology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Neuroblastoma (NB) and the Ewing sarcoma (ES)/peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) family are pediatric cancers derived from neural
crest cells. Although NBs display features of the sympathetic nervous system,
ES/PNETs express markers consistent with parasympathetic differentiation. To
examine the control of these differentiation markers, we generated NB x ES/PNET
somatic cell hybrids. NB-specific markers were suppressed in the hybrids, whereas
ES/PNET-specific markers were unaffected. These results suggested that the
Ews/Fli-1 fusion gene, resulting from a translocation unique to ES/PNETs, might
account for the loss of NB-specific markers. To test this hypothesis, we
generated two different NB cell lines that stably expressed the Ews/Fli-1 gene.
We observed that heterologous expression of the Ews/Fli-1 protein led to the
suppression of NB-specific markers and de novo expression of ES/PNET markers. To 
determine the extent of changes in differentiation, we used the Affymetrix
GeneChip Array system to observe global transcriptional changes of genes. This
analysis revealed that the gene expression pattern of the Ews/Fli-1-expressing NB
cells resembled that observed in pooled ES/PNET cell lines and differed
significantly from the NB parental cells. Therefore, we propose that Ews/Fli-1
contributes to the etiology of ES/PNET by subverting the differentiation program 
of its neural crest precursor cell to a less differentiated and more
proliferative state.

PMID: 14973077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Dec;1002:72-7.

Therapeutic potentialities of EWS-Fli-1 mRNA-targeted vectorized antisense
oligonucleotides.

Maksimenko A(1), Lambert G, Bertrand JR, Fattal E, Couvreur P, Malvy C.

Author information: 
(1)BioAlliance Pharma, 59, Boulevard du Général Martial Valin, 75015 Paris.

We have used structured antisense oligonucleotides (AON), which are protected
against extra and intracellular degradation by their internal structure. We have 
shown that if correctly designed this structure does not prevent them from
hybridizing to the mRNA target. This concept allows reducing the number of
thioate groups in the oligonucleotide and therefore the potential toxicity.
Junction oncogenes are found in cancers such as certain leukemias, Ewing sarcoma,
and thyroid papillary carcinomas. Ewing sarcoma is a cancer of children and young
adults with bone metastasis. It is caused by a chromosomic translocation t(11;22)
(q24;q12) creating a fusion gene between the genes EWS and Fli-1 giving rise to a
chimeric protein which is an unnatural transcription factor. Immortalized NIH/3T3
cells transfected by the EWS-Fli-1 cDNA under the control of the LTR retroviral
promoter--which do not undergo apoptosis and which became tumoral--were used for 
this study. As a model of Ewing sarcoma in nude mice, we have used permanently
expressing human EWS-Fli-1 cells grafted to nude mice. The nanospheres or
nanocapsules have been used to deliver two different AON: a phosphorothioate, and
a structured chimeric AON, both targeted toward the junction area of EWS-Fli-1.
Both types of AON-loaded nanoparticles inhibited the growth of the xenografted
tumor after intratumoral injections into nude mice, whereas similar nanoparticles
with control oligonucleotides had no effect. With AON in nanospheres, we have
shown after 24 hours that the mRNA of EWS-Fli-1 was specifically down-regulated, 
confirming the antisense activity of the targeted AON.

PMID: 14751824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Oncogene. 2003 Dec 18;22(58):9282-7.

Rapamycin induces the fusion-type independent downregulation of the EWS/FLI-1
proteins and inhibits Ewing's sarcoma cell proliferation.

Mateo-Lozano S(1), Tirado OM, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Department of Radiation Medicine,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20057-1482, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is the prototype of a family of tumors (ESFT) of
neuroectodermal origin formed by small, round cells with limited neural
differentiation, which arise most frequently within bones in children or
adolescents. The proliferation of ESFT cells is highly dependent on the
establishment of, and signaling through several growth factor-mediated autocrine 
loops. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a central regulator of
translation and cell proliferation, involved in the cellular response to various 
nutritional, stress and mitogenic effectors. As mTOR has recently been associated
with certain human cancers, we investigated the possibility that mTOR played a
role in the regulation of ES cell proliferation. Results showed that ES cell
lines carrying EWS/FLI-1 alleles of different types expressed different levels of
total and phosphorylated mTOR protein. We demonstrate that rapamycin, an mTOR
inhibitor, efficiently blocked the proliferation of all cell lines by promoting
cell cycle arrest at the G1 phase. This was paralleled by the downregulation of
the levels of the EWS/FLI-1 proteins, regardless of their fusion type, and the
concomitant restoration of the expression of the TGF-beta type 2 receptor
(TGFbeta RII), which is known to be repressed by several EWS-ETS fusion proteins.
The expression of a rapamycin-resistant mTOR construct prevented both the
proliferation blockade and the EWS/FLI-1 downregulation. These data demonstrate
that mTOR signaling plays a central role in ES cell pathobiology and strongly
suggest that the use of rapamycin as a cytostatic agent may be an efficient tool 
for the treatment of ES patients.

PMID: 14681687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 1;63(23):8338-44.

EWS/ETS fusions activate telomerase in Ewing's tumors.

Takahashi A(1), Higashino F, Aoyagi M, Yoshida K, Itoh M, Kyo S, Ohno T, Taira T,
Ariga H, Nakajima K, Hatta M, Kobayashi M, Sano H, Kohgo T, Shindoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathobiological Science, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Dental Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

EWS/ETS is a chimeric protein identified in most Ewing's sarcomas. Although
EWS/ETS has been shown to activate transcription as a transcription factor, the
detailed targets of EWS/ETS in transformed cells have not been clarified. Herein,
we demonstrate that telomerase is a new target of EWS/ETS fusions. Both
telomerase activity and the expression level of telomerase reverse transcriptase 
(TERT) mRNA were up-regulated in NIH3T3 cells transformed by EWS/E1AF and
EWS/FLI1 as well as in two Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. Luciferase assay using the
TERT promoter revealed that EWS/E1AF and EWS/FLI1 function as positive regulators
of TERT transcription in an ETS binding site-independent manner. EWS/ETS appeared
to be included in the initiation complex of TERT transcription and to cooperate
with CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300. When EWS/FLI1 was knocked down in Ewing's
sarcomas cells by RNA interference, the expression level of TERT mRNA and the
telomerase activity were significantly decreased. These findings indicate that
EWS/ETS fusion proteins activate human telomerase activity in Ewing's tumors
through up-regulation of TERT gene expression, probably as a transcriptional
coactivator.

PMID: 14678994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Diagn Cytopathol. 2003 Dec;29(6):341-3.

Sequence confirmation of the EWS-WT1 fusion gene transcript in the peritoneal
effusion of a patient with desmoplastic small round cell tumor.

Chiu LL(1), Koay ES, Chan NH, Salto-Tellez M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnosis Centre, Department of Laboratory Medicine, National
University Hospital, Singapore.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a rare undifferentiated neoplasm. 
The prognosis is poor, even if therapy is instituted promptly, and thus it is
important to differentiate it from other histologically and cytologically
similar-looking malignancies of the young adult. We present a case of DSRCT in a 
17-yr-old male with disseminated peritoneal disease and peritoneal effusion. The 
cytology sample showed a malignant small round cell tumor, the classical
cytological features of DSRCT, and immunohistochemistry performed in the prepared
cell block exhibited an antibody expression profile in keeping with DSRCT.
Further material from the effusion was prepared for RNA extraction, following
which a reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and sequencing
of the t(11;22)(p13;q11 or q12) were carried out. The result showed the presence 
of the reciprocal translocation and thus confirmed the diagnosis of DSRCT. This
case shows how molecular techniques (including sequencing) can be applied to
cytology in clarifying and confirming certain difficult diagnosis of
undifferentiated neoplasms, DSRCT in this particular case.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14648792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Pharm Res. 2003 Oct;20(10):1565-7.

Oligonucleotides targeted against a junction oncogene are made efficient by
nanotechnologies.

Maksimenko A(1), Malvy C, Lambert G, Bertrand JR, Fattal E, Maccario J, Couvreur 
P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 1582, Institut Gustave Roussy, 39 rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805
Villejuif cedex, France.

PURPOSE: Antisense oligonucleotides (AON) against junction EWS-Fli-1 oncogene
(which is responsible for the Ewing Sarcoma) are particularly interesting for
targeting chromosomal translocations that are only found in tumor cells. However,
these AON have proved in the past to be ineffective in vivo because of their
susceptibility to degradation and their poor intracellular penetration. The aim
of this study was to improve the delivery of these molecules through the use of
nanotechnologies.
METHOD: Two different AONs, and their controls, both targeted against the
junction area of the fusion gene EWS-Fli-1 were used. Nanocapsules were employed 
to deliver a phosphorothioate AON and its control. The nanospheres were used to
deliver a chimeric phosphorothioate, phosphodiester AON, with 5 additional bases 
in 5' which allow this AON to be structured with a loop. These formulations were 
injected intratumorally to nude mice bearing the experimental EWS-Fli-1 tumor.
The tumour volume was estimated during the experiments by two perpendicular
measurements length (a) and width (b) of the tumour and was calculated as
ab(2)/2. Northern blot analysis was also performed after removing the tumors 24 h
after the treatment with a single dose of AON either free or associated with
nanotechnologies.
RESULTS: This study shows for the first time that AON against EWS-Fli-1 oncogene 
may inhibit with high specificity the growth of an EWS-Fli-1 dependent tumor
grafted to nude mice provided they are delivered by nanocapsules or nanospheres. 
In this experience, the antisense effect was confirmed by the specific down
regulation of EWS-Fli-1 mRNA.
CONCLUSION: Thus, both nanocapsules and nanospheres may be considered as
promising systems for AON delivery in vivo.

PMID: 14620508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Int J Surg Pathol. 2003 Oct;11(4):331-7.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma of the suodenum: a case report.

Kie JH(1), Lee MK, Kim CJ, Lee K, Kwon KW, Yang WI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Health Insurance Cooperation Ilsan Hospital,
Koyang, Korea.

We report a case of Ewing's sarcoma arising from the duodenum in a 20-year-old
woman who presented with a rapidly progressive ulcerative lesion. The surgical
specimen obtained via Whipple's operation revealed a small round-cell tumor
(SRCT) in the first and second portion of the duodenum. The tumor cells revealed 
strong immunore-activity for CD 99 and vimentin and focal paranuclear dot-like
immunoreactivity for cytokeratin. Electron microscopy showed primitive tumor
cells with few cytoplasmic organelles, but neither neurosecretory granules nor
specific cell junctions were present. On Western blot study, 68-kDa EWS/FLI1
fusion protein was detected. The occurrence of Ewing's sarcoma in the
gastrointestinal hollow viscus has recently been recognized, and this case
expands the known anatomic sites that can harbor Ewing's sarcoma by demonstrating
primary duodenal involvement.

PMID: 14615834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003 Nov 5;95(21):1574-6.

Ewing's sarcoma: a miracle drug waiting to happen?

Longtin R.

PMID: 14600088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Nov 6;119(1):37-49.

The Ewing's sarcoma protein interacts with the Tudor domain of the survival motor
neuron protein.

Young PJ(1), Francis JW, Lince D, Coon K, Androphy EJ, Lorson CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, 210 Connaway Hall, University of
Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

The survival motor neuron (SMN) gene is the spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)
determining gene. Here we report that the SMN protein product interacts in vitro 
and in vivo with the arginine/glycine (RG)-rich RNA binding protein and
transcription factor, Ewing's sarcoma (EWS). Recently, the SMN encoded Tudor
domain (exon 3) and the YG-motifs (exon 6) have been shown to be involved in
binding to RG-rich proteins. Here, we demonstrate that the Tudor domain encoded
by SMN exon 3 is independently sufficient to mediate the interaction with EWS.
Synthetic mutations within the Tudor domain, as well as a SMA patient-derived
mutation within exon 3, reduced the levels of the SMN/EWS interaction.
Carboxyl-terminal SMN mutations that prevent formation of SMN oligomers also
indirectly reduced EWS binding. A role for arginine methylation has been observed
in some RG-containing SMN-interacting proteins. Here we demonstrate that SMN
interacts with non-methylated EWS and an EWS-derived RG-containing peptide. In
contrast to previously reported results, symmetrical dimethylation of the
EWS-derived RG-peptide results in a quantitative increase in the dissociation
rate between SMN and the symmetrical dimethylated EWS RG-peptide. Consistent with
the interaction data, endogenous and transiently expressed SMN co-localizes with 
endogenous EWS in a number of cultured cell lines, as well as rat primary neuron 
cultures. Anti-sense RNA experiments, however, demonstrate that EWS does not
mediate the nuclear distribution of SMN or other Cajal body components.

PMID: 14597228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Nov 1;290(2):414-9.

EWS/FLI function varies in different cellular backgrounds.

Zwerner JP(1), Guimbellot J, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-1150, USA.

EWS/FLI and other EWS/ets chimeric transcription factors play a central role in
the biology of the Ewing family tumors. As with many oncogenes, EWS/FLI biologic 
activity can be demonstrated in a limited range of cellular contexts. To
investigate the causes of this restriction, we demonstrate that two immortalized 
fibroblast lines resistant to EWS/FLI transformation, Rat1 and Yal7, express
stable levels of EWS/FLI protein. Despite their resistance to EWS/FLI, Rat1 and
Yal7 can be transformed by the potent EWS/FLI downstream mediator PDGF-C. In
contrast to NIH3T3, the EWS/FLI resistant lines show no upregulation of PDGF-C in
response to EWS/FLI, demonstrating differential EWS/FLI function in different
cellular backgrounds. This phenomenon of differential function can also be
demonstrated for several other NIH3T3 targets of EWS/FLI. Despite the correlation
between anchorage-independent growth and PDGF-C induction, PDGF-C does not fully 
reproduce all aspects of the EWS/FLI phenotype in NIH3T3 cells. These results
further point to the importance of PDGF-C in mediating EWS/FLI in vitro
transformation and suggest caution in assuming that a transcription factor will
produce identical effects in different cellular backgrounds.

PMID: 14567998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Semin Cancer Biol. 2003 Aug;13(4):275-81.

Potentials for RNAi in sarcoma research and therapy: Ewing's sarcoma as a model.

Kovar H(1), Ban J, Pospisilova S.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Kinderspitalgasse
6, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. heinrich.kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

Existing data identify EWS-FLI1 as indispensable for sustained Ewing's sarcoma
growth and as the ideal therapeutic target in this disease. The siRNA may hold
great promises as a fusion gene specific agent. RNAi mediated suppression of
EWS-FLI1 is likely to result in an altered tumor cell phenotype including changes
in chemosensitivity, and a restored differentiation potential. Thus, RNAi may
serve as an adjuvant to chemotherapy. As a therapeutic means however, RNAi is
hampered by limitations in the delivery of the agent and emergence of resistant
clones. In vitro suppression of EWS-FLI1 expression will allow to define the
phenotypic characteristics of dormant tumor cells that may give rise to late
relapses, enabling improved diagnosis and treatment even of minimal residual
disease.

PMID: 14563122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. FEBS Lett. 2003 Oct 9;553(1-2):104-8.

Upregulation of the matrix metalloproteinase-1 gene by the Ewing's sarcoma
associated EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1 oncoproteins, c-Jun and p300.

Fuchs B(1), Inwards CY, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

The mechanisms of action of Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) associated EWS-ETS oncoproteins
have largely remained unresolved. Here, we analyzed how two EWS-ETS proteins,
EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1, in vitro activate the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1
promoter that is upregulated in a subset of EWSs. EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1 interact
with and thereby activate the MMP-1 promoter, which is potentiated by the
cofactor p300 and the proto-oncoprotein c-Jun. Further, EWS-ER81 binds to c-Jun
in vitro and in vivo. The interaction between c-Jun, p300 and EWS-ER81 or
EWS-Fli-1 may also be relevant to the regulation of other yet-to-be-identified
genes that are responsible for EWS formation.

PMID: 14550555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 9;22(44):6819-29.

Homotypic and heterotypic interactions of EWS, FLI1 and their oncogenic fusion
protein.

Spahn L(1), Siligan C, Bachmaier R, Schmid JA, Aryee DN, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderspital, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria.

In Ewing's sarcoma family tumors, the ets transcription factor gene FLI1 is
rearranged with one EWS allele resulting in coexpression of germline EWS and
chimeric EWS-FLI1 proteins. Here, we investigated the potential of germline EWS, 
FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 to oligomerize. In two functional in vivo tests, fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) and the mammalian two-hybrid (MTH) assay,
self-association of EWS and EWS-FLI1, but not of FLI1 was detected. In addition, 
interaction of EWS-FLI1 with EWS and FLI1 was observed. GST pull-down assays and 
immunoprecipitation experiments largely confirmed these results. The EWS
N-terminal domain present in both EWS and EWS-FLI1 was found to contribute to
homotypic and heterotypic interactions of these proteins. However, in the context
of germline EWS, the presence of the whole or part of the C-terminal RNA-binding 
domain greatly supported the self-association potential of the protein.
Involvement of an RNA component in EWS oligomerization was confirmed by
sensitivity of the corresponding GST pull-down assay to RNaseA treatment. In
contrast, EWS-FLI1 was able to self-associate and also bind to FLI1 via its
C-terminal domain, which comprises the FLI1 DNA-binding motif. Accordingly, the
EWS-FLI1 interaction was not disrupted by RNaseA treatment. Despite its potential
to oligomerize, EWS-FLI1 bound to a tandem ets-binding site of the TGFbeta type
II receptor promoter as a monomer. Therefore, the functional consequences of
homo- and hetero-oligomerization of EWS and EWS-FLI1 proteins remain to be
elucidated.

PMID: 14534527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2003 Sep;30(9):1211-24.

[Recent progress of molecular diagnosis in pediatric malignancies].

[Article in Japanese]

Hayashi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pediatric Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo.

Recent progress of molecular and cytogenetic techniques has led to remarkable
advances in molecular diagnosis of pediatric malignancies, including malignant
bone and soft tissue sarcoma (MSTS). Fusion genes, such as EWS-FLI1 and
PAX3-FKHR, were cloned at the chromosome breakpoints of t(11;22) and t(2;13) in
Ewing's sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma, respectively. Minimal residual disease can 
be detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction using these
translocations. These fusion genes contribute to differential diagnosis of
pediatric small round cell tumor, which was difficult to diagnose
morphologically. Some of these fusion genes, including SYT-SSX in synovial
sarcoma and EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma, have been reported to be associated with
prognosis. Recently, genome-wide searches using microarray and single nucleotide 
polymorphisms have been performed in pediatric malignancies. These advances have 
led to the increased importance of molecular diagnosis as well as morphological
diagnosis. We review here the recent progress of molecular diagnosis in pediatric
malignancies.

PMID: 14518398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Aug 15;288(2):374-81.

Expression and subcellular localization of Ewing sarcoma (EWS) protein is
affected by the methylation process.

Belyanskaya LL(1), Delattre O, Gehring H.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemisches Institut, Universität Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057
Zürich, Switzerland.

Ewing sarcoma (EWS) protein contains an N-terminal transcriptional activation
domain (EAD) and a C-terminal RNA-binding domain (RBD). Recently, we had shown
that EWS protein is not only localized in the nucleus and cytosol, but also on
the surface of T cells and that its RBD is extensively asymmetrically
dimethylated on arginine residues. Here we show that stimulation of T cells with 
phytohemagglutinin (PHA) caused a time-dependent 10-fold increase in expression
of methylated EWS protein on the cell surface and a sixfold increase in the
nuclei of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Mitogenic stimulation of
malignant T cell lines, however, did not increase their inherently high
expression of EWS protein. This expression seemed to correlate with methionine
adenosyltransferase activity and S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) utilization in 
PBMC and tumor cells and thus indicates dependence on the methylation process.
Inhibition of methylation in normal and malignant cells with the methylation
inhibitor adenosine dialdehyde (AdOx) resulted in a three to fivefold decreased
expression of EWS protein not only in the nucleus but also on the cell surface.
The inhibitory effect of AdOx was compensated and negligible in PBMC, but not in 
tumor cells if they were treated simultaneously with mitogenic PHA
concentrations. The present findings indicate that expression of EWS protein in
the various subcellular compartments is affected by the methylation process, in
particular by the availability of intracellular AdoMet.

PMID: 12915128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003;532:27-37.

Ewing tumor biology: perspectives for innovative treatment approaches.

Kovar H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria.

The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) is a group of malignancies affecting
bone and soft tissue in adolescents. It is characterized by a unique gene
rearrangement between the EWS gene and an ets transcription factor gene. EFT can 
be cured with conventional multi modal treatment, however, about 40% of patients 
still succumb to the disease. Relapses can be observed more than 5 years after
the end of primary treatment suggesting persistence of minimal residual disease
(MRD). Due to the still enigmatic nature of EFT histogenesis the phenotype of EFT
stem cells and of dormant tumor cells remains unknown. The most frequent fusion
product associated with EFT, EWS-FLI1, is the founding member of a whole class of
similarly structured chimeric proteins associated with a variety of human
sarcomas and also specific leukemias. The corresponding gene rearrangement
constitutes a rate limiting step in oncogenesis as implied by the high
association of EFT with EWS-ETS fusions, strong selective pressure for
maintenance of a correct reading frame in the tumors, and by experimental data
confirming the transforming and tumorigenic potential of EWS-FLI1. Understanding 
the biology of EWS-ETS gene fusions and its interplay with essential cellular
pathways regulating cell growth, apoptosis, differentiation, genomic integrity,
and treatment resistance may unravel specifically vulnerable sites for
therapeutic targeting. This review summarizes the current knowledge about the
EWS-FLI1 pathway in EFT and provides some ideas as to how this knowledge may be
translated into innovative treatment approaches.

PMID: 12908547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cancer Res. 2003 Aug 1;63(15):4568-76.

FUS/ERG gene fusions in Ewing's tumors.

Shing DC(1), McMullan DJ, Roberts P, Smith K, Chin SF, Nicholson J, Tillman RM,
Ramani P, Cullinane C, Coleman N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre,
Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XZ, UK.

Ewing's tumors are rare pediatric neoplasms that are characterized by specific
chromosomal translocations and gene rearrangements. All of the fusion genes
reported to date in Ewing's tumors juxtapose the EWS gene at 22q12 to an
ETS-related gene, the most common of which are FLI1 at 11q24 and ERG at 21q22. We
present here four cases of Ewing's tumor, which showed no evidence of a EWS gene 
rearrangement, but instead contained translocations involving 16p11 and 21q22. A 
rearrangement involving the same chromosome bands, t(16;21)(p11;q22), is found in
rare cases of acute myeloid leukemia and fuses the FUS gene at 16p11 to the ERG
gene at 21q22. In two of our Ewing's tumor cases, we were able to show at the
sequence level that the translocation between chromosomes 16 and 21 similarly
results in a FUS/ERG fusion. In one case, exons 1-5 and most of exon 6 of FUS
were fused in-frame to exon 9 of ERG; in the other case, FUS exons 1-7 were fused
in-frame to ERG exons 8-9. The functional fusion transcript is expected to be
expressed from the der(21)t(16;21) derivative. In the two other t(16;21)-positive
Ewing's cases, we performed bacterial artificial chromosome fluorescence in situ 
hybridization analysis on metaphases and interphase nuclei to demonstrate
colocalization of bacterial artificial chromosomes containing FUS and ERG genes, 
also highly suggestive of fusion gene formation. These represent the first four
cases where FUS, rather than EWS, is rearranged with an ETS-family transcription 
factor in Ewing's tumors. Our data provide additional evidence that the
transactivation domains of the TET family of RNA-binding proteins (such as EWS
and FUS) are interchangeable, and suggests a novel mechanism of oncogenesis in
Ewing's tumors.

PMID: 12907633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Ultrastruct Pathol. 2003 Jul-Aug;27(4):217-26.

Molecular variability of TLS-CHOP structure shows no significant impact on the
level of adipogenesis: a comparative ultrastructural and RT-PCR analysis of 14
cases of myxoid/round cell liposarcomas.

Huang HY(1), Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

A specific TLS-CHOP fusion gene derived from the t(12;16) is present in at least 
95% of myxoid/round cell liposarcomas (MLS). Rare cases of MLS show a variant
t(12;22) translocation, resulting in EWS-CHOP fusion gene. The CHOP gene encodes 
a leucine-zipper transcription factor, which is implicated in both oncogenic
transformation and inhibition of adipogenesis. To examine whether the molecular
variability of TLS-CHOP or EWS-CHOP fusion transcript structure is associated
with the degree of inhibition of adipogenesis, a comparative ultrastructural and 
RT-PCR-based analysis of 14 MLS was performed. The specimens consisted of 9
primary, 2 locally recurrent tumors, and one representative sample each from 3
patients with multifocal soft tissue metastases. Histologically, there were 8
high-grade and 6 low-grade MLS using 5% round cell (RC) component as the cutoff
point. By RT-PCR assay there were 13 cases with TLS-CHOP fusion transcripts: 7
cases of type 5-2 (known as type II), 4 cases of type 7-2 (known as type I),1
case of type 8-2 (known as type III), and 1 unique case of type 6-2. The
remaining 1 case showed an EWS-CHOP fusion transcript. Ultrastructural
examination revealed that tumor cells were composed of a moderate-to-predominant 
proportion of well-formed lipoblasts in 4 cases, while in 6 cases such lipoblasts
were very scant. The remaining 4 tumors were arrested in the stage of
transitional cells. The heterogeneity of TLS-CHOP fusion transcript showed no
apparent impact on adipogenesis, since both TLS-CHOP type I and II cases could
randomly display various levels of lipoblastic differentiation. Furthermore, the 
4 cases without definite lipoblasts showed no preference for any specific fusion 
variants and consisted of one each of TLS-CHOP subtypes. In addition, the fusion 
transcript variants did not correlate with other ultrastructural features, such
as the presence and amount of glycogen, mitochondria, rough endoplasmic
reticulum, vimentin-like intermediate filaments, and external lamina. However,
there appeared to have a trend suggesting the predilections of glycogen particles
and vimentin-like intermediate filaments in primitive mesenchymal cells and/or
transitional cells. These findings cannot substantiate the hypothesis that the
molecular variability of fusion transcripts has a biological impact on
adipogenesis of MLS, and other factors might be implicated in their level of
differentiation.

PMID: 12907366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Aug;27(8):1161-6.

Evidence of neural differentiation in a case of post-therapy primitive
neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma of bone.

Collini P(1), Mezzelani A, Modena P, Dagrada P, Tamborini E, Luksch R, Gronchi A,
Navarria P, Sozzi G, Pilotti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of pathology, Experimental Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori,
Milan, Italy.

Neural differentiation with the appearance of ganglion-like cells has been
reported in untreated primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma (PNET/EWS) at
peculiar sites, such as the cauda equina, and following treatment. The case is
presented here of a 17-year-old girl with a tumor in the iliac bone. An open
biopsy was diagnosed as PNET/EWS of the bone. The tumor had the typical
morphology of this tumor type and showed diffuse membranous immunoreactivity for 
CD99, intense immunoreactivity for synaptophysin, and focal immunoreactivity for 
neuron-specific enolase and S-100 protein. Occasional reactivity for vimentin was
evident, while no immunoreactivity for NB84a, Hu, chromogranins A and B,
neurofilaments, cytokeratins, and desmin was present. The patient underwent
chemotherapy and radiotherapy, followed by right internal hemipelvectomy. The
post-treatment residual viable tumor showed a morphologic appearance resembling a
neuroblastoma, with immunoreactivity for NB84a, Hu, synaptophysin, and
chromogranins A and B, but not for CD99. RT-PCR performed on tumor tissue before 
and after therapy showed the presence of the EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript, type I
in both samples. This case of PNET/EWS is unique in the sense of showing the
typical fusion transcript associated with this tumor both in the morphologically 
typical pretherapy tumor and in the sample from the post-therapy specimen showing
neuroblastoma-like features.

PMID: 12883251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Oncogene. 2003 Jul 17;22(29):4586-93.

UQCRH gene encoding mitochondrial Hinge protein is interrupted by a translocation
in a soft-tissue sarcoma and epigenetically inactivated in some cancer cell
lines.

Modena P(1), Testi MA, Facchinetti F, Mezzanzanica D, Radice MT, Pilotti S, Sozzi
G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Cytogenetics, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, via G. Venezian 1, 
20133 Milano, Italy.

We previously reported the identification of a novel zinc-finger gene, designated
ZSG, fused to Ewing sarcoma gene (EWS) by a submicroscopic paracentric inversion 
of 22q12 in a small round cell sarcoma presenting a translocation
t(1;22)(p34;q12). We report here the molecular cloning and characterization of
the breakpoint in 1p34, which encompasses the gene coding for mitochondrial Hinge
protein ubiquinol-cytochrome C reductase hinge gene (UQCRH). All the three
breakpoints, two on 22q12 and one in 1p34, interrupt different genes: EWS, ZSG
and UQCRH. We determined the genomic structure of UQCRH, characterized its
splicing variants and identified a transcribed processed pseudogene. The analysis
of UQCRH expression in normal tissues and cancer cell lines revealed absent
expression of UQCRH in two ovarian and one breast cancer cell lines and reduced
expression in a further breast carcinoma cell line. CpG island methylation
upstream exon 1 was detected in all the three cell lines with absent expression. 
Moreover, treatment with demethylating agent 5-azacytidine restored UQCRH
expression in OAW42 ovarian cancer cells. These data provide preliminary evidence
of the inactivation of UQCRH gene in cancer either by structural rearrangements
or epigenetic mechanisms.

PMID: 12881716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Mol Diagn. 2003 Aug;5(3):191-4.

Inconspicuous insertion 22;12 in myxoid/round cell liposarcoma accompanied by the
secondary structural abnormality der(16)t(1;16).

Birch NC(1), Antonescu CR, Nelson M, Sarran L, Neff JR, Seemayer T, Bridge JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

In myxoid/round cell liposarcoma, the t(12;16)(q13;p11) and its associated fusion
transcript, FUS-CHOP, characterize greater than 95% of cases. The variant
translocation t(12;22)(q13;q12) and associated EWS-CHOP fusion transcript are
rare. A second non-random aberration observed in roughly 20% of Ewing's sarcomas,
and to a lesser extent other select sarcomas, is the unbalanced 1;16
translocation. Recognition of this secondary aberration in the absence of an
obvious primary karyotypic abnormality strongly suggests that the use of other
genetic approaches will be informative in uncovering a clinically suspected
primary anomaly. The following case illustrates the utility of molecular
cytogenetic and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction techniques in
diagnosing an ins(22;12)(q12;q13q14) and associated EWS-CHOP fusion transcript in
a myxoid/round cell liposarcoma exhibiting a der(16)t(1;16)(q11;q11).

PMCID: PMC1907333
PMID: 12876210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cancer Res. 2003 Jul 15;63(14):4268-74.

Functional analysis of the EWS/ETS target gene uridine phosphorylase.

Deneen B(1), Hamidi H, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90024, USA.

The EWS/ETS fusion proteins associated with Ewings family tumors (EFTs) are
thought to promote oncogenesis by acting as aberrant transcription factors.
Uridine phosphorylase is a gene that is up-regulated by structurally distinct
EWS/ETS fusions. Ectopic expression of uridine phosphorylase was able to support 
anchorage-independent cell growth, indicating that it plays an active role in the
oncogenic process. Transcriptional up-regulation of uridine phosphorylase is
shown to be mediated in a DNA binding-dependent manner, and reporter gene assays 
demonstrated that EWS/FLI1 and RAS mediate activation through a single activator 
protein 1/ETS site located in the uridine phosphorylase promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays reveal that EWS/FLI1 directly associates with the
uridine phosphorylase promoter in vivo. Up-regulation of uridine phosphorylase by
EWS/FLI1 sensitizes cells to growth inhibition by the pyrimidine analogue,
5'-deoxy-5'fluorouridine, both in tissue culture and in vivo model systems.

PMID: 12874036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Cancer Res. 2003 Jul 1;63(13):3464-8.

Ewing tumor fusion proteins block the differentiation of pluripotent marrow
stromal cells.

Torchia EC(1), Jaishankar S, Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The Ewing family of tumors are poorly differentiated pediatric solid tumors
arising in bone and soft tissues from an unknown cell of origin. Ewing tumors are
molecularly defined by in-frame genomic fusions that combine EWS with one of
several ETS genes, most commonly FLI-1. We considered pluripotent marrow-derived 
stromal cells a likely candidate for the origin of Ewing tumors and assessed the 
effects of EWS/ETS proteins in this cell background. EWS/ETS expression in
marrow-derived stromal cells caused a dramatic change in cellular morphology that
was dependent on the presence of the ETS domain and unique to the fusion
proteins. EWS/ETS fusion proteins blocked differentiation along osteogenic and
adipogenic lineages, consistent with the undifferentiated appearance of Ewing
tumors. Inhibition of differentiation may be an important function of EWS/ETS
proteins in the genesis of Ewing tumors.

PMID: 12839926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Mol Ther. 2003 Jun;7(6):811-6.

Small interfering RNAs expressed from a Pol III promoter suppress the EWS/Fli-1
transcript in an Ewing sarcoma cell line.

Dohjima T(1), Lee NS, Li H, Ohno T, Rossi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
1450 East Duarte Road, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

The EWS/Fli-1 fusion gene encodes an oncogenic fusion protein. The fusion is a
product of the translocation t(11;22) (q24;q12), which is detected in 85% of
Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor cells. Utilizing
intracellularly expressed 21- to 23-nucleotide small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
targeting the EWS/Fli-1 fusion transcript in an Ewing sarcoma cell line, we
achieved a greater than 80% reduction in the EWS/Fli-1 transcript. The reduction 
in transcript levels was accompanied by growth inhibition of an Ewing cell line. 
In addition to quantitating the reduction of the fusion transcript, we carefully 
monitored reduction of the endogenous EWS and Fli-1 mRNAs as well. One of the two
siRNAs targeted to the fusion transcript also partially downregulated the Fli-1
mRNA, further potentiating the growth inhibition. These results highlight both
the power of siRNAs and the potential side reactions that need to be carefully
monitored. In addition, these results provide the first demonstration of
expressed siRNAs downregulating an oncogenic fusion transcript. The results and
observations from these studies should prove useful in targeting other fusion
transcripts characteristic of sarcomas and erythroleukemias.

PMID: 12788655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;23(11):3897-908.

PIM3 proto-oncogene kinase is a common transcriptional target of divergent
EWS/ETS oncoproteins.

Deneen B(1), Welford SM, Ho T, Hernandez F, Kurland I, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California-Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Despite significant structural diversity, present evidence suggests that EWS/ETS 
fusion proteins promote oncogenesis by transcriptionally modulating a common set 
of target genes. In order to identify these genes, microarray expression analyses
were performed on NIH 3T3 polyclonal populations expressing one of three EWS/ETS 
fusion genes. The majority of these genes can be grouped into seven functional
categories, including cellular metabolism and signal transduction. The biologic
significance of these target genes was pursued. The effects of modulating genes
involved in metabolism were assessed by flux studies and demonstrated shifts in
glucose utilization and lactate production as a result of EWS/FLI1 expression.
The proto-oncogene coding for serine/threonine kinase PIM3 was found to one of
several genes encoding signal transduction proteins that were up-regulated by
EWS/ETS fusions. PIM3 was found to be expressed in a panel of human Ewing's
family tumor cell lines. Forced expression of PIM3 promoted anchorage-independent
growth. Coexpression of a kinase-deficient PIM3 mutant attenuated
EWS/FLI1-mediated NIH 3T3 tumorigenesis in immunodeficent mice.

PMCID: PMC155223
PMID: 12748291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2003 Apr;127(4):e190-3.

Primary primitive peripheral neuroectodermal tumor of the prostate.
Immunophenotypic and molecular study of a case.

Colecchia M(1), Dagrada G, Poliani PL, Messina A, Pilotti S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Patologia, Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei
Tumori, Milano, Italy. colecchia@istitutotumori.mi.it

A case of primitive peripheral neuroectodermal tumor arising in the prostate
gland of a 31-year-old man and first diagnosed through a biopsy is reported.
Microscopically, the tumor was made up of solid nests and sheets of small round
cells, and it was difficult to distinguish the neoplasm from other small round
cell tumors, such as small cell carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, or malignant
lymphoma. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed immunoreactivity for
CD99, vimentin, neuron-specific enolase, and synaptophysin. The neoplasm was
excised by a radical surgical procedure preceded by chemotherapy and radiation
therapy. The morphologic diagnosis of the prostatectomy specimen was complemented
by molecular analysis performed on viable microdissected tissue obtained from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor sections. Polymerase chain reaction and
sequencing assessment showed the presence of EWS/FLI1 type 2 chimeric transcript,
confirming the diagnosis of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. To our
knowledge, this is the first description of a primary peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor in the prostate gland.

PMID: 12683899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Clin Neuropathol. 2003 Mar-Apr;22(2):66-70.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor in the cerebellopontine angle with isochromosome 
17q presenting as meningioma in a woman 26 years of age.

Izycka-Swieszewska E(1), Debiec-Rychter M, Kloc W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Gdansk, Poland. eczis@wp.pl

An unusual posterior fossa neoplasm in a 26-year-old woman with short history of 
the cerebellar symptoms is presented. CT and MR images showed the tumor within
the cerebellopontine angle, suspected as meningioma. At surgery, the tumor was
dura-attached and did not infiltrate the arachnoid. Histologically, the neoplasm 
was a small blue cell tumor with solid and microcystic pattern, consistent with
primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). Immunohistochemically the cells were
strongly positive for NCAM and GFAP. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
was performed with the cosmids G9 and F7 (flanking EWSR1/22q12 region) DNA probes
and dual-color spectrum-orange LSI HER-2/neu (17q11.2)/spectrum green CEP17
(17p11.1-q11.1) DNA probe. The presence of isochromosome 17q within neoplastic
cells was found. The tumor was classified as a medulloblastoma. We demonstrate
the utility of a multidisciplinary approach to nervous system tumor diagnosis.
The clinical features together with histological, immunohistochemical, and
characteristic molecular alteration allowed classification of the presented case.

PMID: 12670052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Mar;141(2):138-42.

Characterization of the A673 cell line (Ewing tumor) by molecular cytogenetic
techniques.

Martínez-Ramírez A(1), Rodríguez-Perales S, Meléndez B, Martínez-Delgado B,
Urioste M, Cigudosa JC, Benítez J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Molecular Pathology Program, Spanish National
Cancer Center (CNIO), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
angmartinez@cnio.es

Comment in
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Jan 1;148(1):86.

The A673 cell line was established from a patient with a primary rhabdomyosarcoma
(RMS), which is referred to in the literature either as a Ewing tumor (ET) or as 
RMS. Although the two tumoral types are associated with specific and
well-characterized translocations, no cytogenetic report on this cell line has
been published. We characterized the A673 cell line using a combination of
spectral karyotyping (SKY), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which revealed the
presence of a complex karyotype and a translocation involving chromosomes 11 and 
22 and the fusion of EWS and FLI1 genes, both events being specific to ET.
Neither cytogenetics nor molecular alterations specific to RMS were found.

PMID: 12606131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 25;278(17):15105-15. Epub 2003 Jan 30.

Identification of p21WAF1/CIP1 as a direct target of EWS-Fli1 oncogenic fusion
protein.

Nakatani F(1), Tanaka K, Sakimura R, Matsumoto Y, Matsunobu T, Li X, Hanada M,
Okada T, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Translocation t(11;22) is a karyotypic abnormality detected in over 90% of
Ewing's family tumors. This translocation results in the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene,
which has been shown to be a potent, single-step transforming gene. We reported
previously that suppression of the EWS-Fli1 fusion protein altered the expression
of G(1) regulatory cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors both at mRNA
and protein levels, resulting in G(1) growth arrest in Ewing's family tumor cell 
lines. These data suggest that the G(1) regulatory molecules may be targets of
the EWS-Fli1 fusion protein, which functions as an aberrant transcription factor.
By using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we show here the direct
association of EWS-Fli1 fusion protein with ETS consensus sequences, which are in
the promoter of the p21(WAF1/CIP1) gene. Reporter gene assays revealed that the
activity of the p21(WAF1/CIP1) promoter is negatively regulated by EWS-Fli1
fusion protein through at least two ETS-binding sites in the promoter. EWS-Fli1
interacted with p300 cotransactivator and suppressed its histone
acetyltransferase activity, which may explain the down-regulation of
p21(WAF1/CIP1) by EWS-Fli1. In the presence of a histone deacetylase inhibitor,
the histone acetyltransferase activity of the Ewing's family tumor cell was
recovered resulting in the induction of p21, and the cell growth was dramatically
inhibited. These results demonstrated that p21(WAF1/CIP1) might be one of the
direct targets of EWS-Fli1, and that p21(WAF1/CIP1) could serve as a target for a
molecularly based therapy for Ewing's family tumors.

PMID: 12560328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 Mar;36(3):224-32.

Induction of tenascin-C by tumor-specific EWS-ETS fusion genes.

Watanabe G(1), Nishimori H, Irifune H, Sasaki Y, Ishida S, Zembutsu H, Tanaka T, 
Kawaguchi S, Wada T, Hata J, Kusakabe M, Yoshida K, Nakamura Y, Tokino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) are
associated with a chromosomal translocation resulting in a fusion of the
amino-terminus of EWS with the DNA-binding domain of an ETS transcription factor 
(most commonly FLI1 or ERG). Although previous reports suggested that these
chimera proteins would act as aberrant transcription factors, their downstream
targets have not been fully elucidated. To identify downstream targets of these
EWS-ETS fusion proteins, we introduced EWS-ETS fusion constructs into a human
fibrosarcoma cell line, HT-1080, by retroviral transduction. Here we report that 
Tenascin-C (TNC) is induced to a significantly higher level in cells expressing
EWS-ETSs than in cells expressing normal ETSs. Furthermore, through use of an
antisense cDNA expression vector we show that expression of endogenous TNC mRNA
and protein were reduced coordinately with attenuation of EWS-FLI1 fusion protein
expression. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed direct interaction
between the TNC promoter and the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein in vivo. In addition, a 
luciferase reporter assay revealed that EWS-ETSs upregulated the TNC gene through
four ETS binding sites in the TNC promoter. High levels of TNC expression were
observed in a subset of ES cell lines (3 of 6) and primary tumors (4 of 6).
Together with previous studies showing that TNC expression is involved in the
invasive and malignant phenotype of several tumor types, our data suggest that
the oncogenic effect of EWS-ETS may be mediated in part by upregulating of TNC
expression.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12557222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Br J Cancer. 2003 Jan 13;88(1):137-45.

Transformation induced by Ewing's sarcoma associated EWS/FLI-1 is suppressed by
KRAB/FLI-1.

Chan D(1), Wilson TJ, Xu D, Cowdery HE, Sanij E, Hertzog PJ, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Diseases, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

Ewing's sarcoma is a childhood bone tumour with poor prognosis, most commonly
associated with a t(11;22)(q24;q12) reciprocal translocation that fuses the EWS
and FLI-1 genes, resulting in the production of an aberrant chimeric
transcription factor EWS/FLI-1. To elucidate the mechanisms by which EWS/FLI-1
mediates transformation in mouse models, we have generated a murine Ews/Fli-1
fusion protein. We demonstrate that this protein transforms fibroblast cells in
vitro similar to human EWS/FLI-1 as demonstrated by serum and
anchorage-independent growth, the formation of tumours in nude mice and elevation
of the oncogenic marker c-myc. Furthermore, transformation of these cells was
inhibited by a specific repressor, KRAB/FLI-1. The KRAB/FLI-1 repressor also
suppressed the tumorigenic phenotype of a human Ewing's sarcoma cell line. These 
findings suggest that the transformed phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma cells can be
reversed by using the sequence-specific FLI-1-DNA-binding domain to target a gene
repressor domain. The inhibition of EWS/FLI-1 is the first demonstration of the
KRAB domain suppressing the action of an ETS factor. This approach provides
potential avenues for the elucidation of the biological mechanisms of EWS/FLI-1
oncogenesis and the development of novel therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC2376791
PMID: 12556973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 28;278(13):11369-75. Epub 2003 Jan 28.

COL11A2 collagen gene transcription is differentially regulated by EWS/ERG
sarcoma fusion protein and wild-type ERG.

Matsui Y(1), Chansky HA, Barahmand-Pour F, Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A, Tsumaki N,
Myoui A, Yoshikawa H, Yang L, Eyre DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington School
of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195-6500, USA.

A specific t(21;22) chromosomal translocation creates the chimeric EWS/ERG gene
in some cases of Ewing's sarcoma. In the resultant EWS/ERG fusion protein, the
N-terminal part of the ETS family protein ERG is replaced by the N terminus of
the RNA-binding protein EWS. We found that both the EWS/ERG and COL11A2 genes are
expressed in the Ewing's sarcoma cell line, CADO-ES1. To investigate a potential 
role for EWS/ERG in COL11A2 gene expression, we characterized the COL11A2
promoter and tested the ability of wild-type ERG and EWS/ERG sarcoma fusion
protein to transactivate COL11A2 promoter using a luciferase assay. We found that
expression of EWS/ERG, but not wild-type ERG, transactivated the COL11A2 promoter
and that this transactivation required not only the N-terminal region of EWS but 
also an intact DNA-binding domain from ERG. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay 
using COL11A2 promoter sequence showed involvement of EWS/ERG in the formation of
DNA-protein complexes, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed direct
interaction between COL11A2 promoter and EWS/ERG fusion protein in vivo. EWS/ERG,
but not wild-type ERG, bound to RNA polymerase II. Treatment of cells with the
histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A enabled ERG to transactivate the
COL11A2 promoter, therefore abolishing the differential effects of EWS/ERG and
ERG. Taken together, these findings indicate that the COL11A2 gene is regulated
both by potential ERG association with a histone deacetylase complex and by
direct EWS/ERG recruitment of RNA polymerase II.

PMID: 12554743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2003 Mar;20(2):119-40.

Stable transgenic expression of IL-2 and HSV1-tk by single and fusion tumor cell 
lines bearing EWS/FLI-1 chimeric genes.

Staege MS(1), Gorelov V, Bulankin A, Fischer U, Dumon K, Hohndorf L, Hattenhorst 
U, Kramm C, Burdach S.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Center, Department of Pediatrics and BioCenter,
Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/Saale, Germany.

In augmenting systemic anti-tumor immune response, the authors evaluated the
genetic modification of Ewing family tumor (EFT) cell lines for use as allogeneic
vaccines. EFT cell lines A673 and RD-ES were transfected with cDNAs for human
interleukin (IL)-2 and/or HSV1 thymidine kinase (HSV1-tk), respectively. Clones
with high and stable secretion of IL-2 alone or with coexpression of functional
HSV1-tk were obtained and their features were analyzed. IL-2 expressing clones
derived from the A673 cell line demonstrated decreased expression of HLA class I 
molecules compared with the parental cell line and corresponding clones derived
from RD-ES. However, IFN-gamma could upregulate the expression of HLA class I
antigens by IL-2 transfected A673 cells. Ganciclovir induced apoptosis in
double-transfected cell clones. IL-2/HSV1-tk cells continued to produce and
release IL-2 after initial ganciclovir treatment. After gamma-irradiation,
transfected clones released bioactive IL-2 in a quantity sufficient to activate T
and natural killer cells in culture. A polyvalent allogeneic vaccine was also
obtained using fusion of two different transgenic cell lines. The resulting
hybrids inherited antigenic and transgenic characteristics of both parental cell 
lines. It is presumed that the cell lines generated here could be used as
allogeneic vaccines for treatment of patients with EFTs.

PMID: 12554523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Cancer Res. 2003 Jan 15;63(2):449-54.

The homeotic protein Six3 is a coactivator of the nuclear receptor NOR-1 and a
corepressor of the fusion protein EWS/NOR-1 in human extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcomas.

Laflamme C(1), Filion C, Bridge JA, Ladanyi M, Goldring MB, Labelle Y.

Author information: 
(1)Human and Molecular Genetic Research Unit, Pavillon Saint-François d'Assise,
CHUQ, Quebec, Qc, G1L 3L5 Canada.

Nuclear receptors represent a large family of transcription factors involved in
development, differentiation, homeostasis, and cancer. In recent years, a growing
number of cofactors has been discovered that participate in the regulation of the
transcriptional activity of these proteins. We present in this study the
identification of a cofactor, the homeotic protein Six3, which differentially
regulates the transcriptional activity of the orphan nuclear receptor NOR-1
(NR4A3). NOR-1 is normally involved in the balance between cell proliferation and
cell death, and is implicated in oncogenesis as part of the EWS/NOR-1 fusion
protein found in human extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) tumors. Reverse 
transcription-PCR analyses indicate that EMC tumors expressing the EWS/NOR-1 mRNA
also express mRNAs encoding NOR-1 and Six3. Glutathione S-transferase fusion
protein assays show that Six3 binds in vitro the DNA-binding domain of NOR-1 and 
the EWS domain of EWS/NOR-1 and that the homeodomain of Six3 is required for
these interactions. Mammalian two-hybrid experiments, using immortalized human
chondrocytes as a model, indicate that Six3 also interacts with NOR-1 and
EWS/NOR-1 in vivo. Cotransfection experiments show that Six3 stimulates the
transcriptional activity of NOR-1, whereas it represses that of EWS/NOR-1.
Considering the highly specific expression pattern of Six3, our finding that it
is expressed in EMC suggests that it plays a pivotal role in the development of
these tumors. We propose that Six3 maintains a transcriptional balance between
the activities of NOR-1 and EWS/NOR-1, the net effect being to deregulate the
expression of specific target genes and push the equilibrium toward uncontrolled 
cell proliferation.

PMID: 12543801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Oncogene. 2003 Jan 9;22(1):41-9.

Identification of target genes for EWS/ATF-1 chimeric transcription factor.

Jishage M(1), Fujino T, Yamazaki Y, Kuroda H, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation is a useful technique to detect in vivo direct
interaction between any transcription factor and its binding site on genomic DNA.
We applied this skill to identify the direct target gene for EWS/ATF-1 by
coupling with a GFP reporter assay. This novel approach isolated 62 of cloned DNA
fragments responding upon EWS/ATF-1 expression and 16 of 62 clones included
putative ATF-1 binding sites. Further analysis revealed that six of the cloned
fragments included possible regulatory regions of ATM, GPP34, ARNT2, NKX6.1,
NYD-SP28 and POSH. Most of these clones upregulated reporter activity by
overexpression of EWS/ATF-1, suggesting that putative ATF-1 binding sites in
these clones are functional elements for ATF-1 in vivo. Consistently, endogenous 
expression of these genes was upregulated by EWS/ATF-1. Interestingly, the clone 
containing the promoter region of POSH, which is known to be a strong inducer of 
apoptosis, repressed reporter activity by overexpression of EWS/ATF-1.
Correspondingly, EWS/ATF-1 expression decreased endogenous POSH expression,
suggesting that six isolated genes may be involved in direct regulation by
EWS/ATF-1. Moreover, induction of POSH brought apoptotic cell death to KAS, the
clear cell sarcoma (CCS) cell line, suggesting that repressed expression of POSH 
in CCS may be relevant to the normal signaling pathway in apoptosis.

PMID: 12527906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Oncogene. 2003 Jan 9;22(1):1-9.

Upregulation of Id2, an oncogenic helix-loop-helix protein, is mediated by the
chimeric EWS/ets protein in Ewing sarcoma.

Fukuma M(1), Okita H, Hata J, Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The chromosomal translocation specifically linked to the Ewing sarcoma family
results in the generation of fusion proteins comprising the amino terminal
portion of EWS and the DNA-binding domain of ets transcription factors. The
EWS/ets chimeric proteins act as aberrant transcription factors leading to
tumorigenic processes. We searched for genes specifically activated in Ewing
sarcoma cells but not in other tumor cell lines using the gene array technique,
and found significantly enhanced expression of the Id2 gene. High levels of Id2
transcripts were detected in Ewing sarcoma cell lines and tumor tissues. The
EWS/ets chimeric proteins activated the Id2 gene via the 5'-upstream promoter
sequence. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation revealed a direct interaction of
EWS/Fli-1 with the promoter regions of the Id2, TGF-beta type II receptor, cyclin
D1, and c-myc genes. Since EWS/Fli-1 transactivates c-myc, a cooperative action
of the chimeric protein and c-myc leads to overexpression of Id2. In the present 
study, we suggest that Id2 is a target of the chimeric proteins and that the
c-myc/Id2 pathway plays a pivotal role in the tumorigenic processes provoked by
EWS/ets proteins.

PMID: 12527902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Hum Genet. 2003 Feb;112(2):143-55. Epub 2002 Nov 16.

Arrangement of chromosome 11 and 22 territories, EWSR1 and FLI1 genes, and other 
genetic elements of these chromosomes in human lymphocytes and Ewing sarcoma
cells.

Taslerová R(1), Kozubek S, Lukásová E, Jirsová P, Bártová E, Kozubek M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Optical Microscopy, Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, 
Botanická 68a, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic.

Standard and repeated fluorescence in situ hybridization and high-resolution
cytometry were used to study topographical parameters of chromosome 11 and 22
territories, EWSR1 and FLI1 genes, and other genetic elements of these
chromosomes in human lymphocytes and Ewing sarcoma cells. HSA 11 and its elements
(BCL1, FLI1, centromere) were found, on average, more peripherally in comparison 
with HSA 22 and investigated elements (BCR, EWSR1, centromere). After the
elimination of fluctuations of chromosome territories in nuclear volume, it was
found that genetic elements in most cases adhered to their territories. The
investigated genetic elements of HSA 11 were found close to each other relative
to the large molecular lengths among them. This finding indicates a higher degree
of chromatin condensation of at least a part of HSA 11 compared with HSA 22. In
general, there is no correlation between the physical and molecular distance of
two loci of the same chromosome territory. The topographical parameters of the
EWSR1 and FLI1 genes do not differ substantially for G(0)-lymphocytes, stimulated
lymphocytes and Ewing sarcoma cells. The fusion genes pertaining to both
derivative chromosomes 11 and 22 in Ewing sarcoma cell nuclei are shifted to the 
midway position between the native EWSR1 and FLI1 genes. Comparing results
obtained for the EWSR1/FLI1 and ABL1/BCR genes in samples of patients suffering
from Ewing sarcoma or chronic myelogenous leukaemia, it can be concluded that the
mean positions of the fusion genes are determined by the final structure of the
chimeric chromosomes and do not depend on the location of the translocation
event.

PMID: 12522555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(2):482-92.

Alteration of mesodermal cell differentiation by EWS/FLI-1, the oncogene
implicated in Ewing's sarcoma.

Eliazer S(1), Spencer J, Ye D, Olson E, Ilaria RL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Simmons Cancer Center
and Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-8593, USA.

The chimeric fusion gene EWS/FLI-1 is detected in most cases of Ewing's sarcoma
(ES), the second most common malignant bone tumor of childhood. Although 80% of
ES tumors develop in skeletal sites, the remainder can arise in almost any soft
tissue location. The lineage of the cell developing the EWS/FLI-1 gene fusion has
not been fully characterized but is generally considered to be of either
mesenchymal or neural crest origin. To study this oncogene in a conceptually
relevant target cell, EWS/FLI-1 was introduced into the murine cell line C2C12, a
myoblast cell line capable of differentiation into muscle, bone, or fat. In this 
cellular context, EWS/FLI-1 profoundly inhibited the myogenic differentiation
program. The block in C2C12 myogenic differentiation required the nuclear
localization and DNA-binding functions of EWS/FLI-1 and was mediated by
transcriptional and posttranscriptional suppression of the myogenic transcription
factors MyoD and myogenin. Interestingly, C2C12-EWS/FLI-1 cells constitutively
expressed alkaline phosphatase, a bone lineage marker, and were alkaline
phosphatase positive by histochemistry but showed no other evidence of bone
lineage commitment. Consistent with recent findings in human ES tumor cell lines,
C2C12-EWS/FLI-1 cells constitutively expressed cyclin D1 and demonstrated
decreased expression of the cell cycle regulator p21(cip1), even under
differentiation conditions and at confluent density. This C2C12-EWS/FLI-1 cell
model may assist in the identification of novel differentially expressed genes
relevant to ES and provide further insight into the cell(s) of origin developing 
ES-associated genetic fusions.

PMCID: PMC151529
PMID: 12509448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Eur J Cancer. 2003 Jan;39(1):19-30.

A systematic review of molecular and biological markers in tumours of the Ewing's
sarcoma family.

Riley RD(1), Burchill SA, Abrams KR, Heney D, Sutton AJ, Jones DR, Lambert PC,
Young B, Wailoo AJ, Lewis IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Leicester, 22-28
Princess Road West, Leicester LE1 6TP, UK. rdr3@leicester.ac.uk

The aims of this study were to perform the first systematic review of molecular
and biological tumour markers in tumours of the Ewing's sarcoma family (ESFT),
and evaluate the current evidence for their clinical use. A well-defined,
reproducible search strategy was used to identify the relevant literature from
1966 to February 2000. Papers were independently assessed for tumour markers used
in the screening, diagnosis, prognosis or monitoring of patients with ESFT.
Eighty-four papers studying the use of 70 different tumour markers in ESFT's were
identified. Low-quality, inconsistent reporting limited meta-analysis to that of 
prognostic data for 28 markers. Patients with tumours lacking S-100 protein
expression have a better overall survival (OS) (hazard ratio (HR)=0.41, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 0.19, 0.89) than those with expression; patients with
high levels of serum LDH had a worse OS and disease-free survival (DFS) (OS:
HR=2.92, CI 2.16, 3.94, DFS: HR=3.38, 95% CI 2.28, 4.99); patients with localised
disease and tumours expressing type 1 EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts had an improved
DFS compared with those with other fusion transcript types (HR=0.17, 95% CI
0.079, 0.37). The knowledge base formed should facilitate more informative future
research. Improved statistical reporting and large, multicentre prospective
studies are advocated.

PMID: 12504654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cancer Cell. 2002 Dec;2(6):497-505.

Induction of BAIAP3 by the EWS-WT1 chimeric fusion implicates regulated
exocytosis in tumorigenesis.

Palmer RE(1), Lee SB, Wong JC, Reynolds PA, Zhang H, Truong V, Oliner JD, Gerald 
WL, Haber DA.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2002 Dec;2(6):427-8.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is defined genetically by the
chimeric fusion of the Ewing's sarcoma and Wilms' tumor genes, generating a novel
transcription factor, EWS-WT1. By using cells with inducible EWS-WT1 to screen
high-density microarrays, we identified BAIAP3 as a transcriptional target of the
chimera. The BAIAP3 promoter is specifically bound in vivo by the (-KTS) isoform 
of EWS-WT1, consistent with its activation in reporter assays. BAIAP3 encodes a
protein implicated in regulated exocytosis, which is colocalized with a secreted 
growth factor within cytoplasmic organelles. Ectopic expression of BAIAP3 in
tumor cells dramatically enhances growth in low serum and colony formation in
soft agar. BAIAP3 therefore encodes a transcriptional target of an oncogenic
fusion protein that implicates the regulated exocytotic pathway in cancer cell
proliferation.

PMID: 12498718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cancer Cell. 2002 Dec;2(6):427-8.

A putative link between exocytosis and tumor development.

Chan AM(1), Weber T.

Author information: 
(1)Derald H Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10029, USA. andrew.chan@mssm.edu

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2002 Dec;2(6):497-505.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is characterized by a
t(11;22)(p13;q12) translocation breakpoint. In this issue of Cancer Cell, now
show that the resulting EWS-WT1 gene-fusion product leads to overexpression of
BAIAP3, a protein implicated in regulated exocytosis.

PMID: 12498708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Histopathology. 2002 Dec;41(6):526-30.

Clear cell sarcoma of the stomach.

Pauwels P(1), Debiec-Rychter M, Sciot R, Vlasveld T, den Butter B, Hagemeijer A, 
Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Stichting PAMM, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, Michelangelolaan 2, 5623 EJ
Eindhoven, The Netherlands. P.Pauwels@pamm.nl

AIM: Clear cell sarcoma is a high-grade sarcoma with morphological features
resembling malignant melanoma. This tumour is reported to display a
characteristic distribution pattern nearly always involving the extremities. We
report the first case of clear cell sarcoma of the stomach.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A 30-year-old male developed a huge tumour of the stomach,
which at first glance could be considered as a poorly differentiated carcinoma.
Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural examinations were consistent with a
diagnosis of metastatic melanoma. However, cytogenetic examination revealed a
t(12;22) translocation, specific for clear cell sarcoma. This was confirmed by
fluorescence in-situ hybridization.
CONCLUSION: Making a reliable diagnosis of clear cell sarcoma of the stomach
requires cytogenetic or molecular diagnostic investigations, particularly to rule
out metastatic melanoma. This diagnosis avoids an unnecessary search for a
primary melanoma.

PMID: 12460205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):5427-32. Epub 2002 Nov 28.

Cooperative interaction of EWS with CREB-binding protein selectively activates
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-mediated transcription.

Araya N(1), Hirota K, Shimamoto Y, Miyagishi M, Yoshida E, Ishida J, Kaneko S,
Kaneko M, Nakajima T, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, Aspect of Functional Genomic
Biology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan.

The EWS gene when fused to transcription factors such as the ETS family ATF-1,
Wilms' tumor-1, and nuclear orphan receptors upon chromosomal translocation is
thought to contribute the development of Ewing sarcoma and several malignant
tumors. Although EWS is predicted to be an RNA-binding protein, an inherent EWS
nuclear function has not yet been elucidated. In this study, we found that EWS
associates with a transcriptional co-activator CREB-binding protein (CBP) and the
hypophosphorylated RNA polymerase II, which are included preferentially in the
transcription preinitiation complex. These interactions suggest the potential
involvement of EWS in gene transcription, leading to the hypothesis that EWS may 
function as a co-activator of CBP-dependent transcription factors. Based on this 
hypothesis, we investigated the effect of EWS on the activation of nuclear
receptors that are activated by CBP. Of nuclear receptors examined, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4-dependent transcription was selectively enhanced by EWS but not 
by an EWS mutant defective for CBP binding. These results suggest that EWS as a
co-activator requires CBP for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-mediated
transcriptional activation.

PMID: 12459554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Oncogene. 2002 Nov 28;21(54):8302-9.

The Id2 gene is a novel target of transcriptional activation by EWS-ETS fusion
proteins in Ewing family tumors.

Nishimori H(1), Sasaki Y, Yoshida K, Irifune H, Zembutsu H, Tanaka T, Aoyama T,
Hosaka T, Kawaguchi S, Wada T, Hata J, Toguchida J, Nakamura Y, Tokino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, S-1, W-17, Chuo-ku, Sapporo, 060-8556, Japan.

We report here that the Id2 (inhibitor of DNA binding 2) gene is a novel target
of transcriptional activation by EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG, two fusion proteins that
characterize Ewing family tumors (EFTs). To identify downstream targets of these 
EWS-ETS fusion proteins, we introduced EWS-ETS fusion constructs into a human
fibrosarcoma cell line by retroviral transduction. cDNA microarray analysis
revealed that Id2 expression was up-regulated by introducing the EWS-ETS fusion
gene but not by the normal full-length ETS gene. An Id2 promoter-luciferase
reporter assay showed that transactivation by EWS-ETS involves the minimal Id2
promoter and may function in cooperation with c-Myc within the full-length
regulatory region. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed direct
interaction between the Id2 promoter and EWS-FLI1 fusion protein in vivo.
Significantly higher expression of Id2 and c-Myc was observed in all of the six
EFT cell lines examined compared to six other sarcoma cell lines. Moreover, high 
levels of Id2 expression were also observed in five of the six primary tumors
examined. Id2 is generally thought to affect the balance between cell
differentiation and proliferation in development and is highly expressed in
several cancer types. Considering these previous studies, our data suggest that
the oncogenic effect of EWS-ETS may be mediated in part by up-regulating Id2
expression. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1206025

PMID: 12447693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002 Jul-Aug;1(4):428-32.

The pro-oncoprotein EWS (Ewing's Sarcoma protein) interacts with the Brn-3a POU
transcription factor and inhibits its ability to activate transcription.

Thomas GR(1), Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Molecular Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, UK.

The Brn-3a POU family transcription factor is able to induce the expression of a 
number of neuronally-expressed genes as well as to enhance neuronal
differentiation and inhibit apoptosis. Many of these effects are mediated by the 
C-terminal POU domain of Brn-3a which acts both as a DNA binding domain and a
transcriptional activation domain. To identify the mechanisms by which this
domain acts, we carried out a yeast two hybrid assay to identify proteins which
interact with it. We show that both full length Brn-3a and the isolated POU
domain interact with the EWS transcription factor and its oncogenic derivative
EWS-Fli1. Moreover, EWS can block Brn-3a-mediated activation of the Bcl-x
promoter whereas this effect is lost in EWS-Fli1. The significance of this novel 
interaction is discussed in terms of the manner in which Brn-3a regulates its
target promoters and the mechanism of oncogenic transformation by EWS-Fli1.

PMID: 12432261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002 Jul-Aug;1(4):330-6.

EWS-FLI1 and Ewing's sarcoma: recent molecular data and new insights.

Ladanyi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York
10021, USA. ladanyim@mskcc.org

The EWS-FLI1 fusion resulting from the specific t(11;22)(q24;q12) of Ewing's
sarcoma was the first sarcoma gene fusion to be cloned, a decade ago. Moving from
the cloning of this oncogenic chimeric transcription factor to the further
elucidation of its pathogenetic mechanisms has revealed new complexities in the
biology of this tumor which may be relevant to other fusion oncogenes as well.
The present review highlights recent advances in three avenues of investigation
that are providing new insights into this particular neoplasm and into the
biology of EWS-FLI1 and related fusion proteins, namely the identification of
various mitogenic targets of this aberrant transcription factor, its possible
role as a deregulator of splicing, and the role of the p53 pathway in modulating 
its oncogenicity.

PMID: 12432241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Dec;35(4):340-52.

Molecular genetic characterization of the EWS/CHN and RBP56/CHN fusion genes in
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Panagopoulos I(1), Mertens F, Isaksson M, Domanski HA, Brosjö O, Heim S,
Bjerkehagen B, Sciot R, Dal Cin P, Fletcher JA, Fletcher CD, Mandahl N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
ioannis.panagopoulos@klingen.lu.se

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is a soft-tissue neoplasm
cytogenetically characterized by the translocations t(9;22)(q22;q11-12) or
t(9;17)(q22;q11), generating EWS/CHN or RBP56/CHN fusion genes, respectively. In 
the present study, 18 EMCs were studied both cytogenetically and at the molecular
level. Chromosomal aberrations were detected in 16 samples: 13 with involvement
of 9q22 and 22q11-12, and three with rearrangements of 9q22 and 17q11. Fifteen
cases had an EWS/CHN fusion transcript and three had an RBP56/CHN transcript. The
most frequent EWS/CHN transcript (type 1; 10 tumors), involved fusion of EWS exon
12 with CHN exon 3, and the second most common (type 5; two cases) was fusion of 
EWS exon 13 with CHN exon 3. In all tumors with RBP56/CHN fusion, exon 6 of RBP56
was fused to exon 3 of CHN. By genomic XL PCR and sequence analyses, the
breakpoints from 14 cases were mapped in the EWS, RBP56, and CHN genes. In CHN,
12 breakpoints were found in intron 2 and only two in intron 1. In EWS, the
breaks occurred in introns 7 (one break), 12 (eight breaks), and 13 (one break), 
and in RBP56 in intron 6. Repetitive elements such as Alu and LINE sequences seem
to have limited, if any, importance in the genesis of EWS/CHN and RBP56/CHN
chimeras. Furthermore, there were no chi, chi-like, topoisomerase II, or translin
consensus sequences in the introns harboring the translocation breakpoints, nor
could the number of topo I sites in EWS, RBP56, and CHN introns explain the
uneven distribution of the breakpoints among EWS or CHN introns. Additional
genetic events, such as nucleotide insertions, homologies at the junction,
deletions, duplications, and inversions, were found to accompany the
translocations, indicating that the chromosomal translocations do not require
sequence-specific recombinases or extensive homology between the recombined
sequences.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12378528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002 Aug;137(1):23-8.

Synovial sarcoma with a secondary chromosome change der(22)t(17;22)(q12;q12).

Nishio J(1), Iwasaki H, Ishiguro M, Ohjimi Y, Isayama T, Naito M, Kaneko Y,
Kamada N, Kikuchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka,
Japan. nishio@minf.med.fukuoka-u.ac.jp

A consistent, pathognomonic translocation, most commonly a balanced reciprocal
translocation, t(X;18) (p11.2;q11.2), is found in more than 90% of synovial
sarcomas. We report here a secondary chromosome change, der(22)t(17;22)(q12;q12),
in addition to the primary t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2) in a biphasic synovial sarcoma
that occurred in the thigh of a 34-year-old woman. Although the karyotype of the 
primary tumor exhibited 46,X,t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2), the recurrent tumor showed
46,X,der(X)t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2),der(22) t(17;22)(q12;q12). The SYT-SSX1 fusion
transcript was demonstrated in the primary and recurrent tumors using a reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Southern blot analysis also
confirmed that the detected messages were derived from the SYT-SSX fusion gene.
However, we could not detect the EWS-E1AF fusion gene that has been reported to
be generated through a t(17;22)(q12;q12) by RT-PCR. Furthermore, fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH) with cosmid probes corresponding to loci flanking the
EWSR1 region demonstrated no split of chromosome 22 in all analyzed interphase
nuclei. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of synovial sarcoma in 
which an additional (secondary) chromosome change, der(22)t(17;22)(q12;q12), has 
been demonstrated.

PMID: 12377409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Cancer Res. 2002 Oct 1;62(19):5408-12.

Recurrent rearrangement of the Ewing's sarcoma gene, EWSR1, or its homologue,
TAF15, with the transcription factor CIZ/NMP4 in acute leukemia.

Martini A(1), La Starza R, Janssen H, Bilhou-Nabera C, Corveleyn A, Somers R,
Aventin A, Foà R, Hagemeijer A, Mecucci C, Marynen P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg O&N06,
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Fusions of the TET-proteins (TLS/FUS, EWSR1, and TAF15/RBP56) to different
transcription factors are involved in various malignancies including Ewing's
sarcoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumors, and acute myeloid leukemia. These are 
thought to arise through transcriptional deregulation, with the transcription
factor defining the tumor phenotype. We show that, as result of a
t(12;17)(p13;q11) or its variant t(12;22)(p13;q12), the transcription factor gene
CIZ/NMP4 is recurrently involved in acute leukemia through fusion with either
EWSR1 or TAF15. The fusions possess transforming properties in NIH3T3 cells but
do not affect the expression of CIZ target genes, suggesting a contribution to
oncogenesis that is independent of the transactivating properties of the fusion
protein. These results also extend the involvement of TET-protein fusions to
acute lymphoblastic leukemia and suggest a role for CIZ/NMP4 in lymphoid and
myeloid development.

PMID: 12359745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Int J Cancer. 2002 Oct 20;101(6):505-11.

Establishment and characterisation of a human clear cell sarcoma model in nude
mice.

Crnalic S(1), Panagopoulos I, Boquist L, Mandahl N, Stenling R, Löfvenberg R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden.

We have established a new experimental model of human clear cell sarcoma,
UM-CCS1, using serial subcutaneous transplantation of intact tumour tissue in
nude mice. The heterotransplanted nude mouse tumours retained characteristic
morphological features of the primary clear cell sarcoma. Immunohistochemical
analysis showed the retained expression patterns of S-100 protein,
melanoma-associated antigen HMB-45 and vimentin in the xenografts as compared to 
the primary tumour. DNA index showed low variations both between the xenografts
in the same passage and between the serial passages. Cytogenetic analysis of the 
primary tumour and the xenografts showed the unbalanced translocation
der(6)t(6;12)(p23;q13). Based on the combined genetic data a reasonable
interpretation of our findings is that there was a complex chromosomal
rearrangement resulting in a cytogenetically cryptic EWS-ATF1 fusion gene.
Analysis of cell kinetics using in vivo incorporation of iododeoxyuridine and
flow cytometry showed generally short potential doubling time (T(pot)) of the
xenografts. Volume doubling time showed low variations without correlation with
T(pot). The retained phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of the primary
tumour and the morphological and structural stability over time makes the model
suitable for studies on the tumour biology and treatment of clear cell sarcoma.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12237889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2002 Aug;21(4):233-6.

Identification of Ewing's sarcoma gene product as a glycoprotein using a
monoclonal antibody that recognizes an immunodeterminant containing O-linked
N-acetylglucosamine moiety.

Matsuoka Y(1), Matsuoka Y, Shibata S, Yasuhara N, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka University, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) oncogene is fused to a variety of cellular
transcription factors in various forms of human cancers. Although EWS fusion
proteins have been extensively studied, the normal function of EWS remains poorly
characterized. We previously reported that a monoclonal antibody, referred to as 
MY95, recognized nucleoporins such as p62, Nup98, and CAN/Nup214 and an
uncharacterized polypeptide with an apparent molecular mass of 83 kDa. In the
present study, an amino acid sequence analysis of this 83-kDa protein revealed
that it is, in fact, EWS, which is not known to belong to the nucleoporins. We
further demonstrated that the immunodeterminant of MY95 contains an
N-acetylglucosamine moiety, indicating that EWS is a glycoprotein. Interestingly,
the glycosylation level of EWS changes during the neural differentiation of P19
cells. MY95 will be quite useful in further studies of the glycosylated form of
EWS in terms of understanding the normal cellular function of this oncogene
product.

PMID: 12193275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Cancer Res. 2002 Aug 15;62(16):4583-7.

Interaction of the EWS NH2 terminus with BARD1 links the Ewing's sarcoma gene to 
a common tumor suppressor pathway.

Spahn L(1), Petermann R, Siligan C, Schmid JA, Aryee DN, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, 1090 Vienna,
Austria.

In 85% of Ewing family tumors, the NH2 terminus of EWS is fused to the
DNA-binding domain of FLI1, an ets transcription factor. The resulting chimeric
protein is a strong transcriptional activator with transforming activity. We
report that EWS and EWS-FLI1 interact via their common NH2 terminus with the COOH
terminus of BARD1, a putative tumor suppressor, in vitro and in vivo. Because
BARD1 associates via its NH2-terminal RING domain with the breast cancer
susceptibility gene BRCA1 that provides a platform for interactions with proteins
involved in DNA repair and checkpoint control, our results provide a link between
the Ewing's sarcoma gene product and the genome surveillance complex.

PMID: 12183411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Mol Diagn. 2002 Aug;4(3):164-71.

A novel type of EWS-CHOP fusion gene in two cases of myxoid liposarcoma.

Hosaka T(1), Nakashima Y, Kusuzaki K, Murata H, Nakayama T, Nakamata T, Aoyama T,
Okamoto T, Nishijo K, Araki N, Tsuboyama T, Nakamura T, Toguchida J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Fusion genes consisting of TLS/FUS and CHOP or EWS and CHOP are characteristic
markers for myxoid/round cell liposarcomas (MLS/RCLS). Several different
structures of the fusion genes were reported in the case of the TLS/FUS-CHOP
form, whereas only one type of structure has so far been found for the EWS-CHOP
form, which consisted of exons 1 to 7 of the EWS and exons 2 to 4 of the CHOP
gene. Here we describe a novel type of EWS-CHOP fusion gene in two cases of
MLS/RCLS, which were found in a consecutive analysis of 21 cases. This fusion
gene consisted of exons 1 to 10 of the EWS and exons 2 to 4 of the CHOP gene. The
two cases with this fusion gene shared several clinical features, such as a large
tumor mass, rapid and invasive growth, and local recurrence within 12 months
after surgical resection. Histopathological findings also showed common features 
characterized by the diffuse proliferation of small spindle cells with a
primitive mesenchymal appearance. The association of these clinical and
histopathological features suggests a distinct biological property for this rare 
type of fusion product.

PMCID: PMC1906982
PMID: 12169678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Gastroenterol. 2002;37(7):543-9.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the transverse colonic mesentery defined by
the presence of EWS-FLI1 chimeric mRNA in a Japanese woman.

Tokudome N(1), Tanaka K, Kai MH, Sueyoshi K, Matsukita S, Setoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kagoshima City Hospital, Japan.

We report a case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) arising in the
transverse colonic mesentery. A 24-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to
Kagoshima City Hospital with complaints of abdominal pain and sensations of
abdominal fullness of 5 months' duration. On palpation, a mass the size of an
infant's head was noted in the right flank. Abdominal computed tomography (CT)
and ultrasonography showed a huge mass that consisted of multiple cystic
components. On arteriography, a slight tumor stain appeared, with stretched and
displaced tributaries of the right colic and middle colic arteries. Barium
swallow examination demonstrated that the ascending colon was shifted to the
right and small intestine to the left. We performed an en-bloc resection of the
tumor in the transverse colonic mesentery, including the ascending colon,
proximal jejunum (20 cm in length), and greater omentum. The resected tumor was
12 x 10 x 7 cm in size, 590g in weight, elastic soft in consistency, and
multicystic. Histologically, the specimens showed a sheet-like proliferation of
spindle-to-polygonal cells, and focally, the tumor formed rosette structures.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for neuron-specific enolase 
(NSE) and mic-2. EWS-FLI1 chimeric mRNA was detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Based on the above findings, we
finally diagnosed the tumor as PNET of the colonic mesentery. There has been no
recurrence for 20 months after operation. PNET arising in the mesentery is very
rare, and we distinguished PNET from other tumors by immunohistochemical
examination and by demonstration of the presence of EWS-FLI1 chimeric mRNA in the
tumor.

PMID: 12162413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cancer Cell. 2002 May;1(4):393-401.

The Ewing's sarcoma oncoprotein EWS/FLI induces a p53-dependent growth arrest in 
primary human fibroblasts.

Lessnick SL(1), Dacwag CS, Golub TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is associated with a fusion between the EWS and FLI1 genes,
forming an EWS/FLI fusion protein. We developed a system for the identification
of cooperative mutations in this tumor through expression of EWS/FLI in primary
human fibroblasts. Gene expression profiling demonstrated that this system
recapitulates many features of Ewing's sarcoma. EWS/FLI-expressing cells
underwent growth arrest, suggesting that growth arrest-abrogating collaborative
mutations may be required for tumorigenesis. Expression profiling identified
transcriptional upregulation of p53, and the growth arrest was rescued by
inhibition of p53. These data support a role for p53 as a tumor suppressor in
Ewing's sarcoma and demonstrate the use of transcriptional profiling of model
systems in the identification of cooperating mutations in human cancer.

PMID: 12086853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Cancer Lett. 2002 Sep 8;183(1):87-94.

The AF2 domain of the orphan nuclear receptor TEC is essential for the
transcriptional activity of the oncogenic fusion protein EWS/TEC.

Maltais A(1), Filion C, Labelle Y.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Génétique Humaine et Moléculaire, Pavillon
Saint-François d'Assise, CHUQ, 10 rue de l'Espinay, G1L 3L5, Québec, QC, Canada.

The EWS/TEC fusion protein encoded by the t(9:22) chromosomal translocation in
human extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma tumors is thought to participate in the
tumoral process at least in part by deregulating the expression of specific
target genes involved in the control of cell proliferation. In this work we show 
that the activation function-2 (AF2) domain of TEC is essential for the
transcriptional activity of the EWS/TEC fusion protein. Significantly, deleting
only the last 15 amino acids of the fusion protein, which contains 949 amino
acids in its full form, results in a loss of over 70% of its transcriptional
activity in transfected human chondrocyte cell lines. Point mutation analyses
indicate that within the AF2 domain, amino acid residues I939, D940 and F943 all 
play a crucial role in the activity of EWS/TEC. Comparable results were obtained 
with the native TEC receptor. These results suggest that EWS/TEC interacts at
least in part with the same transcriptional coactivators as the native TEC
receptor, and that these coactivators may be involved in the tumoral process
leading to human chondrosarcoma tumors.

PMID: 12049818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 25;21(18):2890-5.

Differential regulation of the response to DNA damage in Ewing's sarcoma cells by
ETS1 and EWS/FLI-1.

Soldatenkov VA(1), Trofimova IN, Rouzaut A, McDermott F, Dritschilo A, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Vincent T. Lombardi Cancer Center,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington DC 20007, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) cells contain levels of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) 
significantly higher than other eukaryotic cells. Previously, we cloned the PARP 
gene promoter region from EWS cells, showed that it contained multiple
ETS-binding sites and demonstrated a positive regulation of PARP by ETS1. We now 
report that, contrary to ETS1, EWS/FLI-1, an aberrant ETS transcription factor
present in most EWS cells, is a negative effector of PARP transcription. Because 
PARP levels have been associated with cellular resistance or sensitivity to
genotoxic agents, we studied the effect of modifying PARP levels in EWS cells on 
their response to DNA damage by modulating the expression of ETS1 or EWS/FLI-1
using antisense methodology. Results show that stable down-regulation of ETS1
increases the resistance of EWS cells to various genotoxic agents, whereas
down-regulation of EWS/FLI-1 has pro-apoptotic effects. Because down-regulation
EWS/FLI-1 does not dramatically change PARP levels, these results suggest a
direct effect for EWS/FLI-1 in the DNA damage response of EWS cells. Since
expression of the aberrant fusion proteins by EWS cells is essential for
maintaining their neoplastic phenotype, our results suggest that the use of
antisense oligonucleotides in combination with chemotherapeutic agents or
radiation may be doubly effective by causing both an increase in sensitivity to
therapeutic agents and a simultaneous down-regulation, or reversion, of the
neoplastic phenotype of EWS cells.

PMID: 11973649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Histopathology. 2002 Jan;40(1):108-9.

Immunophenotypic and genotypic analysis of a case of primary peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumour (pPNET) of the urinary bladder.

Colecchia M, Dagrada GP, Poliani PL, Pilotti S.

Comment on
    Histopathology. 1997 May;30(5):486-90.
    Histopathology. 1998 May;32(5):477-8.

PMID: 11903609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002 Feb;133(1):72-5.

EWS/FLI-1 fusion signal inserted into chromosome 11 in one patient with
morphologic features of Ewing sarcoma, but lacking t(11;22).

Batanian JR(1), Bridge JA, Wickert R, Vogler C, Gadre B, Huang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO,
USA. batanijr@slu.edu

A reciprocal t(11;22)(q24;q12) is found in 85% of Ewing sarcomas (ES) cases. We
report a case of a child with ES, in whom trisomy 8 was observed as the sole
chromosomal abnormality. Fluorescence in situ hybridization---using a set of
probes that localize to 22q12 (EWS) and 11q24 (FLI-1) and usually show the
translocation as fusion (red-green) signal on der(22)---showed a fusion signal on
der(11) suggesting an insertion as the mechanism that led to the EWS-FLI-1 gene
rearrangement. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction studies revealed
the presence of two EWS/FLI1 fusion gene products.

PMID: 11890993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2001 May;23(4):221-4.

Molecular confirmation of Ewing sarcoma.

Dagher R(1), Pham TA, Sorbara L, Kumar S, Long L, Bernstein D, Mackall C, Raffeld
M, Tsokos M, Helman L.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Branch , National Cancer Institute. National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze retrospectively results of reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing and demographic information in patients with
known or suspected Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor family of tumors
referred to the National Cancer Institute and to describe factors influencing the
determination of molecular marker status.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tumor samples from 76 patients from February 1997 to
December 1999 were analyzed. In all cases, the diagnosis of this family of tumors
was confirmed by histopathologic review.
RESULTS: In 58 patients, the presence of a translocation associated with this
family of tumors was confirmed using RT-PCR. Specifically, there were 45 Ewing
sarcoma (EWS)-FLI type 1 translocations, four EWS-FLI type 2 translocations, five
EWS-ERG translocations, and four less common EWS-FLI variants. Of patients with a
confirmed translocation, four were confirmed only after nested RT-PCR techniques 
were used. In five patients who initially underwent needle biopsy, the diagnosis 
was confirmed only after open biopsy or repeat needle biopsy was undertaken.
Samples from 18 patients were translocation-negative. Of these, seven samples
were deemed inadequate for RT-PCR testing as a result of inappropriate tissue
handling or the presence of necrotic material. Five patients were found to have a
different diagnosis after complete histopathologic and molecular
characterization. Six samples remained, in which adequate tissue was obtained
with no evidence of a characteristic translocation.
CONCLUSIONS: In apparently translocation-negative samples, close attention should
be given to the possibility of an alternative diagnosis, the potential need for
nested RT-PCR, and the possibility of an inadequate sample. Strong consideration 
should be given to the use of open biopsy as opposed to needle biopsy to avoid
the need for repeat biopsies and the potential for inaccurate assessment of
molecular marker status.

PMID: 11846300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Hum Pathol. 2002 Jan;33(1):130-2.

Esophageal extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma.

Maesawa C(1), Iijima S, Sato N, Yoshinori N, Suzuki M, Tarusawa M, Ishida K,
Tamura G, Saito K, Masuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine, Morioka,
Japan.

Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma is a rare tumor. The most common sites of
occurrence are on the trunk, extremities, and retroperitoneum. This type of tumor
is well characterized by recurrent chromosomal translocation such as t (11;22)
(q24;q12) (EWSR1/FLI1) or t (21;22) (q22;q12) (EWSR1/ERG) and overexpression of
MIC2/CD99 on tumor cell membrane. We describe the first reported case of an
esophageal extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma with confirmation from
immunohistochemical and molecular diagnoses. A 56-year-old man developed a
polypoid tumor located in the lower part of the esophagus. The tumor was composed
of small-sized round cells showing prominent fibrillar cytoplasmic processes.
Intracytoplasmic glycogen was detected in all the tumor cells. Immunoreactivity
for MIC2/CD99 was positive on the membrane of all tumor cells. A reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction followed by sequencing revealed an
EWSR1/ERG chimeric transcript, which combined EWSR1 exon 10 with ERG exon 6. The 
present report added a new entity of esophageal small round cell tumor.

Copyright 2002 by W.B. Saunders Company

PMID: 11823984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2000 Jan;22(1):48-9.

[Minimal residual disease in bone marrow in patients with Ewing's sarcoma
detected by RT-PCR amplification of EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene transcript].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang S(1), Huang D, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To set up a system for sensitively detecting minimal Ewing's sarcoma
cells in bone marrow.
METHODS: Ewing's sarcoma cell line T1 cells were serially diluted with normal
bone marrow cells so that the concentration of tumor cells was 10(-3), 10(-4),
10(-5), 10(-6), 10(-7), and 0, respectively. Total RNA was isolated from these
samples and cDNA was synthesized. EWS-FLI-1, a fusion gene formed due to
chromosome translocation, was amplified with PCR. Bone marrow samples from five
patients with Ewing's sarcoma patients with tumor metastasis were examined for
EWS-FLI-1 transcript.
RESULTS: T1 cells could be detected when one was present in 10(6) normal bone
marrow cells. Thus the sensitivity of detection was 10(-6). A 434 bp EWS-FLI-1
transcript was detected in five Ewing's sarcoma patients examined at the time of 
diagnosis. After complete remission, EWS-FLI-1 was still positive on RT-PCR in 3 
patients, although BM pathological examination was negative in all cases.
CONCLUSION: RT-PCR for EWS-FLI-1 is sensitive enough to detect minimal residual
Ewing's sarcoma cells in the bone marrow. It can identify residual tumor cells in
pathologically negative bone marrow specimens.

PMID: 11776597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Dec;7(12):3977-87.

Prognostic impact of P53 status, TLS-CHOP fusion transcript structure, and
histological grade in myxoid liposarcoma: a molecular and clinicopathologic study
of 82 cases.

Antonescu CR(1), Tschernyavsky SJ, Decuseara R, Leung DH, Woodruff JM, Brennan
MF, Bridge JA, Neff JR, Goldblum JR, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA. antonesc@mskcc.org

PURPOSE: A specific TLS-CHOP fusion gene resulting from the t(12;16) is present
in at least 95% of myxoid liposarcomas (MLS). Three common forms of the TLS-CHOP 
fusion have been described, differing by the presence or absence of TLS exons 6-8
in the fusion product. Type 5-2 (also known as type II) consists of TLS exons 1-5
fused to CHOP exon 2; type 7-2 (also known as type I) also includes TLS exons 6
and 7 in the fusion, whereas type 8-2 (also known as type III) fuses TLS exons
1-8 to CHOP exon 2. We sought to determine the impact of TLS-CHOP fusion
transcript structure on clinical outcome in a group of well-characterized MLS
cases. We also analyzed P53 status, because this parameter has been found to have
a significant prognostic impact in other sarcomas with chromosomal
translocations.
METHODS: We analyzed TLS-CHOP fusion transcripts by reverse-transcription PCR
using RNA extracted from frozen tissue in 82 MLS confirmed previously to harbor a
CHOP rearrangement either by Southern blotting or by cytogenetic detection of the
t(12;16). Parameters analyzed included age, location, size, percentage of round
cell (RC) component, areas of increased cellularity, necrosis, and surgical
margins. In 71 (87%) cases, adequate tumor tissue was available for
immunohistochemical analysis of P53 status, using DO7 antibody. The Kaplan-Meier 
method, log-rank, and Cox regression tests were used for survival analyses.
RESULTS: Most MLS were >10 cm (73%), arising in the thigh (70%), and localized at
presentation (89%). RC component was <5% in 47 (57%) cases and > or =5% in 35
(43%). The TLS-CHOP fusion transcript was type 5-2 in 55 (67%), type 7-2 in 16
cases (20%), and type 8-2 in 8 (10%). One tumor had a unique variant fusion,
between exon 6 TLS and exon 2 CHOP. Two other cases (2%) showed an EWS-CHOP
fusion transcript. Overexpression of P53 (defined as > or =10% nuclear staining) 
was detected in 12 (17%) cases. High histological grade (defined as > or =5% RC; 
P < 0.01), presence of necrosis (> or =5% of tumor mass; P < 0.05), and
overexpression of P53 (P < 0.001) correlated with reduced metastatic disease-free
survival in localized tumors. The presence of negative surgical margins (P <
0.01) and extremity location (P = 0.02) were found to be significant in
predicting local recurrence in the entire group as well as localized cases by
univariate and multivariate analysis. Although there was no significant
correlation between TLS-CHOP transcript type and histological grade or
disease-specific survival, an association was found between the P53 status and
type 5-2 fusion (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: In contrast to some other translocation-associated sarcomas, the
molecular variability of TLS-CHOP fusion transcript structure does not appear to 
have a significant impact on clinical outcome in MLS. Instead, high histological 
grade (> or =5% RC), presence of necrosis, and P53 overexpression are predictors 
of unfavorable outcome in localized MLS.

PMID: 11751490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 11;20(46):6731-41.

Loss of p16 pathways stabilizes EWS/FLI1 expression and complements EWS/FLI1
mediated transformation.

Deneen B(1), Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Labs, University of 
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Ewings sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/PNET) are characterized
by the fusion of the N-terminus of the EWS gene to the C-terminus of a member of 
the ETS family of transcription factors. While such fusion proteins are thought
to play dominant oncogenic roles, it is unlikely that a single genetic alteration
by itself will support cellular transformation. Given that EWS/FLI1 is only able 
to transform immortalized 3T3 fibroblasts and that 30% of ES/PNET tumors contain 
a homozygous deletion of the p16 locus, it is likely that other genetic events
are required for EWS/FLI1 oncogenesis. Here we describe a complementary mechanism
utilized in the establishment ES/PNET tumors. EWS/FLI1 has the capacity to induce
apoptosis and growth arrest in normal MEFs. Such effects prevent the
establishment of stable expression of the protein in these cells. When expressed 
in p16, p19(ARF), or p53 deficient MEFs, the apoptotic and growth arrest effects 
are attenuated, creating a environment permissive for stable expression of the
protein. While loss of a single tumor suppressor is sufficient to establish
expression of EWS/FLI1, cellular transformation requires further genetic
perturbation.

PMID: 11709708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Hum Pathol. 2001 Oct;32(10):1109-15.

Visceral primitive peripheral neuroectodermal tumors: a clinicopathologic and
molecular study.

O'Sullivan MJ(1), Perlman EJ, Furman J, Humphrey PA, Dehner LP, Pfeifer JD.

Author information: 
(1)Lauren V. Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Washington University
Medical Center, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Ewing sarcoma-primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET) belongs to the group of 
pediatric small round blue cell tumors; although EWS/PNET is classically a tumor 
of the soft tissue or bone in children and young adults, individual cases have
been described in patients of all ages. A group of chromosomal translocations
involving the EWS gene and a member of the Ets transcription factor family of
genes has been detected in EWS/PNET, and heterogeneity in the precise breakpoint 
of the translocation has been shown to generate a group of related fusion
transcripts that may have prognostic significance. Within the last decade, the
clinicopathologic spectrum of EWS/PNET has been markedly expanded by recognition 
that the tumor may also have a visceral origin. To determine whether visceral
EWS/PNET has the same pattern of genetic alterations and range of fusion
transcripts as EWS/PNET of bone and soft tissue, we performed
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction-based testing of formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded tissue from a series of visceral tumors for which the diagnosis
of EWS/PNET was well established. Together with additional cases compiled from
the literature, EWS-Fli1 (or a related fusion transcript) was present in 18 of 19
visceral EWS/PNET, with a distribution of transcript types not statistically
different from EWS/PNET of soft tissue and bone (P >.05, chi(2) test). These
results firmly establish the genetic relationship between EWS/PNET of visceral
sites, soft tissue, and bone.

Copyright 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company

PMID: 11679946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 4;277(1):535-43. Epub 2001 Oct 22.

The EWS/NOR1 fusion gene product gains a novel activity affecting pre-mRNA
splicing.

Ohkura N(1), Yaguchi H, Tsukada T, Yamaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Factor Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. nohkura@gan2.ncc.go.jp

In extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, chromosomal translocation creates a gene 
fusion between EWS and the orphan nuclear receptor NOR1. The resulting fusion
gene product, EWS/NOR1, has been believed to lead to malignant transformation by 
functioning as a transcriptional activator, but an alternative mechanism may also
be involved. Here, using a newly developed functional complementation screening
in yeast, we found that EWS/NOR1, but not EWS or NOR1, complemented the loss of
function of the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein Snu23p, an essential factor for
pre-mRNA splicing in yeast. To verify the potential function of EWS/NOR1 in
mammalian cells, we next showed that overexpression of EWS/NOR1 caused increased 
usage of the distal 5'-splice site of pre-mRNA splicing and that EWS/NOR1
interacted with the human splicing protein U1C; neither EWS nor NOR1 had the same
activity or interaction as EWS/NOR1. Altogether, our findings reveal that
EWS/NOR1 gains a novel activity affecting pre-mRNA splicing.

PMID: 11673470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 10;20(40):5747-54.

Biology of EWS/ETS fusions in Ewing's family tumors.

Arvand A(1), Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial 
Labs, University of California at Los Angeles, California, USA.

Tumor-associated chromosomal translocations lead to the formation of chimeric
fusions between the EWS gene and one of five different ETS transcription factors 
in Ewing's family tumors (EFTs). The resultant EWS/ETS proteins promote
oncogenesis in a dominant fashion in model systems and are necessary for
continued growth of EFT cell lines. EWS belongs to a family of genes that encode 
proteins that may serve as adapters between the RNA polymerase II complex and RNA
splicing factors. EWS/ETS fusions have biochemical characteristics of aberrant
transcription factors and appear to promote abnormal cellular growth by
transcriptionally modulating a network of target genes. Early evidence suggests
that EWS/ETS proteins may also impact gene expression through alteration in RNA
processing. Elucidation of EWS/ETS target gene networks in the context of other
signaling pathways will hopefully lead to biology based therapeutic strategies
for EFT.

PMID: 11607824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Gastroenterol. 2000 Dec;35(12):933-40.

Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET) arising in the
omentum as a multilocular cyst with intracystic hemorrhage.

Tanida S(1), Tanioka F, Inukai M, Yoshioka N, Saida Y, Imai K, Nakamura T,
Kitamura H, Sugimura H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Iwata City Hospital, Iwata, Japan.

A rare case of Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor arising
in the greater omentum in a 41-year-old man is reported. The patient presented
with a hemorrhagic mesenteric cyst that was disclosed by the results of an
abdominal echogram, a computed tomography scan, and magnetic resonance imaging. A
laparotomy showed a multilocular cyst with intra-cystic hemorrhage.
Histologically, the tumor wall consisted of sheets of small round cells separated
by thick desmoplastic stroma. Rosette formations or ribbon-like cell arrangements
were absent. Further pathological examination revealed that the membrane of the
tumor cells was positive for MIC-2, and negative for epithelial membrane antigen,
cytokeratin, and desmin, which are usually positive in intra-abdominal
desmoplastic small round-cell tumors. An EWS/FLI1 fused transcript was detected
by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. These findings confirmed the 
diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. The
patient died of tumor recurrence 4 months after his first admission. The
autopsied tumor tissue exhibited neural differentiation in certain regions. To
our knowledge, this is the first case to be reported of Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor arising in the omentum with
unique pathological features and the occurrence of partial neural differentiation
during the clinical course. This case pointed out to us, as gastroenterologists, 
that only thorough examination confirms a definitive diagnosis of small
round-cell tumor of the abdomen, it also shows that Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumor should be included in the differential diagnosis 
of cystic lesions in the omentum.

PMID: 11573731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2001 Oct;125(10):1358-60.

Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma in a 77-year-old woman.

Cheung CC(1), Kandel RA, Bell RS, Mathews RE, Ghazarian DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University Health Network,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma (EES) is a rare soft tissue tumor that is
morphologically indistinguishable from Ewing sarcoma of bone. It is usually found
in young people, but several cases have occurred in patients older than 50 years.
The differential diagnoses include other small, blue round cell tumors (SBRCTs)
and other members of the Ewing family of tumors such as the primitive
neuroectodermal tumor. We present a case of EES in the left inguinal region of a 
77-year-old woman. The tumor was distinguished from other SBRCTs by lack of
immunoreactivity for epithelial, lymphoid, vascular, neuroendocrine, neural,
histiocytic, and muscle markers. Primitive neuroectodermal tumor was excluded
because of the lack of neural differentiation by histologic analysis,
immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy. Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma was
confirmed by characteristic features on histologic analysis, histochemistry,
immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy and by the presence of the
t(11;22)(q24;q12) fusion transcript detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase 
chain reaction. This case serves to remind the reader that EES is not a tumor
that occurs exclusively in young patients.

PMID: 11570916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Hum Pathol. 2001 Sep;32(9):1012-6.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumor arising in the adrenal gland--possible diagnostic
pitfall in pediatric pathology: histologic, immunohistochemical, ultrastructural,
and molecular study.

Kato K(1), Kato Y, Ijiri R, Misugi K, Nanba I, Nagai J, Nagahara N, Kigasawa H,
Toyoda Y, Nishi T, Tanaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan.

We present an adrenal Ewing's sarcoma family of tumor (ESFT) arising in an
11-year-old Japanese boy. Although intensive chemoradiotherapy and radical
surgery were performed, the patient died of obstinate disease 1 year and 3 months
after the initial presentation. The primary site (adrenal gland) with radiologic 
findings (with foci of calcification), high titer of serum neuron specific
enolase, and sheets of monotonous primitive rounded cells on histology mostly
favored neuroblastoma. However, a diagnosis of ESFT was confirmed by
immunohistochemical profile, including MIC2-positivity and molecular study
disclosing EWS-FLI1 chimera gene verified by direct sequencing. Recognition of
adrenal ESFT and use of newly developed diagnostic techniques are required for
differential diagnosis of undifferentiated small round cell tumor of the adrenal 
gland.

Copyright 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company

PMID: 11567233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2001 Sep;9(3):255-60.

Immunohistochemical detection of EWS and FLI-1 proteinss in Ewing sarcoma and
primitive neuroectodermal tumors: comparative analysis with CD99 (MIC-2)
expression.

Llombart-Bosch A(1), Navarro S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Valencia, Spain.
antonio.llombart@uv.es

The molecular analysis of the t(11;22) rearrangement involving EWS/FLI-1 genes is
likely to be of diagnostic value in Ewing sarcoma (ES) and primitive
neuroectodermal tumors (PNET). The objective of the current study was to analyze 
the immunohistochemical expression of the EWS and FLI-1 proteins in a group of
small round-cell tumors (SRCT) to determine their specificity and relevance in
their differential diagnosis. Forty-eight cases-10 conventional ES, 4 large-cell 
ES, 5 PNET, 9 neuroblastomas (NB), 6 undifferentiated synovial sarcomas (SS), 5
rhabdomyosarcomas (RB), 5 non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL), 1 round-cell liposarcoma, 
and 3 mesenchymal chondrosarcomas-were analyzed. Immunocytochemistry was
performed on paraffin sections after the LSAB method and antigen retrieval using 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid buffer (pH 6). Primary antibodies included FLI-1 
(C-19), EWS (N-18), EWS (C-19), and CD99 (MIC-2). As expected, CD-99 expression
was found in 100% of ES/PNET cases, in 2 cases of RB, 2 SS, and 1 NHL. FLI-1
protein was observed as nuclear staining in 16 cases of ES/PNET (84%) and in 4
cases of NHL, 2 NB, and 3 SS. Normal endothelial cells and lymphocytes also were 
positive. EWS expression (both proteins N-18 and C-19) was detected not only in
95% of ES/PNET cases but also in more than 50% of cases from the other tumoral
types (4 of 9 and 7 of 9 NB, 5 of 6 and 6 of 6 SS, 3 of 5 and 5 of 5 RB, and 2 of
5 and 3 of 5 NHL, respectively). Whereas EWS expression does not appear specific 
for ES/PNET, analysis of FLI-1 expression together with CD-99 is a powerful
marker for ES/PNET and important factors in the differential diagnosis of SRCT.

PMID: 11556754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):41977-84. Epub 2001 Sep 11.

DNA binding domain-independent pathways are involved in EWS/FLI1-mediated
oncogenesis.

Welford SM(1), Hebert SP, Deneen B, Arvand A, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Specific chromosomal translocations involving the ews gene and one of five
members of the ets family of transcription factors create ews/ets fusion genes
that are found in approximately 85% of Ewing's family of tumors. ews/ets fusion
genes consistently maintain an intact and functional ets DNA binding domain (DBD)
in all of these cases. We demonstrate here, however, that EWS/FLI1, the most
prevalent EWS/ETS fusion, activates oncogenic pathways independent of its DBD. In
in vivo tumor assays, EWS/FLI1 molecules with either point mutations or a large
deletion in the ets DBD retain the ability to accelerate tumors in NIH 3T3 cells,
whereas they lose the ability to bind DNA in vitro. Additionally, whereas
inhibition of DBD functions of EWS/FLI1 with a dominant negative form of FLI1 is 
sufficient to inhibit anchorage-independent growth in NIH 3T3 cells, it is
ineffective in inhibiting tumor growth in SCID mice. Usage of this dominant
negative construct in a Ewing's tumor cell line, however, does reduce the rate of
tumor formation, supporting the need for a functional DBD in this context.
Together, these results suggest that EWS/FLI1 induces both DBD-dependent and
DBD-independent oncogenic pathways.

PMID: 11553628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Int J Cancer. 2001 Sep;93(6):769-72.

No EWS/FLI1 fusion transcripts in giant-cell tumors of bone.

Panagopoulos I(1), Mertens F, Domanski HA, Isaksson M, Brosjö O, Gustafson P,
Mandahl N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
ioannis.ganagopoulos@klingen.lu.se

Giant-cell tumor of bone (GCT) is a locally aggressive neoplasm of unknown
etiology and pathogenesis. Cytogenetically, no consistent chromosomal
alterations, apart from telomeric associations involving various chromosome ends,
have been described. Recently, however, it was reported that by using highly
sensitive nested RT-PCR, a high proportion of GCT displays chimeric EWS/FLI1
fusion transcripts, i.e., the molecular genetic feature previously known to be
strongly associated with the Ewing family of tumors. Thus, we decided to perform 
single-step and nested RT-PCR analyses on fresh frozen samples from 10 cases of
GCT, all of which had also been subjected to cytogenetic analysis. After
short-term culturing, none of the samples displayed any t(11;22)(q24;q12), the
translocation characteristically giving rise to the EWS/FLI1 fusion, nor any
other type of rearrangement of 11q24 or 22q12. Furthermore, in none of the cases 
did the RT-PCR analysis, whether single step or nested, result in products
corresponding to a hybrid EWS/FLI1 transcript. On the basis of these results, we 
conclude that translocations leading to fusion of the EWS and FLI1 genes are not 
part of the pathogenesis of GCT.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11519035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Cancer Res. 2001 Aug 15;61(16):5992-7.

The EWS protein is dispensable for Ewing tumor growth.

Kovar H(1), Jug G, Hattinger C, Spahn L, Aryee DN, Ambros PF, Zoubek A, Gadner H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Kinderspitalgasse
6, 1090 Vienna, Austria. kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

EWS encodes a ubiquitously expressed RNA binding protein with largely unknown
function. In Ewing sarcoma family tumors (EFT), one allele is rearranged with an 
ETS gene. This is the first description of an EFT with a complete EWS deficiency 
in the presence of two copies of a rearranged chromosome 22 carrying an
interstitial EWS-FLI1 translocation. Absence of EWS protein suggested that it is 
dispensable for EFT growth. By sequencing of EWS cDNA from unrelated EFTs, we
excluded inactivation of EWS as a general mechanism in EFT pathogenesis. Rather, 
EWS was found to be uniformly expressed in two splicing variants of similar
abundancy, EWSalpha and EWSbeta, which differ in a single amino acid. Three EWS
negative cell lines were established, which will serve as valuable models to
study normal and aberrant EWS function upon reintroduction into the tumor cells.

PMID: 11507040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;93(1-2):29-35.

Fine-mapping of cytogenetically undetectable EWS/ERG fusions on DNA fibers of
Ewing tumors.

Hattinger CM(1), Rumpler S, Kovar H, Ambros PF.

Author information: 
(1)CCRI, Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna,
Austria. ClaudiaHattinger@web.de

In contrast to the EWS/FLI1 fusion which is represented by a t(11;22)(q24;q12),
EWS/ERG fusions are frequently cytogenetically not detectable. Three Ewing tumors
(ET), two with apparently normal chromosomes 21 and 22, and one ET with a
t(2;22)(p25;q12), were studied by FISH on interphase nuclei, metaphase
chromosomes and on DNA fibers. EWS/ERG transcripts were detected by RT-PCR in all
cases. FISH, using cosmids located proximally (F10, G9) and distally (F7) to the 
EWS breakpoint region, revealed no detectable separation of these probes in two
cases. In contrast, co-hybridization of probe PT1526 containing the ERG
breakpoint region with G9 revealed the juxtaposition of two signals per
interphase nucleus in all three cases indicating the EWS/ERG fusions. Chromosome 
preparations displayed the juxtaposed signals on the der(22), and hybridization
signals of the probes PT1526 and G9 on the non-rearranged chromosomes 21 and 22
in all cases, respectively. The PT1526 signal on the der(21) was seen only in
cases 1 and 2. These results were confirmed by triple-target FISH on tumor DNA
fibers. In all three cases, the hybridization pattern F10 - G9 - PT1526 indicates
a centromere to telomere orientation. This finding suggests that EWS/ERG fusions 
in ETs may be generated by an inversion of the ERG gene or a part thereof
followed by an insertion into the EWS gene on the der(22). Double-target FISH on 
interphase nuclei using probes flanking the EWS breakpoint region and probe
PT1526 enables the detection of virtually all 22q12 rearrangements in ETs, thus
providing a reliable diagnostic assay.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11474174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Mol Biotechnol. 2001 Jun;18(2):97-104.

A method for accurate detection of translocation junctions in Ewing family of
tumors.

Morishita T(1), Bolander ME, Zhang K, Tamai S, Mii Y, Sarkar G.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, 3-15, Medical Sciences Building, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The Ewing family of tumors (ET) generally contain translocations involving the
EWS gene and the FLI or ERG genes. Identification of the translocation confirms
the diagnosis of ET. Currently, diagnosis of the translocation is made by several
methods. In general, these methods require different primer sets for amplifying
different translocations and subsequent efforts to identify the amplified
product. The need to employ different sets of primers to amplify different
translocation junctions presents some limitations. We have developed a method
based on PCR with consensus primers followed by direct automated sequencing of
the amplified product. With this method we have correctly determined known as
well as unknown ET-associated EWS-FLI and EWS-ERG translocations in appropriate
specimens. Use of our consensus primers eliminates the need for separate PCRs to 
amplify EWS-FLI and EWS-ERG translocation junctions, and because direct
sequencing is used for confirming the identity of the amplification product, the 
accuracy of detection becomes 100%. The method might also accurately diagnose
ET-associated translocations other than EWS-FLI and EWS-ERG translocations.

PMID: 11471459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Int J Surg Pathol. 2001 Jan;9(1):7-17.

Ewing tumor: tumor biology and clinical applications.

de Alava E(1), Pardo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

The Ewing tumor family includes classical Ewing's sarcoma of bone and soft
tissues, peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNET), Askin tumor, and
other less frequent variants. This group of tumors is defined by the consistent
presence of chromosomal translocations resulting in gene fusions between EWS gene
and a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, mainly FLI1 and ERG.
Analogous fusions are seen in other solid developmental tumors, like desmoplastic
small round cell tumor. These fusions, which are consistently present and
tumor-specific, control transcription of several target genes, largely unknown
but critical to cell proliferation and differentiation. Therefore, gene fusions
are useful to diagnose and classify small round cell tumors, have prognostic
significance, are probably useful to detect micrometastasis and monitor minimal
residual disease, and are potential therapeutic targets. Secondary molecular
alterations, which include mutations of cell cycle regulatory genes, are not
tumor-specific but are related to progression and may have prognostic value. The 
Ewing tumor family represents a paradigm of the application of the knowledge of
biology of neoplasia to the clinical management of patients.

PMID: 11469351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Histochem Cell Biol. 2001 May;115(5):421-8.

A monoclonal antibody against insect CALNUC recognizes the prooncoprotein EWS
specifically in mammalian cells. Immunohistochemical and biochemical studies of
the antigen in rat tissues.

Kawano J(1), Nakayama T, Takami Y, Kotani T, Sawaguchi A, Nagaike R, Oinuma T,
Suganuma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Miyazaki Medical Collage, Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.
jkawano@post.miyazaki-med.ac.jp

A monoclonal antibody against insect CALNUC was shown to recognize an 85-kDa
nuclear protein specifically in mammalian cells. Amino acid sequencing of the
protein purified from rat liver revealed it to be EWS, a prooncoprotein for Ewing
sarcomas and related tumors. Using the antibody, distribution of EWS was studied 
in rat tissues fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde by immunohistochemical methods. On 
thaw-fixed cryosections or those of perfusion-fixed tissues, almost all cell
nuclei showed the specific staining. In immersion-fixed tissues, the staining
unexpectedly disappeared in particular tissues (kidney cortex, liver, etc.),
although it was recovered by autoclaving the cryosections. Western blotting also 
demonstrated the ubiquitous expression of EWS in the tissues. In extracts from
the liver, the 85-kDa band rapidly disappeared in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner, but 
never in the testis. The antigen was very labile in kidney homogenates even
without Ca2+. Biochemical studies with digoxigenin-labeled EWS showed that the
Ca(2+)-dependent disappearance was associated with upward mobility shifts of EWS.
These suggested that EWS was ubiquitously expressed in rat tissues, and that the 
antigen was masked in particular tissues during the immersion fixation.

PMID: 11449890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2001 Jul-Aug;4(4):391-6.

Small round cell tumor with biphenotypic differentiation and variant of
t(21;22)(q22;q12).

Tan SY(1), Burchill S, Brownhill SC, Gerrard MP, Watmore A, Wagner BE, Variend S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cytogenetics and Oncology, Children's Hospital,
Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK.

A 14-year-old boy presented with a soft tissue swelling on the outer aspect of
his left upper arm. Examination of the tumor by light microscopy showed a small
round cell tumor with a rare focus of myogenic differentiation. Myogenic
differentiation was confirmed on ultrastructural examination by
immunohistochemistry and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Conventional G-banding and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
demonstrated a complex variant of t(21;22)(q22;q12). By RT-PCR, the EWS-ERG
fusion transcript was defined as type 9e. This tumor was unusual in that it
showed characteristics of myogenic and neural differentiation, and contained a
rearrangement of the EWS gene consistent with a diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma.
This supports the hypothesis that a class of biphenotypic childhood sarcomas,
with features of myogenic and neural differentiation, exists that may be related 
to the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors.

PMID: 11441341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cancer Res. 2001 Jul 1;61(13):5311-7.

The COOH-terminal domain of FLI-1 is necessary for full tumorigenesis and
transcriptional modulation by EWS/FLI-1.

Arvand A(1), Welford SM, Teitell MA, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
California at Los Angeles, USA.

More than 85% of Ewing's family tumors carry a specific chromosomal translocation
that fuses the NH(2) terminus of the EWS gene to the COOH terminus of the FLI1
transcription factor. It has been shown previously that both the transactivation 
domain encoded by EWS and the DNA binding domain of FLI1 were necessary for
transforming cells to anchorage independence. We now report that a COOH-terminal 
domain in addition to the FLI1 DNA binding domain is necessary to promote
cellular transformation. NIH 3T3 cells expressing a COOH-terminal deletion mutant
(EWS/FLI1 DeltaC) have a greatly reduced capability to form colonies in soft agar
and tumors in severe combined immunodeficient mice. The rate of tumor formation
for NIH 3T3 that express EWS/FLI1 DeltaC is 50 days, whereas EWS/FLI1 forms
tumors within 22 days. In addition, cells expressing the EWS/FLI1 DeltaC mutant
failed to completely demonstrate the round-cell histology that is seen in both
Ewing's tumor cell lines and NIH 3T3 cells expressing full-length EWS/FLI1.
Northern and microarray analyses were performed to assess the effect of loss of
the FLI1 COOH terminus on transcriptional modulation of EWS/FLI1 target genes. We
found that although EWS/FLI1 DeltaC up-regulates smaller numbers of genes (21
genes) compared with EWS/FLI1 (34 genes), 41% of the EWS/FLI1 targets were also
up-regulated by EWS/FLI1 DeltaC. On the other hand, EWS/FLI1 DeltaC is unable to 
down-regulate genes (3 genes) as efficiently as EWS/FLI1 (39 genes) with only one
target gene repressed by both fusion constructs. Our study indicates that the
EWS/FLI1 transcription factor has strong transcriptional activating as well as
repressing properties and suggests that transcriptional activation and repression
of target genes may occur through biochemically different mechanisms.

PMID: 11431376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Oncogene. 2001 May 31;20(25):3258-65.

Analysis of the expression of cell cycle regulators in Ewing cell lines:
EWS-FLI-1 modulates p57KIP2and c-Myc expression.

Dauphinot L(1), De Oliveira C, Melot T, Sevenet N, Thomas V, Weissman BE,
Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U509, Laboratoire de Pathologie Moléculaire des Cancers, Institut
Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Ewing tumour is characterized by specific chromosome translocations which fuse
EWS to a subset of genes encoding ETS transcription factors, most frequently
FLI-1. We report the analysis of the expression of various cell cycle regulators 
both in Ewing tumour derived cell lines and in different cellular models with
either inducible or constitutive EWS-FLI-1 cDNA expression. In Ewing cell lines, 
cyclin D1, CDK4, Rb, p27KIP1 and c-Myc were consistently highly expressed whereas
p57KIP2, p15INK4B and p14ARF demonstrated undetectable or low expression levels. 
The amount of p16INK4A, p21CIP1, p18INKAC and CDK6 was variable from one cell
line to the other. The inducible expression of EWS-FLI-1 led to a strong
upregulation of c-Myc and a considerable downregulation of p57KIP2. Other
proteins did not show evident modification. High c-Myc and very low p57KIP2
expression levels were also observed in neuroblastoma NGP cells constitutively
expressing EWS-FLI-1 as compared to parental cells. Analysis of the p57KIP2
promoter indicated that EWS-FLI-1 downregulates, possibly through an indirect
mechanism, the transcription of this gene. Finally, we show that ectopic
expression of p57KIP2 in Ewing cells blocks proliferation through a complete G1
arrest. These results suggest that the modulation of p57(KIP2) expression by
EWS-FLI-1 is a fundamental step in Ewing tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11423975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Jun;268(12):3483-9.

Characterization of a new brain-specific isoform of the EWS oncoprotein.

Melot T(1), Dauphinot L, Sévenet N, Radvanyi F, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pathologie Moléculaire des Cancers, INSERM U509, Paris, France.

EWS and related TAFII68 and TLS/FUS genes are fused with different genes encoding
transcription factors in various human cancers. The products of these genes have 
the ability to bind RNA and have been shown to be part of splicing and
transcription complexes. We show that the EWS, TAFII68 and TLS/FUS proteins are
expressed to various levels in all adult murine tissues. We characterize a new
isoform of EWS that is specifically expressed in the central nervous system, in
both mice and humans. It is shown to be related to a splice variant which
includes a new 18-bp exon, termed 4', between exon 4 and 5. The detection of this
isoform in spontaneously differentiating SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells and in nerve
growth factor-induced PC12 cells further links this isoform to neural
differentiation. RT-PCR experiments indicate that the level of expression of the 
brain-specific EWS isoform is stable during brain development whereas that of the
ubiquitous EWS isoform decreases during this period. The two isoforms show a
parallel decrease in expression after birth. The 4' exon is not detected in
tumour-specific EWS fusion transcripts, suggesting that its presence may impair
their oncogenic properties. Interestingly, sequences of the 4' exon and flanking 
regions show remarkable similarities to that of the neural-specific c-src exon,
suggesting common mechanisms for the alternative splicing of these exons. The
phylogenetic conservation and relationship to neural differentiation strongly
suggests an important functional role for this exon.

PMID: 11422378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cancer Res. 2001 May 1;61(9):3586-90.

Oncogenic TLS/ERG and EWS/Fli-1 fusion proteins inhibit RNA splicing mediated by 
YB-1 protein.

Chansky HA(1), Hu M, Hickstein DD, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The translocation liposarcoma protein TLS has recently been shown to function as 
an adapter molecule coupling gene transcription to RNA splicing. Here we
demonstrate that YB-1, a protein known to play important roles in transcription
and translation, interacts with the COOH-terminal domains of TLS and the
structurally related Ewing's sarcoma protein EWS. Through this interaction, YB-1 
is recruited to RNA polymerase II and promotes splicing of E1A pre-mRNA to the
13S isoform. This splicing function of YB-1 is inhibited by exogenous TLS/ERG or 
EWS/Fli-1 fusion proteins, which bind to RNA polymerase II but fail to recruit
the YB-1 protein. In Ewing's sarcoma cells that express endogenous EWS/Fli-1,
this linkage between YB-1 and RNA Pol II via EWS (or TLS) was found to be
defective. Together, these results suggest that TLS and EWS fusion proteins may
contribute to malignant transformation through disruption of RNA splicing
mediated by TLS- and EWS-binding proteins such as YB-1.

PMID: 11325824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 1;20(5):626-33.

PDGF-C is an EWS/FLI induced transforming growth factor in Ewing family tumors.

Zwerner JP(1), May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

The aberrant transcription factors associated with many human malignancies
function by deregulation of tumorigenic pathways. However, identification of
these pathways has come slowly. Virtually all cases of Ewing's Sarcoma and
peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor (PNET) are associated with aberrant
transcription factors which fuse amino-terminal EWS with the DNA binding moiety
of an ETS transcription factor (FLI-1 in 90% of cases). Attempts to identify the 
downstream targets of these chimeras in the Ewing Family Tumors (EFT) on the
basis of differential gene regulation have produced little association with tumor
biology. As an alternative approach, we have used highly efficient retroviral
systems to biologically screen cDNA derived from cells transformed by EWS/FLI-1. 
We have identified the recently described PDGF-C as target of EWS/ETS
transcriptional deregulation. This transcriptional deregulation is specific to
EWS/FLI. PDGF-C possesses substantial biologic activity in vitro and in vivo. It 
is expressed in EFT cell lines and in primary tumors. Within these EFT cell
lines, PDGF-C expression is dependent upon EWS/FLI activity. These results
suggest that PDGF-C may be a significant mediator of EWS/FLI driven oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3860748
PMID: 11313995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Oncogene. 2001 Mar 29;20(14):1756-64.

Phosphorylation of the EWS IQ domain regulates transcriptional activity of the
EWS/ATF1 and EWS/FLI1 fusion proteins.

Olsen RJ(1), Hinrichs SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska, NE 69198-6495, USA.

Specific chromosomal translocations are commonly present in mesenchymal tumors
and frequently involve genes encoding transcription factors. The combination of
different domains from unrelated genes results in chimeric proteins believed to
play a key role in the neoplastic process. The EWS/ATF1 and EWS/FLI1 fusion
proteins associated with Clear Cell Sarcoma and Ewing's Sarcoma, respectively,
were utilized to study the comparative effect of the EWS component on two
different DNA binding partners. A potential regulatory site within the EWS IQ
domain at serine266 was identified, and studies were performed to demonstrate
that EWS is phosphorylated in cells and phosphorylation of serine266 regulates
transcriptional activity. Mutational analysis showed that elimination of
phosphorylation significantly reduced DNA binding activity by EMSA and reporter
activation in luciferase assays, whereas phosphorylation mimicry resulted in a
partial restoration to wild-type levels. Phosphorylation was also observed to
mediate cellular compartmentalization. These studies confirm that IQ domain
phosphorylation regulates the transcriptional activity of exogenous EWS/ATF1 and 
EWS/FLI1 and suggests that post-translational modifications may potentiate the
neoplastic behavior of fusion proteins in general. Since the IQ domain is
incorporated into only a subset of fusion transcripts, these findings may provide
insight into the molecular mechanism underlying clinical heterogeneity observed
in Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 11313922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Neuropathology. 2001 Mar;21(1):40-4.

Alternative EWS-FLI1 fusion gene and MIC2 expression in peripheral and central
primitive neuroectodermal tumors.

Ishii N(1), Hiraga H, Sawamura Y, Shinohe Y, Nagashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) occur either in the central nervous
system (CNS; central PNET, cPNET) or in the peripheral sites (peripheral PNET,
pPNET). Recent molecular approaches have been defining a new concept of PNET,
that is, the pPNET including Ewing's sarcoma (ES) which expresses MIC2
glycoprotein and shows the specific chimeric gene of EWS-FLI1. The expression of 
MIC2 and the genetic rearrangement of EWS-FLI1 are considered to be highly
specific to the pPNET/ES. This study examined the expression of MIC2 and EWS-FLI1
gene by means of immunohistochemistry and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) on various small round cell tumors originating in the CNS or
non-CNS organs. All peripheral PNET tested expressed MIC2 and were positive for
EWS-FLI1 (11/11). In contrast, all cPNET and other blastic CNS tumors were
negative for MIC2: medulloblastoma (0/3), cerebral PNET (0/2), spinal PNET (0/2),
glioblastoma (0/2), retinoblastoma (0/3), and pineoblastoma (0/2). These
MIC2-negative tumors were also negative for the chimeric gene product of
EWS-FLI1. Interestingly, one PNET originating in the intracranial dura mater was 
positive for both MIC2 and EWS-FLI1 fusion gene. The results indicate that cPNET 
lacks any genetic or protein markers, except for a meningeal PNET which falls
into the same phenotypic spectrum of pPNET.

PMID: 11304041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 22;276(25):22317-22. Epub 2001 Apr 11.

EWS/FLI alters 5'-splice site selection.

Knoop LL(1), Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The chimeric gene EWS/FLI is present in at least 85% of Ewing's sarcomas as a
result of chromosomal translocations. The resulting fusion protein contains the N
terminus of the RNA-binding protein EWS and the ETS DNA-binding domain of the
transcription factor FLI-1. Although EWS/FLI binds DNA and activates
transcription, both EWS and EWS/FLI also interact with SF1 and U1C, essential
components of the splicing machinery. Therefore, we tested the ability of EWS and
EWS/FLI to alter 5'-splice site selection using an E1A gene in vivo splicing
assay. We found that EWS/FLI, but not EWS, interfered with heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein A1-dependent splice site selection of E1A. Mutational analysis 
of EWS/FLI revealed that the ability to affect pre-mRNA splicing coincided with
transforming activity. Therefore, EWS/FLI has the ability to influence splicing
as well as transcription.

PMID: 11301318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 15;61(6):2690-5.

The Ewing's sarcoma gene product functions as a transcriptional activator.

Rossow KL(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) proto-oncogene can give rise to a variety of different 
tumors because of the generation of transforming EWS fusion proteins upon
chromosomal translocation. However, the cellular function of the EWS protein
itself was hitherto not established. We show that EWS is a nuclear protein, whose
nuclear localization is dependent upon its transactivating NH2 terminus. EWS
COOH-terminal amino acids suppress this NH2-terminal activation domain in the
context of a Gal4 fusion protein, which may explain why none of the EWS fusion
proteins in cancer cells contains the EWS COOH terminus. Furthermore, EWS
expression enhances c-fos, Xvent-2, and ErbB2 promoter activity in a
cell-type-dependent manner, indicating that EWS is a transcriptional regulator.
Also, the EWS protein stimulates transcription mediated by the COOH-terminal
transactivation domain of the cofactor CREB-binding protein (CBP).
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that EWS forms a complex with CBP
and the homologous p300 protein. A COOH-terminal region of EWS is both required
for the physical interaction with CBP/p300 and sufficient to mediate c-fos
activation. In addition, suppression of CBP/p300 function by the adenoviral E1A
protein abolishes c-fos activation by EWS, indicating that EWS-mediated gene
regulation depends on CBP/p300. In conclusion, the nuclear EWS proto-oncoprotein 
can function as a transcriptional cofactor in conjunction with CBP/p300.

PMID: 11289149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 1;276(22):18681-7. Epub 2001 Mar 9.

Exposure on cell surface and extensive arginine methylation of ewing sarcoma
(EWS) protein.

Belyanskaya LL(1), Gehrig PM, Gehring H.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemisches Institut, Universität Zürich; Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057
Zürich, Switzerland.

In contrast to the knowledge regarding the function of chimeric Ewing sarcoma
(EWS) fusion proteins that arise from chromosomal translocation, the cellular
function of the RNA binding EWS protein is poorly characterized. EWS protein had 
been found mainly in the nucleus. In this report we show that EWS protein is not 
only found in the nucleus and cytosol but also on cell surfaces. After
cell-surface biotinylation, isoelectric focusing of membrane fraction,
avidin-agarose extraction of biotinylated proteins, and SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis, EWS protein was identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization and nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometry of in-gel-digested
peptides. These analyses revealed that the protein, having repeated RGG motifs,
is extensively asymmetrically dimethylated on arginine residues, the sites of
which have been mapped by mass spectrometric methods. Out of a total of 30
Arg-Gly sequences, 29 arginines were found to be at least partially methylated.
The Arg-Gly-Gly sequence was present in 21 of the 29 methylation sites, and in
contrast to other methylated proteins, only 11 (38%) methylated arginine residues
were found in the Gly-Arg-Gly sequence. The presence of Gly on the C-terminal
side of the arginine residue seems to be a prerequisite for recognition by a
protein-arginine N-methyltransferase (PRMT) catalyzing this asymmetric
dimethylation reaction. One monomethylarginine and no symmetrically methylated
arginine residue was found. The present findings imply that RNA-binding EWS
protein shuttles from the nucleus to the cell surface in a methylated form, the
role of which is discussed.

PMID: 11278906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2001 Mar;10(1):2-8.

Translocation (10;11;22)(p14;q24;q12) characterized by fluorescence in situ
hybridization in a case of Ewing's tumor.

Noguera R(1), Pellín A, Navarro S, Carda C, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Valencia, Spain.
Rosa.Noguera@uv.es

It is well recognized that the identification by classic cytogenetics of
t(11;22)(q24;q12) is a useful aid in the accurate diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma
and related tumors. This translocation induces the EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript,
which can be detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Recent 
studies have also used fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to demonstrate
the translocation. The authors coupled classic cytogenetics and FISH on tumor
cells from the original specimen, the local recurrence, and the pulmonary
metastasis as well as from the xenografted tumors in a case of extraosseous
Ewing's sarcoma. FISH analysis not only confirmed the cytogenetic results but
also allowed the identification of a tumor-specific chromosome change, consistent
with a complex translocation, t(10;11;22), as well as revealed other chromosomal 
rearrangements on both metaphases and interphase nuclei of each material. In
addition this technique served to identify, in the interphase nuclei of the
original tumor, the clone that became dominant, from the cytogenetic point of
view, in the lung metastasis and in the nude mice xenografted tumors. Current
results indicate that the use of FISH on metaphases and interphase nuclei is an
easy and reliable approach to complement or even to substitute classic
cytogenetic studies for the detection of specific chromosomal rearrangements,
especially for determining complex translocations and for describing tumoral
clones with different cytogenetic markers.

PMID: 11277391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Pathol Res Pract. 2001;197(2):113-119; discussion 121-2.

Primary pulmonary primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). A case report.

Mikami Y(1), Nakajima M, Hashimoto H, Irei I, Matsushima T, Kawabata S, Manabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kawasaki Medical School Hospital, Kurashiki,
Okayama,. mika@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp

We describe a rare case of a primary primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) in
the lung of a 17-year-old girl. Grossly, the tumor, located in the right lower
lobe, was relatively well-circumscribed and whitish to yellowish in color with
scattered hemorrhagic necrosis. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of ovoid 
to polygonal cells with a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and relatively scant 
cytoplasm, arranged in solid sheets with intervening fine fibrovascular stroma.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for the MIC2 gene product, whereas 
AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, and a variety of neuroendocrine markers such as chromogranin A, 
synaptophysin, and ProGRP, were negative. Three months after the lobectomy,
recurrent tumors were noted in the mediastinum and right thoracic wall, and she
died despite combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy. In this case
cytogenetic analysis showed a hypertriploid karyotype with multiple numerical and
structural chromosomal aberrations, but failed to disclose distinct evidence of
translocation between chromosome 11 and 22. However, the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) demonstrated EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcripts, confirming the histopathologic diagnosis of PNET. This case
indicates that the primary pulmonary PNET is a highly aggressive neoplasm
occurring at a young age, and should prompt combined systemic chemotherapy, even 
though it is organ-confined.

PMID: 11261815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Mol Diagn. 2000 Aug;2(3):132-8.

Specificity of TLS-CHOP rearrangement for classic myxoid/round cell liposarcoma: 
absence in predominantly myxoid well-differentiated liposarcomas.

Antonescu CR(1), Elahi A, Humphrey M, Lui MY, Healey JH, Brennan MF, Woodruff JM,
Jhanwar SC, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Myxoid liposarcoma (LS), the most common subtype of LS, is known to be
characterized by the specific t(12;16) resulting in a TLS-CHOP fusion in almost
all cases. We wished to address the following questions: (i) Is this genetic
hallmark also present in other types of LS with predominant myxoid change? (ii)
What is the proportion of cases with the variant EWS-CHOP fusion? (iii) What is
the optimal approach for Southern blot detection of TLS breakpoints? We
identified 59 LS characterized histologically by >90% myxoid component, in which 
frozen tissue tumor was available for DNA extraction. These 59 LS with myxoid
features were divided into 2 groups: 42 LS with classic myxoid/round cell
appearance (myxoid LS) and 17 well-differentiated LS (WDLS) with a predominant
(>90%) myxoid component. Within the myxoid LS group, 29 tumors were low grade and
13 high grade (>20% round cell component). Among the 17 predominantly myxoid
WDLS, there were 15 low grade and 2 focally high grade tumors. In addition, we
selected as control group, 20 LS of other histological types with minimal or no
myxoid change (17 WDLS and 3 pleomorphic LS) and 13 myxofibrosarcomas. Southern
blot analysis was performed in all cases using a CHOP cDNA probe, and in all CHOP
rearranged cases using a TLS cDNA probe. Probe/enzyme combinations for Southern
blot analysis were CHOP exon 3-4 cDNA probe with BamHI or SacI, TLS exon 3-6 cDNA
probe with BclI. All 42 cases of myxoid LS showed a CHOP rearrangement and 38 of 
them also had a TLS rearrangement. Among the 4 myxoid LS without Southern blot
evidence of TLS rearrangement, 1 showed an EWS-CHOP fusion by Southern blotting
and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and in another case, reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction detected a TLS-CHOP fusion transcript.
None of the predominantly myxoid WDLS and none of the tumors included in the
control group showed rearranegements with CHOP probe. In addition, 12
predominantly myxoid WDLS, 10 other LS, and 5 myxofibrosarcoma from the control
group were also tested for TLS rearrangement; all were negative. The TLS-CHOP
fusion is highly sensitive and specific for the entity of classic myxoid/round
cell LS. Other types of LS, even with a predominant myxoid component, lack the
TLS-CHOP rearrangement, confirming that they represent a genetically distinct
group of LS. The prevalence of the EWS-CHOP variant fusion was approximately 2%
in this series. The optimal enzyme for TLS genomic breakpoint detection is BclI.

PMCID: PMC1906905
PMID: 11229517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2001 Feb;23(2):99-104.

Use of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for diagnosis and staging 
of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma family of tumors, and desmoplastic
small round cell tumor.

Athale UH(1), Shurtleff SA, Jenkins JJ, Poquette CA, Tan M, Downing JR, Pappo AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105-2794, USA.

PURPOSE: To compare the use of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) with that of morphology-based methods for diagnosis, staging, and
detection of metastatic disease in pediatric alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS),
Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT), and desmoplastic small round cell tumors
(DSRCT).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RT-PCR assays for the EWS-FLII, EWS-ERG, PAX3-FKHR,
PAX7-FKHR, and EWS-WTI fusion transcripts were performed on RNA extracted from
the primary tumor tissue, bone marrow, and body fluids obtained at initial
presentation and relapse. Molecular findings were compared with original
histologic diagnoses and results of staging procedures.
RESULTS: Eighty-eight samples from 47 patients with ARMS (n = 13), ESFT (n = 31),
or DSRCT (n = 3) were analyzed. The detection rate of metastatic disease was
significantly higher with RT-PCR (95%) as compared with the morphologic methods
(70%) for the three pediatric sarcomas studied. In primary tumors with
characteristic fusion transcript, RT-PCR was positive in all cases with
morphologic evidence of metastatic disease. Moreover, in six patients (3 with
ARMS, 2 with DSRCT, and 1 with ESFT) with metastatic disease, micrometastases in 
bone marrow (4) and other sites (2) were detected by RT-PCR alone. Importantly,
none of the patients with localized disease diagnosed had micrometastases
detected by RT-PCR in bone marrow.
CONCLUSIONS: The high sensitivity and specificity of RT-PCR for the
characteristic fusion transcripts of pediatric sarcomas make it an ideal method
to aid in the routine staging of these patients. In addition, the 100%
sensitivity of RT-PCR in detection of micrometastasis makes it useful for
follow-up and detection of minimal residual disease. However, the clinical
significance of molecularly-detectable disease remains unknown. Further studies
should aim to elucidate the therapeutic and prognostic implications of
micrometastases detected by RT-PCR alone.

PMID: 11216714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2001 Feb;46(2):111-6.

[Molecular mechanism of inactivation of TGF-beta receptors during
carcinogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Kim SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute.
kims@dce41.nci.nih.gov

PMID: 11211784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Feb;25(2):273-4.

Cytokeratin immunoreactivity in 41 cases of ES/PNET confirmed by molecular
diagnostic studies.

Collini P, Sampietro G, Bertulli R, Casali PG, Luksch R, Mezzelani A, Sozzi G,
Pilotti S.

PMID: 11176079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Feb;25(2):133-46.

Primary malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the kidney: a clinicopathologic
analysis of 146 adult and pediatric cases from the National Wilms' Tumor Study
Group Pathology Center.

Parham DM(1), Roloson GJ, Feely M, Green DM, Bridge JA, Beckwith JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Arkansas Children's Hospital, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock 72202, USA.

Primary malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the kidney (NETKs) comprise a group
of primitive, highly malignant neoplasms that histologically and clinically are
not well characterized. A large cohort of 146 of these tumors, occurring in
adults and children, has been collected at a single depository site, the National
Wilms' Tumor Study Group (NWTSG) Pathology Center. The authors undertook a
systematic retrospective review of the histologic, ultrastructural, and clinical 
features of these tumors, based on materials collected by the NWTSG and the
consultation files of one of the authors (J.B.B.). Histologic features were
generally those of primitive neural tumors with varying amounts of rosettes and
neuropil; however, a large proportion of cases displayed unusual features such as
spindle cells, ganglion cells, clear cell sarcoma-like foci, rhabdoid cells,
epithelioid cells, and organoid foci. CD99 staining had been performed on 69
cases and showed membranous staining in 65. The NETKs were present in patients
with a wide age spectrum, ranging from 1 month to 72 years (median, 18 years).
EWS/FLI1 fusion analysis using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
and immunohistochemical stains for cytokeratin, chromogranin, and epithelial
membrane antigen were performed successfully on a subset of 45 cases with
available paraffin blocks. Only 13 of the 45 were fusion-positive, and there was 
no correlation between fusion status and histology, presence of rosettes,
ultrastructural features, or cytokeratin positivity. CD99-negative cases were
usually fusion-negative (six of seven cases), and all three chromogranin-positive
cases were fusion-negative. Tumor staging, performed on 72 clearly defined and
quantifiable cases by using NWTSG criteria, indicated that these are aggressive
tumors, because only six were Stage 1, compared with 16 Stage 2, 31 Stage 3, and 
19 Stage 4 lesions. The authors conclude that NETKs are a somewhat diverse group 
of generally aggressive, high-grade lesions that may present in a wide age range 
and are difficult to characterize without immunohistochemistry and
cytogenetics/molecular biology.

PMID: 11176062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6482-9.

The role of Fli-1 in normal cell function and malignant transformation.

Truong AH(1), Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology Research, Sunnybrook and Women's College Health
Sciences Centre & Toronto-Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre (TSRCC), 2075 Bayview
Avenue, S-Wing, Room S216, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4N 3M5.

Aberrant expression of the Fli-1 transcription factor following genetic mutation 
has been recognized as a seminal event in the initiation of certain types of
malignant transformation. Indeed, the etiology of a number of virally induced
leukemias, including Friend virus-induced erythroleukemia, has been associated
with Fli-1 overexpression. The clinical relevance of Fli-1 becomes apparent in
human Ewing's sarcoma in which Fli-1 is the target of a characteristic
chromosomal translocation. As such, Fli-1 has generated considerable interest
over the past several years for its role in malignant transformation and tumor
progression. This review will present a synopsis of the current research on Fli-1
with emphasis on its function in malignant transformation. Moreover, the possible
role of Fli-1 in cellular proliferation, differentiation and survival, as well as
the recent development of transgenic and knock-out mice to investigate the
function of Fli-1 will be discussed. Finally, the significance of identifying
target genes that are regulated by Fli-1 and their role in cellular function will
be reviewed.

PMID: 11175364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Pathol Int. 2000 Dec;50(12):967-72.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney.

Kuroda M(1), Urano M, Abe M, Mizoguchi Y, Horibe Y, Murakami M, Tashiro K,
Kasahara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fujita Health University, School of Medicine, Aichi, 
Japan. mkuro@fujita-hu.ac.jp

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is a small round cell sarcoma that mainly 
develops in the central nervous system and soft tissues of childhood; however
recently, primary occurrence of this tumor in the kidney has been reported. We
experienced one case of PNET primarily arose in the kidney without metastasis.
The patient was a 28-year-old man whose chief complaint was abdominal pain,
especially on exercise. On computed tomography scan and magnetic resonance
imaging, a solid lesion was found in the left kidney, and a left nephrectomy was 
performed based on the diagnosis of a tumor in the left kidney. The tumor was
within the parenchyma of lower end of left kidney protruding into the abdominal
cavity. Histologically, diffuse proliferation of primitive small round cells with
rosette formation was found. Immunohistochemically, MIC2 gene product,
neuron-specific enolase and S-100 protein were positive. No metastasis to the
regional lymph nodes was found. From these observations, the tumor was diagnosed 
as PNET primarily arising in the left kidney. Although chromosome analysis was
not performed, EWS-FLI1 chimera gene was identified by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction on the freshly frozen specimen and
fluorescence in situ hybridization on paraffin sections.

PMID: 11123763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Dec 9;279(1):172-80.

bFGF induces differentiation and death of olfactory neuroblastoma cells.

Nibu K(1), Li G, Kaga K, Rothstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kimmel Cancer Institute,
Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Olfactory neuroblastoma (ONB) is a highly vascularized and malignant tumor
arising in olfactory neuronal precursors from the paranasal sinuses. Previously, 
we showed that treatment of JFEN cells with transforming growth factor
(TGF)-alpha caused them to differentiate and respond to chemical odorants,
whereas basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) treated cells differentiated and
died. In the present study we show that established ONB tumors treated with bFGF 
upregulate the bFGF receptor (FGFR1) prior to differentiation. This cellular
differentiation was evidenced by bFGF-induced expression of the human runt
homologue AML1 (PEBP2 alpha B, CBFA-2) that is highly expressed in developing
olfactory neuroepithelium and TrkA, a preferred nerve growth factor receptor.
Since TrkA is expressed in supporting cells, but not in mature olfactory neurons,
we hypothesize that the expression of AML1 and TrkA in bFGF-treated JFEN cells
induced supporting cell differentiation. Collectively, these results have
implications for the treatment of patients afflicted with ONB.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11112435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Ultrastruct Pathol. 2000 Sep-Oct;24(5):333-7.

Desmoplastic small round-cell tumor: a case report on the large cell variant with
immunohistochemical, ultrastructural, and molecular genetic analysis.

Pasquinelli G(1), Montanaro L, Martinelli GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Radiology and Anatomic Pathology, University of
Bologna, Italy. pasqui@med.unibo.it

examination. The patient died 10 months after surgery. Histologically, the tumor 
was composed of predominantly large epithelioid cells with foci of anaplasia
mimicking metastatic carcinoma. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells stained
with anti-cytokeratin, EMA, desmin, and NSE antisera. Electron microscopy showed 
secretory lumina, desmosomes, cell processes with microtubules and electron-dense
granules, and focal whorls of intermediate filaments. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction performed on paraffin block-retrieved
tissue demonstrated the EWS/WT-1 fusion transcript characteristic of the
t(11;22)(p13;q12). This case illustrates a less common histological pattern of
DSRCT, i.e., diffuse large cells, thus supporting the view that this tumor
presents a wider morphological spectrum than that previously recognized.

PMID: 11071572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Cancer. 2000 Nov 1;89(9):1992-8.

A reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay in the diagnosis of soft 
tissue sarcomas.

Naito N(1), Kawai A, Ouchida M, Dan'ura T, Morimoto Y, Ozaki T, Shimizu K, Inoue 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Okayama University Medical School, Faculty 
of Medicine, Okayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Many types of sarcomas are characterized by specific chromosomal
translocations that result in the production of novel chimeric genes. Detection
of these fusion genes could be a sensitive molecular diagnostic assay. However,
to the authors' knowledge there have been few systemic comparisons between the
current histopathologic diagnosis and the presence or absence of particular
fusion genes in patients with adult soft tissue sarcomas (STSs).
METHODS: Total RNA was extracted from 75 cases of STS and analyzed by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay for the detection of a
variety of fusion transcripts. The results of the molecular assay were compared
with standard histopathologic diagnoses.
RESULTS: Of the 18 tumors diagnosed as synovial sarcoma, 17 (94%) expressed
SYT-SSX chimeric transcripts. All nine myxoid liposarcomas were positive for
FUS-CHOP fusion transcripts. Of the four cases of Ewing sarcoma, two had an
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript and one had an EWS-ERG fusion transcript. A clear cell
sarcoma had a EWS-ATF1 fusion transcript. None of 19 cases of malignant fibrous
histiocytoma nor 3 leiomyosarcomas contained a fusion transcript. Three cases
with an initial diagnosis other than synovial sarcoma expressed a SYT-SSX fusion 
transcript. A review of the slides and additional examination showed that a
diagnosis of synovial sarcoma was appropriate for these cases. There was a trend 
for biphasic synovial sarcoma to contain the SYT-SSX1 fusion.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors believe RT-PCR assay for the detection of a specific
fusion gene provides a useful tool for confirmation of the diagnosis of adult STS
in diagnostically difficult cases and in retrospective studies.

Copyright 2000 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 11064357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2000 Sep;121(2):109-16.

Genetic characterization of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma identifies fusion of
the FUS and ATF-1 genes induced by a chromosomal translocation involving bands
12q13 and 16p11.

Waters BL(1), Panagopoulos I, Allen EF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Vermont, College of Medicine, Burlington, VT, USA.

This case report documents the first karyotypic, fluorescence in situ
hybridization, and genetic analysis of an angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma that
arose and recurred in the arm of a 5.5-year-old girl. Complex rearrangements
between chromosomes 2, 12, 16, and 17 were noted, as well as deletion in the long
arm of chromosome 11. Flow cytometry revealed a normal cell population. The
t(12;16) site was further investigated using reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction. We found that the FUS (also known as TLS) gene from 16p11
combined with the ATF-1 gene from 12q13 to generate a chimeric FUS/ATF-1. The FUS
gene is rearranged in the t(12;16)(q13;p11) that characterizes myxoid liposarcoma
and in acute myeloid leukemia with t(16;21)(p11;q22), while the ATF-1 gene is
rearranged in the t(12;22)(q13;q12) found recurrently in clear cell sarcomas
(malignant melanoma of soft parts). Thus, the FUS/ATF-1 gene in angiomatoid
fibrous histiocytoma is predicted to code for a protein that is very similar to
the chimeric EWS/ATF-1 found in clear cell sarcoma.

PMID: 11063792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Oct;6(10):3832-6.

Adenovirus 5 early region 1A does not induce expression of the ewing sarcoma
fusion product EWS-FLI1 in breast and ovarian cancer cell lines.

Meric F(1), Liao Y, Lee WP, Pollock RE, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

The adenovirus 5 early region 1A (E1A) can function as a tumor suppressor gene
and is being used in clinical trials as a therapeutic agent for advanced breast, 
ovarian, and head and neck cancer. Recently, there has been a dispute regarding
whether transfection with the E1A gene can induce expression of the Ewing sarcoma
oncogenic fusion transcript EWS-FLI1 (Sanchez-Prieto et al., Nat. Med., 5:
1076-1079, 1999; Melot and Delattre, Nat. Med., 5: 1331, 1999; Kovar et al.,
Cancer Res., 60: 1557-1560, 2000). In an effort to settle the controversy, we
tested several stable E1A transfectants of cell lines MDA-MB-231, MCF-7,
MDA-MB-435 (breast cancer), SKOV3-ipl (ovarian cancer), and PC-3 (prostate
cancer), as well as parental and vector-transfected controls, HEK 293 cells, and 
RD-ES (Ewing sarcoma) cells, for the EWS-FLI1 fusion product. The EWS-FLI1
transcript could not be identified with reverse transcription-PCR in any of the
13 E1A-transfected cell lines analyzed. Furthermore, the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein 
could not be detected by Western blot analysis in E1A-transfected cell lines.
These results suggest that E1A transfection does not necessarily lead to
expression of the oncogenic EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript. Thus, the potential
induction of this gene rearrangement by E1A gene therapy is unlikely to be
clinically significant in the treatment of advanced malignant disease.

PMID: 11051226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Virchows Arch. 2000 Sep;437(3):234-40.

In situ reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction demonstration of the
EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript in Ewing's sarcomas and peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumors.

Krams M(1), Peters J, Boeckel F, Raether A, Ambros PF, Parwaresch R, Harms D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Pathology, University of Kiel, Germany.
mkrams@path.uni-kiel.de

It is now widely accepted that the EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript is associated with
tumors of the Ewing family. To test whether it is possible to detect the fusion
transcript by means of combining polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methodology and 
immunohistochemistry, we investigated tumors of the Ewing family using in situ
reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR. We were able to demonstrate the t(11;22) fusion
transcript in five of six cases of Ewing's sarcoma and four of four peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumors. These results were confirmed using fluorescence
in situ hybridization in seven tumor samples. In situ RT-PCR-labeled fusion
transcripts were found in virtually all tumor cells within a given sample,
indicating that each cell possessed the t(11;22) transcript. We conclude from
these results that in situ RT-PCR can be used for the rapid detection of
EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts in biopsy material. The findings also suggest that
all cells of the tumors of the Ewing family carry the EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcript.

PMID: 11037342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Physiol Genomics. 1999 Nov 11;1(3):127-38.

Molecular genetics of chromosome translocations involving EWS and related family 
members.

Kim J(1), Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Department of Oncology, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

Many types of sarcomas are characterized by specific chromosomal translocations
that appear to result in the production of novel, tumor-specific chimeric
transcription factors. Many of these show striking similarities: the emerging
picture is that the amino-terminal domain of the fusion product is donated by the
Ewing's sarcoma gene (EWS) or a related member from the same gene family, whereas
the carboxy-terminal domain often consists of a DNA-binding domain derived from
one of a number of transcription factors. Given the observation that the
different translocation partners of the EWS protooncogene are associated with
distinct types of sarcomas, the functional consequence of fusing EWS (or a
related family member) to a different DNA-binding domain can only be understood
in the context of functional studies that define the specificity of action of the
different fusion products. An understanding of the molecular structure and
function of these translocations provides new methods for diagnosis and novel
targets for therapeutics.

PMID: 11015571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Oncogene. 2000 Sep 14;19(39):4523-30.

Interference with the constitutive activation of ERK1 and ERK2 impairs
EWS/FLI-1-dependent transformation.

Silvany RE(1), Eliazer S, Wolff NC, Ilaria RL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Simmons Cancer Center
and the Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

The chimeric gene EWS/FLI-1, the hallmark of the Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor family, encodes a fusion protein with enhanced
transcriptional activation properties and preserved recognition of canonical ETS 
binding sites. Although EWS/FLI-1 alters the expression of various genes, the
precise mechanism by which EWS/FLI-1 acts as an oncogene remains to be defined.
In this study we report that members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signaling pathway, ERK1 and ERK2, are constitutively activated in NIH 3T3 
cells expressing EWS/FLI-1. Interference with ERK activation by either highly
specific inhibitors of MEK1 or a dominant negative ras mutant profoundly impaired
the ability of EWS/FLI-1 to transform NIH3T3 cells to growth in semi-solid
medium. An EWS/FLI-1 mutant defective in DNA-binding and transcriptional
activation failed to activate ERK and was also defective in 3T3 cell
transformation. Constitutive ERK activation was also evident in several human
Ewing's sarcoma tumor-derived cell lines. Interestingly, cells expressing the
type II EWS/FLI-1 fusion, recently demonstrated more potent in transcriptional
activation, showed even greater MAPK activation than cells expressing the more
common type I fusion. These results implicate ERK activation in EWS/FLI-1
transformation and suggest that this signaling pathway may be important in the
pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma. Oncogene (2000) 19, 4523 - 4530.

PMID: 11002425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2000 Nov-Dec;3(6):603-5.

Detection of t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation and EWS-FLI-1 fusion transcript in a
case of solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas.

Maitra A, Weinberg AG, Schneider N, Patterson K.

PMID: 11000339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 1;275(48):37612-8.

EWS.Fli-1 fusion protein interacts with hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II and
interferes with serine-arginine protein-mediated RNA splicing.

Yang L(1), Chansky HA, Hickstein DD.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Service, Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System,
Seattle, Washington 98108, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma displays a characteristic chromosomal translocation that results 
in fusion of the N-terminal domain of the Ewing's sarcoma protein (EWS) to the
C-terminal DNA-binding domain of the ETS family transcription factor Fli-1
(Friend leukemia integration-1). EWS possesses structural motifs suggesting a
role in transactivation as well as RNA binding. We demonstrate that wild-type EWS
protein functions as an adapter molecule coupling transcription to RNA splicing
by binding to hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II through the N-terminal domain
of EWS and recruiting serine-arginine (SR) splicing factors through the
C-terminal domain of EWS. The oncogenic EWS.Fli-1 fusion protein retains the
ability to bind to hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II but lacks the ability to
recruit SR proteins because of replacement of the C-terminal domain of EWS by
Fli-1. In an in vivo splicing assay, the EWS.Fli-1 fusion protein inhibits SR
protein-mediated E1A pre-mRNA splicing in a dominant-negative manner. These
results indicate that EWS.Fli-1 interferes with the normal function of EWS and
implicate uncoupling of gene transcription from RNA splicing in the pathogenesis 
of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 10982800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Oncogene. 2000 Aug 31;19(37):4298-301.

A link between basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and EWS/FLI-1 in Ewing's
sarcoma cells.

Girnita L(1), Girnita A, Wang M, Meis-Kindblom JM, Kindblom LG, Larsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Cellular and Molecular Tumor Pathology, 
CCK, R8:04, Karolinska Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

The EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene is characteristic of most cases of Ewing's sarcoma and 
has been shown to be crucial for tumor transformation and cell growth. In this
study we demonstrate a drastic down-regulation of the EWS/FLI-1 protein, and a
growth arrest, following serum depletion of Ewing's sarcoma cells. This indicates
that growth factor circuits may be involved in regulation of the fusion gene
product. Of four different growth factors tested, basic fibroblast growth factor 
(bFGF) was found to be of particular significance. In fact, upon treatment of
serum-depleted cells with bFGF, expression of the EWS/FLI-1 protein and growth of
the Ewing's sarcoma cells were restored. In addition, a bFGF-neutralizing
antibody, which was confirmed to inhibit FGF receptor (FGFR) phosphorylation,
caused down-regulation of EWS/FLI-1. Experiments using specific cell cycle
blockers (thymidine and colcemide) suggest that EWS/FLI-1 is directly linked to
bFGF stimulation, and not indirectly to cell proliferation. We also demonstrated 
expression of FGFRs in several tumor samples of Ewing's sarcoma. Taken together, 
our data suggest that expression of FGFR is a common feature of Ewing's sarcoma
and, in particular, that the bFGF pathway may be important for the maintenance of
a malignant phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma cells through up-regulating the
EWS/FLI-1 protein. Oncogene (2000) 19, 4298 - 4301

PMID: 10980604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Cancer. 2000 Aug 15;89(4):783-92.

Prognostic impact of P53 status in Ewing sarcoma.

de Alava E(1), Antonescu CR, Panizo A, Leung D, Meyers PA, Huvos AG, Pardo-Mindán
FJ, Healey JH, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Disease stage at the time of diagnosis and response to therapy are
the main prognostic factors for patients with Ewing sarcoma or peripheral
neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET). The primary genetic alteration in ES/PNET, the
fusion of the EWS gene with FLI1 or ERG, is diagnostically highly specific for
these tumors, and molecular variation in the structure of the EWS-FLI1 fusion
gene also is of prognostic significance. In contrast, secondary genetic
alterations, such as P53 alterations, are relatively uncommon in ES/PNET, and
their prognostic impact has not been extensively studied.
METHODS: Prechemotherapy, paraffin embedded, nondecalcified, primary tumor
material in a well-characterized series of 55 patients with ES/PNET with defined 
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts (32 patients with type 1 and 23 patients with other
types) was studied retrospectively by immunohistochemical techniques for cell
cycle regulators and proliferative markers, such as P53, P21(WAF1), and Ki-67, as
well as by the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end
labeling (TUNEL) technique for apoptosis. Nuclear P53 expression in > 20% of
tumor cells was scored as aberrant overexpression. Histologic response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy was assessed.
RESULTS: Aberrant P53 expression (in > 20% of tumor cells) was present in 6
patients (11%) but showed no statistically significant correlation with disease
stage, tumor size, proliferation rate (Ki-67), apoptotic rate (TUNEL), or
EWS-FLI1 fusion type. By univariate analysis, the P53 > 20% group showed a
significantly poorer overall survival among patients with localized disease (n = 
43 patients) (P = 0.001) and in the entire study group (P = 0.01). In
multivariate Cox analyses of overall survival, P53 > 20% was the strongest
negative factor among prognostic factors available at the time of diagnosis (P = 
0.001; relative risk [RR] = 9) and when chemotherapy response was included in the
analysis (P53 > 20%: P = 0.01; RR = 10).
CONCLUSIONS: P53 alteration appears to define a small clinical subset of patients
with ES/PNET with a markedly poor outcome. The current observations warrant a
systematic prospective study with comprehensive P53 mutation analysis. [See
related article on pages 793-9, this issue.]

Copyright 2000 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 10951341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Jul;6(7):2788-93.

Monoclonality of multifocal myxoid liposarcoma: confirmation by analysis of
TLS-CHOP or EWS-CHOP rearrangements.

Antonescu CR(1), Elahi A, Healey JH, Brennan MF, Lui MY, Lewis J, Jhanwar SC,
Woodruff JM, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Multifocal presentation, defined as the presence of tumor at two or more
anatomically separate sites, before the manifestation of disease in sites where
sarcomas usually metastasize (e.g., lungs) occurs in about 1% of extremity soft
tissue sarcomas (STSs). Debate still persists whether multifocal STSs represent
an unusual pattern of metastasis or multiple separate primary tumors. Among STSs 
with multifocal presentation, myxoid liposarcoma is the predominant histological 
type. This subtype of liposarcoma contains the specific t(12;16) chromosomal
translocation, which results in rearrangement of the TLS and CHOP genes that is
clone specific at the DNA level. We, therefore, sought to address the question of
clonality by molecular analysis in six patients who presented with either
synchronous or metachronous multifocal myxoid liposarcoma. In all six cases,
adequate frozen tumor was available for DNA extraction from at least two distinct
anatomical sites. Southern blot analysis using CHOP, TLS, and EWS cDNA probes was
performed on genomic DNA. Five cases contained a TLS-CHOP rearrangement, and one 
case had the variant EWS-CHOP fusion (seen in <5% of cases). The size of the
rearranged CHOP fragment differed among the six patients, as expected, but was
identical in all anatomically separate tumor samples from each patient. Likewise,
the sizes of the rearranged bands observed with either the TLS or EWS probes
supported the monoclonality of all cases. Our results confirm the monoclonal
origin of multifocal myxoid liposarcoma, establishing the metastatic nature of
distant soft tissue lesions in these cases. It remains unclear whether this
unusual pattern of metastasis represents an intrinsic property of this subset of 
myxoid liposarcoma or merely a rare chance occurrence. The clinical outcomes
observed in this small series suggest that the prognosis of multifocal myxoid
liposarcoma is poor, regardless of its often bland or "low-grade" histological
appearance.

PMID: 10914725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Int J Cancer. 2000 Aug 1;87(3):328-35.

Identification of EWS/FLI-1 transcripts in giant-cell tumor of bone.

Scotlandi K(1), Chano T, Benini S, Serra M, Manara MC, Cerisano V, Picci P,
Baldini N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Ricerca Oncologica, Dipartimento Goidanich, Istituti Ortopedici
Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy. katia.scotland@ior.it

The EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene, resulting from a t(11;22) translocation, plays a key
role in the pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma. We demonstrate the presence of
EWS/FLI-1 hybrid transcripts also in giant-cell tumor, a bone neoplasm featuring 
intermediate characteristics between benign and malignant lesions. Chimeric
products were detected by semi-nested PCR after 2 cycles of amplification in
13/15 cases of giant-cell tumor, and their presence was confirmed by Southern and
Western blots and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Moreover, 3/8 primary
cultures of giant-cell tumor showed the same type of hybrid transcript observed
in the original tumor sample. Sequencing of PCR products confirmed the presence
of EWS and FLI-1 sequences in these products. Detection of EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcripts in giant-cell tumor of bone provides a model for the study of the
transforming mechanisms of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene in mesenchymal tumors.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10897036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Curr Opin Oncol. 2000 Jul;12(4):323-9.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors.

West DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, Sacramento 95817, USA. dcwest@ucdavis.edu

The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) shares a common neural histogenesis,
tumor genetics, and a fascinating biology, all of which hold the promise of
identifying new therapeutic targets. The genetic hallmark of ESFT is the presence
of the t(11;22)(q24;q12), which creates the EWS/FLI1 fusion gene and results in
the expression of a chimeric protein. This article reviews much of the important 
work that has been reported over the past year regarding the biology and therapy 
of ESFT. Major studies include the observation that the early region (E1A) of
human adenovirus type 5 is directly linked to and may initiate production of the 
EWS/FLI1 fusion transcript in normal human fibroblasts and keratinocytes. In
addition, there is new information regarding the function of EWS/FLI1 and
downstream signals by which it acts. New clinical information continues to
support the addition of ifosfamide to standard chemotherapy regimens and help
further refine prognostic features, including biologic features that may someday 
allow better risk stratification and therapy design.

PMID: 10888417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Jul;267(13):4002-10.

A trans-acting factor, isolated by the three-hybrid system, that influences
alternative splicing of the amyloid precursor protein minigene.

Poleev A(1), Hartmann A, Stamm S.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Neurobiology, Munich, Germany. andrejpoleev@yahoo.com

Two clones were isolated in a three-hybrid screen of a rat fetal brain P5 cDNA
library with an intronic splicing enhancer of the amyloid precursor protein (APP)
gene as RNA bait. These clones represent the rat homologues of the previously
described genes CUG-binding protein (CUG-BP) and Siah-binding protein (Siah-BP). 
Both interact in a sequence-specific manner with the RNA bait used for library
screening as well as with the CUG repeat. In contrast, no interactions were
observed in the three-hybrid assay with other baits tested. In two-hybrid assays,
Siah-BP interacts with U2AF65 as well as with itself. EWS, an RGG-type
RNA-binding protein associated with Ewing sarcoma, was identified as an
interacting partner for the CUG-BP homologue in a two-hybrid assay for
protein-protein interactions performed with various factors involved in RNA
metabolism. Splicing assays performed by RT-PCR from cells cotransfected with
certain cDNAs and an APP minigene, used as a reporter, indicate exclusion of exon
8 if the CUG-BP homologue is present. We conclude that clone AF169013 and its
counterpart in human CUG-BP could be the trans-acting factors that interact with 
the splicing enhancer downstream of exon 8, and in this way influence alternative
splicing of the APP minigene.

PMID: 10866799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 11;275(32):24865-71.

The splicing factor U1C represses EWS/FLI-mediated transactivation.

Knoop LL(1), Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

EWS is an RNA-binding protein involved in human tumor-specific chromosomal
translocations. In approximately 85% of Ewing's sarcomas, such translocations
give rise to the chimeric gene EWS/FLI. In the resulting fusion protein, the RNA 
binding domains from the C terminus of EWS are replaced by the DNA-binding domain
of the ETS protein FLI-1. EWS/FLI can function as a transcription factor with the
same DNA binding specificity as FLI-1. EWS and EWS/FLI can associate with the RNA
polymerase II holoenzyme as well as with SF1, an essential splicing factor. Here 
we report that U1C, one of three human U1 small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein-specific proteins, interacts in vitro and in vivo with both EWS
and EWS/FLI. U1C interacts with other splicing factors and is important in the
early stages of spliceosome formation. Importantly, co-expression of U1C
represses EWS/FLI-mediated transactivation, demonstrating that this interaction
can have functional ramifications. Our findings demonstrate that U1C, a well
characterized splicing protein, can also function in transcriptional regulation. 
Furthermore, they suggest that EWS and EWS/FLI may function both in
transcriptional and post-transcriptional processes.

PMID: 10827180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2000 Apr;19(2):127-32.

Endometrial endometrioid carcinomas associated with Ewing sarcoma/peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Sinkre P(1), Albores-Saavedra J, Miller DS, Copeland LJ, Hameed A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9073, USA.

Three uterine tumors, each consisting of endometrioid carcinoma and Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/pPNET) are described. The 
diagnosis of ES/pPNET in each case was first established in the hysterectomy
specimen because each ES/pPNET was misinterpreted on the endometrial biopsy
specimens as a high-grade homologous sarcoma. The ES/pPNET element in each case
consisted of solid masses of small- to medium-sized round cells without
Homer-Wright pseudorosettes, glial or ganglion cells, true rosettes with central 
lumens, or medulloepithelial tubules. Each ES/pPNET exhibited focal positive
immunostaining for neuron-specific enolase, diffuse staining for vimentin, and
strong cell membrane immunoreactivity for O13 (CD99), the last finding providing 
the first clue to the diagnosis of ES/pPNET in each case. The diagnosis in each
case was confirmed by detection of EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript through reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. We also examined O13 immunoreactivity
retrospectively in 40 cases of malignant mixed mullerian tumors (MMMT) with
homologous or heterologous elements. O13 immunoreactivity was not observed in the
malignant epithelium or in the homologous or heterologous sarcomas. The
immunoreactivity of O13 in round cell endometrial sarcomas provides a clue to the
diagnosis of ES/pPNET.

PMID: 10782408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 15;60(6):1557-60.

Adenovirus E1A does not induce the Ewing tumor-associated gene fusion EWS-FLI1.

Kovar H(1), Fallaux FJ, Pribill I, Jugovic D, Bartl S, Ambros PF, Aryee DN,
Wiegant JC, Hoeben RC.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria. 
kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

Rearrangement of the EWS gene with FLI1 is thought to occur early in the
pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (EFTs) because the chromosomal
aberration is pathognomonic for this disease. Recently, adenovirus (Ad) 5 E1A
protein has been reported to induce this gene rearrangement in a variety of cell 
types. This finding, if generally substantiated, not only suggests an etiological
role for viral agents in the generation of oncogenic chromosomal aberrations but 
would also significantly impact the use of adenoviral vectors for gene therapy.
In contrast, we now report on the absence of EWS-FLI1 chimeric products from
short- and long-term cultures of stably Ad-transformed cells lines and from
transiently E1A-expressing cell lines. In addition, we demonstrate the absence of
E1A from EFTs. We conclude that there is no role for Ads in EFT pathogenesis.
Consequently, evidence for a viral genesis of tumor-specific gene rearrangements 
is not available.

PMID: 10749123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 15;60(6):1536-40.

EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, and EWS-ETV1 oncoproteins of Ewing tumor family all suppress
transcription of transforming growth factor beta type II receptor gene.

Im YH(1), Kim HT, Lee C, Poulin D, Welford S, Sorensen PH, Denny CT, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, DBS, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5055, USA.

Ewing sarcoma-specific chromosomal translocations fuse the EWS gene to a subset
of ets transcription factor family members, most commonly the FLI1 gene and less 
frequently ERG, ETV1, E1A-F, or FEV. These fusion proteins are thought to act as 
aberrant transcription factors that bind DNA through their ets DNA binding
domain. Recently, we have shown (K-B. Hahm et al., Nat. Genet., 23: 222-227,
1999) that the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) type II receptor
(TGF-beta RII), a putative tumor suppressor gene, is a target of the EWS-FLI1
fusion protein. Here, we also examined effects of EWS-ETV1 and EWS-ERG on
expression of the TGF-beta RII gene. We show that relative to the control,
NIH-3T3 cell lines stably transfected with the EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, or EWS-ETV1
gene fusion express reduced levels of TGF-beta RII mRNA and protein, and that
these cell lines have reduced TGF-beta sensitivity. Cotransfection of these
fusion genes and the TGF-beta RII promoter suppresses TGF-beta RII promoter
activity and also FLI1-, ERG-, or ETV1-induced promoter activity. These results
indicate that transcriptional repression of TGF-beta RII is an important target
of the EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, or EWS-ETV1 oncogene, and that EWS-ets fusion proteins 
may function as dominant negative forms of ets transcription factors.

PMID: 10749119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Am J Pathol. 2000 Mar;156(3):849-55.

Association of EWS-FLI1 type 1 fusion with lower proliferative rate in Ewing's
sarcoma.

de Alava E(1), Panizo A, Antonescu CR, Huvos AG, Pardo-Mindán FJ, Barr FG,
Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

The Ewing's sarcoma (ES) family of tumors, including peripheral neuroectodermal
tumor (PNET), is defined genetically by specific chromosomal translocations
resulting in fusion of the EWS gene with a member of the ETS family of
transcription factors, either FLI1 (90-95%) or ERG (5-10%). A second level of
molecular genetic heterogeneity stems from the variation in the location of the
translocation breakpoints, resulting in the inclusion of different combinations
of exons from EWS and FLI1 (or ERG) in the fusion products. The most common type 
of EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript, type 1, is associated with a favorable prognosis
and appears to encode a functionally weaker transactivator, compared to other
fusion types. We sought to determine whether the observed covariation of
structure, function, and clinical course correlates with tumor cell kinetic
parameters such as proliferative rate and apoptosis, and with expression of the
receptor for insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-1R). In a group of 86 ES/PNET with
defined EWS-ETS fusions (45 EWS-FLI1 type 1, 27 EWS-FLI1 non-type 1, 14 EWS-ERG),
we assessed proliferation rate by immunostaining for Ki-67 using MIB1 antibody (n
= 85), apoptosis by TUNEL assay (n = 66), and IGF-1R expression by immunostaining
with antibody 1H7 (n = 78). Ki-67 proliferative index was lower in tumors with
EWS-FLI1 type 1 than those with non-type 1 EWS-FLI1, whether analyzed as a
continuous (P = 0.049) or categorical (P = 0.047) variable. Logistic regression
analysis suggests that this association was secondary to the association of type 
1 EWS-FLI1 and lower IGF-1R expression (P = 0.04). Comparing EWS-FLI1 to EWS-ERG 
cases, Ki-67 proliferative index was higher in the latter (P = 0.01, Mann-Whitney
test; P = 0.02, Fisher's exact test), but there was no significant difference in 
IGF-1R. TUNEL results showed no significant differences between groups. Our
results suggest that clinical and functional differences between alternative
forms of EWS-FLI1 are paralleled by differences in proliferative rate, possibly
mediated by differential regulation of the IGF-1R pathway.

PMCID: PMC1876855
PMID: 10702401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Mar 15;255(2):270-7.

A C-terminal carbohydrate-binding domain in the endothelial cell regulatory
protein, pigpen: new function for an EWS family member.

Alliegro MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Louisiana State University Medical Center, New
Orleans, Louisiana, 70112, USA. mallie@Isumc.edu

The potential for encoding information in carbohydrate (CHO) structures has long 
been recognized. Selective CHO-binding proteins known as lectins and the
biological events they mediate are well known. However, many lectins were
originally discovered for biological activities other than saccharide binding,
and only subsequently was it realized that one or more of their key functions
were mediated by specific CHO recognition. Our previous observations suggested
that the nuclear protein pigpen had an affinity for CHO structures. This would
represent a new attribute for proteins of the EWS (Ewing's sarcoma) family, of
which pigpen is a member. In this study we demonstrate that a CHO-binding domain 
resides in the C-terminus of the molecule and can be preferentially inhibited by 
saccharides, most notably N-acetyl-d-galactosamine (GalNAc) and the
GalNAc-containing polysaccharide, chondroitin sulfate. Ligand blotting
experiments were subsequently performed with fractionated,
[(3)H]galactose-labeled cells to demonstrate the presence of chondroitin
sulfate-inhibitable endogenous CHO ligands for pigpen in endothelial nuclei.
Finally, microinjection of polysaccharide competitor into the nucleus of cultured
endothelial cells resulted in a loss of pigpen focal accumulations, suggesting
that the CHO-binding activity may be instrumental in subcellular localization of 
the protein. In summary, our results show ligand preference and domain
specificity for pigpen's CHO affinity and provide initial evidence for
physiological ligands and function. They may also shed new light on the
mechanisms of oncogenic transformation involving EWS proteins.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10694442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Am J Surg Pathol. 2000 Feb;24(2):322-3.

'Like--but oh, how different!'.

Gaffney EF.

Comment on
    Am J Surg Pathol. 1999 Feb;23(2):159-65.

PMID: 10680910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Br J Cancer. 2000 Jan;82(1):16-9.

Preferential down-regulation of phospholipase C-beta in Ewing's sarcoma cells
transfected with antisense EWS-Fli-1.

Dohjima T(1), Ohno T, Banno Y, Nozawa Y, Wen-yi Y, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University School of Medicine, Japan.

EWS-Fli-1, a fusion gene found in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuro-ectodermal 
tumour (PNET), encodes a transcriptional activator and promotes cellular
transformation. We have made stable Ewing's sarcoma cells expressing antisense
EWS-Fli-1 transcripts by transfecting the antisense EWS-Fli-1 expression plasmid.
These cells showed partial loss of endogenous EWS-Fli-1 proteins and suppression 
of the cell growth. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the growth
inhibition, we examined the changes of signal transducing proteins by immunoblot 
analysis in Ewing's sarcoma cells stably expressing antisense EWS-Fli-1
transcripts. Western blotting of the cell proteins revealed that expressions of
phospholipase Cbeta2 and beta3 (PLCbeta2, PLCbeta3), and also protein kinase C
alpha and beta (PKCalpha, beta) were significantly reduced by transfecting with
antisense EWS-Fli-1. The inositol phosphates production by bradykinin (BK), but
not platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), was suppressed in these cells. These
results suggest that the PLCbeta2 and PLCbeta3 may play a role in tumour
proliferation in Ewing's sarcoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2363212
PMID: 10638960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Lab Invest. 1999 Dec;79(12):1535-43.

EWS/ETS fusion genes induce epithelial and neuroectodermal differentiation in NIH
3T3 fibroblasts.

Teitell MA(1), Thompson AD, Sorensen PH, Shimada H, Triche TJ, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California at Los Angeles, USA. mteitell@ucla.edu

Ewing's sarcoma is the least differentiated member of the peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal (pPNET) tumor family. Chromosomal translocations involving the
EWS gene and five different Ets family transcription factor genes create fusion
genes encoding aberrant transcription factors and are implicated in the vast
majority of Ewing's sarcoma cases. Here, NIH 3T3 fibroblasts were infected with
control (tk-neo or RAS) and two different EWS/ETS-expressing retroviruses. In
vitro studies of established polyclonal lines expressing the two EWS/ETS genes,
either EWS/FLI1 or EWS/ETV1, showed induction of cytokeratin 15 gene expression. 
Both fusion genes also caused characteristic gross morphologic, histologic, and
ultrastructural changes in NIH 3T3 cells when transformed cell lines were
injected into CB-17-scid mice. Native NIH 3T3 cells with a spindled cell
morphology were converted to polygonal cells with high nucleo-cytoplasmic ratios 
that continued to express abundant cytokeratin. Extracellular collagen deposition
was abolished, rough endoplasmic reticulum was markedly diminished, and
rudimentary cell-cell attachments appeared. Most strikingly, neurosecretory-type 
dense core granules like those seen in pPNET were now evident. This murine model,
created in mesenchyme-derived NIH 3T3 cells, demonstrated new characteristics of 
both neuroectodermal and epithelial differentiation and resembled small round
cell tumors microscopically.

PMID: 10616204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 9;18(52):7594-8.

Fusion of the RBP56 and CHN genes in extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas with
translocation t(9;17)(q22;q11).

Panagopoulos I(1), Mencinger M, Dietrich CU, Bjerkehagen B, Saeter G, Mertens F, 
Mandahl N, Heim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, S-221 85 Lund,
Sweden.

Although most extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMC) are cytogenetically
characterized by the translocation t(9;22)(q22;q12), another subset has recently 
been identified carrying a t(9;17)(q22;q11). Whereas the t(9;22) is known to
result in fusion of the CHN (TEC) gene from 9q22 with the EWS gene from 22q12,
creating a chimeric EWS/CHN, the genes involved in the t(9;17) of EMC are
unknown. We examined two EMC with t(9;17)(q22;q11) and found that the CHN gene
was recombined with the RBP56 gene from 17q11 to generate a chimeric RBP56/CHN.
RBP56 has not previously been shown to be involved in tumorigenesis but it
encodes a putative RNA-binding protein similar to the EWS and FUS (TLS) proteins 
known to play a pathogenetic role in several sarcomas. The presence of the
RBP56/CHN chimeric gene in EMC with t(9;17)(q22;q11) shows that the N-terminal
parts of EWS and RBP56 have similar oncogenic potential making them
pathogenetically equivalent in oncoproteins arising from fusions with certain
transcription factors.

PMID: 10602519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Dec 7;96(25):14300-5.

Modification of EWS/WT1 functional properties by phosphorylation.

Kim J(1), Lee JM, Branton PE, Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, McIntyre Medical Sciences
Building, 3655 Drummond Street, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

In many human cancers, tumor-specific chromosomal rearrangements are known to
create chimeric products with the ability to transform cells. The EWS/WT1 protein
is such a fusion product, resulting from a t(11;22) chromosomal translocation in 
desmoplastic small round cell tumors, where 265 aa from the EWS amino terminus
are fused to the DNA binding domain of the WT1 tumor suppressor gene. Herein, we 
find that EWS/WT1 is phosphorylated in vivo on serine and tyrosine residues and
that this affects DNA binding and homodimerization. We also show that EWS/WT1 can
interact with, and is a substrate for, modification on tyrosine residues by
c-Abl. Tyrosine phosphorylation of EWS/WT1 by c-Abl negatively regulates its DNA 
binding properties. These results indicate that the biological activity of
EWS/WT1 is closely linked to its phosphorylation status.

PMCID: PMC24431
PMID: 10588700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Nat Med. 1999 Dec;5(12):1331.

E1A and the Ewing tumor translocation.

Kovar H.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2000 Jan;6(1):4.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):1076-9.

PMID: 10581050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Nat Med. 1999 Dec;5(12):1331.

E1A and the Ewing tumor translocation.

Melot T, Delattre O.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2000 Jan;6(1):4.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):1076-9.

PMID: 10581049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Br J Cancer. 1999 Oct;81(4):586-91.

Esthesioneuroblastoma is not a member of the primitive peripheral neuroectodermal
tumour-Ewing's group.

Mezzelani A(1), Tornielli S, Minoletti F, Pierotti MA, Sozzi G, Pilotti S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology and Cytology, Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura
dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.

Esthesioneuroblastoma (ENB) is a rare, site-specific, locally aggressive neuronal
malignancy so far thought to belong to primitive peripheral neuroectodermal
tumour-Ewing's tumour (pPNETs-ETs). Its anatomical location, in addition to
morphologic, immunophenotypic and ultrastructural features, suggests its origin
in the neuronal or neuroendocrine cells of the olfactory epithelium. However, the
cytogenetic and molecular data currently available appear controversial on the
presence of the typical translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) and of trisomy 8,
chromosomal changes that characterize the tumours belonging to the pPNETs-ETs.
Herein we have analysed five ENB tumour specimens for trisomy 8 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH), for the presence of EWS gene rearrangements by
FISH, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and Southern blot analyses,
as well as for the expression of the Ewing sarcoma-associated MIC2 antigen by
immunohistochemistry. Neither EWS/FLI-I, EWS/ERG and EWS/FEV fusion genes nor
MIC2 expression were found in any tumour, whereas trisomy 8 was found in one case
only. Moreover, DNA from three cases analysed by Southern blot did not show EWS
gene rearrangements. Our results support the evidence that ENB is not a member of
the pPNETs-ETs.

PMCID: PMC2362903
PMID: 10574242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Hum Pathol. 1999 Nov;30(11):1356-60.

Absence of EWS/FLI1 fusion in olfactory neuroblastomas indicates these tumors do 
not belong to the Ewing's sarcoma family.

Kumar S(1), Perlman E, Pack S, Davis M, Zhang H, Meltzer P, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, and Cancer Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-1500, USA.

The balanced reciprocal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) is a specific molecular
marker for the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT). Based on the detection of
this translocation in some olfactory neuroblastomas (ONBs), it has been proposed 
that ONBs also belong to the ESFT. Others have challenged this hypothesis;
however, the rarity of ONBs, as well as the lack of molecular techniques that
work reliably on formalin fixed tissue, have precluded the molecular analysis of 
a significant number of cases. We evaluated the immunophenotypic and molecular
features of 17 paranasal small round neuroectodermal tumors using routinely fixed
tissue. Probes localizing to 22q12 (EWS) and 11q24 (FLI-1) were used in a
standard 2-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay to evaluate
EWS/FLI1 fusion on the der(22). Sixteen tumors were mic-2 negative, whereas 1
tumor was mic-2 positive, compatible with ONB and ESFT, respectively. Thirteen of
15 ONBs could be evaluated by FISH, and all 13 were negative for the EWS/FLI1
fusion. Distinct fusion signals were identified in the single paranasal ESFT. Our
findings indicate that ONBs lack the EWS/FLI1 fusion and are unrelated to the
ESFT; however, true ESFTs may rarely occur as primary sinonasal tumors.

PMID: 10571517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1999 Sep;8(3):120-4.

CD99 positivity and EWS-FLI1 gene rearrangement identify a breast tumor in a
60-year-old patient with attributes of the Ewing family of neoplasms.

Sezer O(1), Jugovic D, Blohmer JU, Turzynski A, Thiel G, Langelotz C, Possinger
K, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology/Hematology, Institute of Medical Genetics
Universitaetsklinikum Charité Medizinische Fakultaet der Humboldt-Universitaet
Berlin, Germany.

Rearrangements of the EWS gene with ETS transcription factor genes as a result of
chromosomal translocation and high expression levels of CD99MIC2 characterize the
Ewing family of tumors (EFT). This group of rather undifferentiated neoplasms
affects bone and soft tissue in children and young adults mostly between 5 and 30
years of age (median, 15 years). This study reports a case of a CD99MIC2 positive
small round cell tumor in the breast of a 60-year-old woman in whom a
t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal aberration was identified by cytogenetic analysis. 
Reverse transcriptase (RT)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by sequence
analysis revealed expression of a chimera transcript in which EWS exon 10 was
fused to FLI1 exon 6. Previously, this gene fusion has been reported to occur in 
approximately 3% of EFT. The specific gene rearrangement of EWS intron 10 was
confirmed on Southern blot of genomic DNA. This study further contributes to the 
growing list of unusual neoplasms in adults that carry genotypic and phenotypic
traits of the EFT.

PMID: 10565682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Clin Oncol. 1999 Jun;17(6):1809-14.

EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG gene fusions are associated with similar clinical phenotypes
in Ewing's sarcoma.

Ginsberg JP(1), de Alava E, Ladanyi M, Wexler LH, Kovar H, Paulussen M, Zoubek A,
Dockhorn-Dworniczak B, Juergens H, Wunder JS, Andrulis IL, Malik R, Sorensen PH, 
Womer RB, Barr FG.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, USA.

PURPOSE: There are a variety of solid tumors in which alternative chromosomal
translocations generate related fusion products. In alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma and
synovial sarcoma, these variant fusions have been found to have major clinical
significance. We investigated whether the two alternative gene fusion products,
EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG, define different clinical subsets within the Ewing's
sarcoma family of tumors.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We selected 30 cases of Ewing's sarcoma with the EWS-ERG
gene fusion and 106 cases with the EWS-FLI1 fusion. Clinical data were obtained
for each case and compared with the molecular diagnostic findings.
RESULTS: There were no significant clinical differences observed between the two 
groups in age of diagnosis, sex, metastasis at diagnosis, primary site,
event-free survival, or overall survival.
CONCLUSION: Differences in the C-terminal partner in the Ewing's sarcoma family
gene fusions are not associated with significant phenotypic differences.

PMID: 10561219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cancer Res. 1999 Oct 15;59(20):5064-7.

Fusion of the EWS-related gene TAF2N to TEC in extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma.

Sjögren H(1), Meis-Kindblom J, Kindblom LG, Aman P, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Göteborg University, Sweden.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMCs) are characterized by a recurrent
t(9;22)(q22;q12) translocation, resulting in the fusion of the EWS gene in 22q12 
and the TEC gene in 9q22. Here we report that a third member of the EWS, TLS/FUS 
gene family, TAF2N, can replace EWS as a fusion partner to TEC in EMC. Two
tumors, one with a novel t(9;17)(q22;q11) variant translocation and one with an
apparently normal karyotype, expressed TAF2N-TEC fusion transcripts. In both
cases, the chimeric transcripts were shown to contain exon 6 of TAF2N fused to
the entire coding region of TEC. This transcript is structurally and functionally
very similar to the EWS-TEC fusions. The exchange of the EWS NH2-terminal part
with the TAF2N NH2-terminal part in EMC further underscores the oncogenic
potential of these protein domains as partners in fusion genes.

PMID: 10537274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5592-7.

Transforming activity of EWS/FLI is not strictly dependent upon DNA-binding
activity.

Jaishankar S(1), Zhang J, Roussel MF, Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, TN 38105, USA.

In approximately 85% of Ewing sarcomas, chromosomal translocations give rise to
the chimeric gene EWS/FLI, encoding the N-terminus of the RNA binding protein EWS
fused to the DNA-binding domain of the ETS protein FLI-1. EWS/FLI is a stronger
transcriptional activator than wild-type FLI-1, although both proteins bind to
the same DNA sequences in vitro. In addition, EWS/FLI, but not FLI-1, is a
transforming oncogene in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. EWS/FLI is thought to transform
through its ability to deregulate the expression of target genes. We introduced
several point mutations into the ETS domain of EWS/FLI that abolished DNA-binding
activity. Although two of these mutations disrupted the transforming activity of 
EWS/FLI, one mutated protein containing a substitution of isoleucine 347 with
glutamic acid (I347E) retained diminished transforming activity. In addition,
EWS/FLI I347E did not activate expression of the endogenous EWS/FLI target gene
manic fringe (MFNG). These studies demonstrate that a portion of the oncogenic
activity of EWS/FLI is independent of FLI DNA-binding activity.

PMID: 10523836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5506-13.

Divergent Ewing's sarcoma EWS/ETS fusions confer a common tumorigenic phenotype
on NIH3T3 cells.

Thompson AD(1), Teitell MA, Arvand A, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Labs, University of 
California at Los Angeles, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas express chimeric transcription factors resulting from a fusion
of the amino terminus of the EWS gene to the carboxyl terminus of one of five ETS
proteins. While the majority of tumors express EWS/FLI1 fusions, some Ewing's
tumors contain variant chimeras such as EWS/ETV1 that have divergent ETS
DNA-binding domains. In spite of their structural differences, both EWS/ETS
fusions up regulate EAT-2, a previously described EWS/FLI1 target gene. In
contrast to EWS/FLI1, NIH3T3 cells expressing EWS/ETV1 cannot form colonies in
soft agar though coexpression of a dominant negative truncated ETV1 construct
attenuates EWS/FLI1 mediated anchorage independent growth. When EWS/ETV1 or
EWS/FLI1 expressing NIH3T3 cells are injected into SCID mice, tumors form more
often and faster than with NIH-3T3 cells with empty vector controls. The
tumorigenic potency of each EWS/ETS fusion is linked to its C-terminal structure,
with the FLI1 C-terminus confering a greater tumorigenic potential than the
corresponding ETV1 domain. The resulting EWS/ETV1 and EWS/FLI1 tumors closely
resemble each other at both a macroscopic and a microscopic level. These tumors
differ greatly from tumors formed by NIH3T3 cells expressing activated RAS. These
data indicate that in spite of their structural differences, EWS/ETV1 and
EWS/FLI1 promote oncogenesis via similar biologic pathways.

PMID: 10523827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Nov;19(11):7639-50.

Dual transforming activities of the FUS (TLS)-ERG leukemia fusion protein
conferred by two N-terminal domains of FUS (TLS).

Ichikawa H(1), Shimizu K, Katsu R, Ohki M.

Author information: 
(1)Radiobiology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. hichikaw@ncc.go.jp

The FUS (TLS)-ERG chimeric protein associated with t(16;21)(p11;q22) acute
myeloid leukemia is structurally similar to the Ewing's sarcoma chimeric
transcription factor EWS-ERG. We found that both FUS-ERG and EWS-ERG could induce
anchorage-independent proliferation of the mouse fibroblast cell line NIH 3T3.
However, only FUS-ERG was able to inhibit the differentiation into neutrophils of
a mouse myeloid precursor cell line L-G and induce its granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor-dependent growth. We constructed several deletion
mutants of FUS-ERG lacking a part of the N-terminal FUS region. A deletion mutant
lacking the region between amino acids 1 and 173 (exons 1 to 5) lost the NIH
3T3-transforming activity but retained the L-G-transforming activity. On the
other hand, a mutant lacking the region between amino acids 174 and 265 (exons 6 
and 7) lost the L-G-transforming activity but retained the NIH 3T3-transforming
activity. These results indicate that the N-terminal region of FUS contains two
independent functional domains required for the NIH 3T3 and L-G transformation,
which we named TR1 and TR2, respectively. Although EWS intrinsically possessed
the TR2 domain, the EWS-ERG construct employed lacked the EWS sequence containing
this domain. Since the TR2 domain is always found in chimeric proteins identified
from t(16;21) leukemia patients but not in chimeric proteins from Ewing's sarcoma
patients, it seems that the TR2 function is required only for the leukemogenic
potential. In addition, we identified three cellular genes whose expression was
altered by ectopic expression of FUS-ERG and found that these are regulated in
either a TR1-dependent or a TR2-dependent manner. These results suggest that
FUS-ERG may activate two independent oncogenic pathways during the leukemogenic
process by modulating the expression of two different groups of genes
simultaneously.

PMCID: PMC84797
PMID: 10523652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Nat Genet. 1999 Oct;23(2):222-7.

Repression of the gene encoding the TGF-beta type II receptor is a major target
of the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein.

Hahm KB(1), Cho K, Lee C, Im YH, Chang J, Choi SG, Sorensen PH, Thiele CJ, Kim
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation, DBS, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-5055, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1999 Dec;23(4):481.

Chromosomal translocations resulting in the expression of chimaeric transcription
factors are frequently observed in tumour cells, and have been suggested to be a 
common mechanism in human carcinogenesis. Ewing sarcoma and related peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumours share recurrent translocations that fuse the
gene EWSR1 (formerly EWS) from 22q-12 to FLI1 and genes encoding other ETS
transcription factors (which bind DNA through the conserved ETS domain). It has
been shown that transduction of the gene EWSR1-FLI1 (encoding EWS-FLI1 protein)
can transform NIH3T3 cells, and that mutants containing a deletion in either the 
EWS domain or the DNA-binding domain in FLI1 lose this ability. This indicates
that the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein may act as an aberrant transcription factor, but
the exact mechanism of oncogenesis remains unknown. Because ETS transcription
factors regulate expression of TGFBR2 (encoding the TGF-beta type II receptor,
TGF-beta RII; Refs 9,14), a putative tumour suppressor gene, we hypothesized that
TGFBR2 may be a target of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. We show here that Ewing
sarcoma [corrected] (ES) cell lines with the EWSR1-FLI1 fusion have reduced
TGF-beta sensitivity, and that fusion-positive ES cells and primary tumours both 
express low or undetectable levels of TGFBR2 mRNA and protein product.
Co-transfection of FLI1 and the TGFBR2 promoter induces promoter activity,
whereas EWSR1-FLI1 leads to suppression of TGFBR2 promoter activity and
FLI1-induced promoter activity. Introduction of EWSR1-FLI1 into cells lacking the
EWSR1-FLI1 fusion suppresses TGF-beta RII expression, whereas antisense to
EWSR1-FLI1 in ES cell lines positive for this gene fusion restores TGF-beta RII
expression. Furthermore, introduction of normal TGF-beta RII into ES cell lines
restores TGF-beta sensitivity and blocks tumorigenicity. Our results implicate
TGF-beta RII as a direct target of EWS-FLI1.

PMID: 10508522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Genomics. 1999 Sep 15;60(3):371-4.

Cryptic exons as a source of increased diversity of Ewing tumor-associated
EWS-FLI1 chimeric products.

Kovar H(1), Jugovic D, Melot T, Zoubek A, Lenoir G, Fink FM, Philip I, Turc-Carel
C, Thomas G, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria. 
kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

In the Ewing family of tumors (EFT), the EWS gene is rearranged with members of
the ets oncogene family. Variability in genomic breakpoint locations is the
source of significant heterogeneity in fusion product structure. As a consequence
of variably included exon sequences from the two partner genes, a variable amount
of additional peptide sequence is inserted in between the minimal transforming
domains. Some of this molecular diversity has recently been correlated with
disparate clinical outcome. Here we report on cryptic exons found in the chimeric
RNA of three EFT with different EWS-FLI1 fusions. In two tumors, the emergence of
a cryptic exon from FLI1 intron 5 in the chimeric RNA was apparently unrelated to
the genomic rearrangement that occurred in FLI1 introns 4 and 5, respectively. In
one case, a novel exon was generated through the creation of an artificial splice
acceptor site in FLI1 intron 6 by the genomic rearrangement that occurred in EWS 
intron 8. These results further extend the spectrum of molecular diversity in
EFT.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10493837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Hum Pathol. 1999 Sep;30(9):1058-64.

Relation of neurological marker expression and EWS gene fusion types in
MIC2/CD99-positive tumors of the Ewing family.

Amann G(1), Zoubek A, Salzer-Kuntschik M, Windhager R, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, University of Vienna, St Anna Children's
Hospital, Austria.

The Ewing family of tumors (EFT) is characterized by high MIC2/CD99 expression
and specific EWS/ETS gene rearrangements, resulting in different chimeric
transcripts. Further division into peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
and Ewing's sarcoma is still debated and, in the absence of distinct
morphological parameters, has been based on the reactivity with neuroglial
markers (NgM). We investigated 44 EFT in terms of a possible correlation between 
the type of EWS chimeric transcripts and reactivity with the following NgM:
polyclonal and monoclonal neuron-specific enolase (NSE), S-100, chromogranin A,
synaptophysin, Leu-7, glial fibrillary acid protein, and neurofilament. EWS/Fli1 
fusion type 1 was detected in 30 of 44 and type 2 in 11 of 44 tumors. Three
tumors, presenting with an uncommon morphology, carried rare chimeric
transcripts. Our results indicate an association of lack of NgM staining with
type 1 EWS/Fli1 translocations, found in 16 of 18 tumors with no NgM expression
as detectable by any of the antibodies we applied. Using the monoclonal NSE
antibody, 21 of 26 tumors without NgM staining expressed type 1 EWS/FLI1chimeric 
RNA, whereas in the groups with 1 or more and 2 or more NgM, only 9 of 17 and 1
of 5 tumors, respectively, carried type 1 EWS/Fli1 fusion transcripts. Despite
this association of increased NgM expression with a non-type 1 EWS/Fli1 gene
fusion, a strict correlation between the extent of NgM expression and certain EWS
fusion types was not evident. This fortifies the concept to consider EFT as a
spectrum of tumors and suggests the type of EWS fusion transcripts as one, but
not the only parameter influencing the extent of differentiation.

PMID: 10492040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Sep;113(2):188-90.

Clinical and molecular features of Ewing sarcoma in a patient with triple-X
syndrome.

Patiño-García A(1), López de Mesa R, de Alava E, Sierrasesúmaga L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pediatrics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

A case of Ewing sarcoma in a 16-year-old girl with 47 XXXc karyotype is reported.

PMID: 10484990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999 Sep;24(5):527-33.

RT-PCR evaluation of peripheral blood, bone marrow and peripheral blood stem
cells in children and adolescents undergoing VACIME chemotherapy for Ewing's
sarcoma and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.

Thomson B(1), Hawkins D, Felgenhauer J, Radich J.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA.

Peripheral blood stem cell support allows dose intensification of multiple cycle 
chemotherapy for metastatic tumors, including pediatric sarcomas. The VACIME
protocol (vincristine, adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, mesna and
etoposide) utilizes peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) collected following the
treatment cycle as support for subsequent dose- and time-intensive chemotherapy. 
A critical assumption is that PBSC collected in this manner will be purged of
residual tumor cells in vivo. We tested this assumption using sensitive
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to assess the presence
of the characteristic translocations of the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors
(ESFT) and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS), t(11;22), and t(2;13), respectively.
We used RT-PCR to evaluate 122 samples of peripheral blood (PB), bone marrow (BM)
and PBSC collected from 12 pediatric patients with metastatic ESFT and ARMS. The 
samples included pre-therapy BM and PB, as well as BM, PB, and PBSC collections
at various times in the VACIME treatment course. Molecular evidence of tumor
contamination was detected in 1/40 PBSC collections from 12 patients. In all
patients, we documented clearance of disease by RT-PCR in peripheral blood and
bone marrow by week 9 of the VACIME protocol. In vivo purging in combination with
the intensive VACIME regime appears to be effective in removing tumor cells from 
PBSC, bone marrow, and peripheral blood as detected by RT-PCR.

PMID: 10482938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):1076-9.

An association between viral genes and human oncogenic alterations: the
adenovirus E1A induces the Ewing tumor fusion transcript EWS-FLI1.

Sanchez-Prieto R(1), de Alava E, Palomino T, Guinea J, Fernandez V, Cebrian S,
LLeonart M, Cabello P, Martin P, San Roman C, Bornstein R, Pardo J, Martinez A,
Diaz-Espada F, Barrios Y, Ramon y Cajal S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clinica Puerta de Hierro, San Martin de Porres 4,
28035 Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):991-2.
    Nat Med. 1999 Dec;5(12):1331.
    Nat Med. 1999 Dec;5(12):1331.
    Nat Med. 2000 Jan;6(1):4.

Malignant transformation of human cells requires the accumulation of multiple
genetic alterations, such as the activation of oncogenes and loss of function of 
tumor suppressor genes or those related to genomic instability. Among the genetic
alterations most frequently found in human tumors are chromosomal translocations 
that may result in the expression of chimeric products with transforming
capability or are able to change the expression of oncogenes. We show here that
the adenovirus early region 1A (E1A) gene can induce a specific human fusion
transcript (EWS-FLI1) that is characteristic of Ewing tumors. This fusion
transcript was detected by RT-PCR in normal human fibroblasts and keratinocytes
after expression of the adenovirus E1A gene, as well as in human cell lines
immortalized by adenoviruses. Cloning and sequencing of the RT-PCR product showed
fusion points between EWS and FLI1 cDNA identical to those detected in Ewing
tumors. In addition, we detected a chimeric protein by western blot analysis and 
immunoprecipitation and a t(11,22) by fluorescent in situ hybridization. This
association between a single viral gene and a specific human fusion transcript
indicates a direct link between viral genes and chromosome translocations, one of
the hallmarks of many human tumors.

PMID: 10470089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):991-2.

Induction of an oncogenic fusion protein by a viral gene--a new chapter in an old
story.

Kirn D, Hermiston T.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):1076-9.

PMID: 10470071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999 Aug;24(4):405-9.

Low incidence of molecular evidence for tumour in PBPC harvests from patients
with high risk Ewing tumours.

Fischmeister G(1), Zoubek A, Jugovic D, Witt V, Ladenstein R, Fritsch G, Höcker
P, Gadner H, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)St Anna Children's Hospital and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Vienna, 
Austria.

Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was applied to evaluate 
the frequency of tumour cells in PBPC products from 15 high risk Ewing tumour
(ET) patients who were treated according to EICESS 92 with high-dose chemotherapy
(HDC) and stem cell rescue. Initial tumour cell contamination of the bone marrow 
(BM) detected by light microscopy was found in five and by RT-PCR in eight cases.
RT-PCR was performed on each PBPC sample repeatedly at a sensitivity comparable
to 20-100 highly EWS-Fli1 expressing tumour cells per 10 ml of fresh blood.
Irrespective of the extent of BM involvement at diagnosis, all BM samples
obtained before harvest were RT-PCR negative. Among 12 of 35 analysed apheresis
products with single positive RT-PCR results only one sample tested reproducibly 
positive for tumour cell contamination in independent determinations. These
preliminary data suggest that tumour cell contamination of PBPC is rarely found
in patients with ET.

PMID: 10467330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Int J Cancer. 1999 Sep 24;83(1):30-3.

Identification of genes differentially expressed in TLS-CHOP carrying myxoid
liposarcomas.

Thelin-Järnum S(1), Lassen C, Panagopoulos I, Mandahl N, Aman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

Myxoid liposarcomas (MLS) carry a t(12;16) or, more rarely, a t(12;22) resulting 
in fusion of the transcription factor gene CHOP on chromosome 12 with TLS/FUS on 
chromosome 16 or EWS on chromosome 22. The chimeric TLS-CHOP or EWS-CHOP proteins
most probably function as abnormal transcription factors, causing transcriptional
de-regulation of several target genes and relaxation of functions critical for
growth and differentiation control. A PCR-based subtractive hybridization
technique was used to identify genes that are differentially expressed in
TLS-CHOP-carrying MLS but not in normal fat tissue. Six
myxoid-liposarcoma-associated transcripts, MLAT, were isolated. The genes
identified as MLAT can be divided into 2 groups. MLAT1, 2 and 6 show high
similarity to glia-derived nexin, neuronatin and the RET oncogene, respectively, 
all normally involved in development of tissues of neural origin. MLAT3 to MLAT5 
represent new genes.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10449603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. APMIS. 1999 Jun;107(6):577-84.

Molecular detection of EWS-FLI1 chimeric transcripts in Ewing family tumors by
nested reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction: application to archival
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues.

Hisaoka M(1), Tsuji S, Morimitsu Y, Hashimoto H, Shimajiri S, Komiya S, Ushijima 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Chromosomal translocations generating unique chimeric genes are highly
characteristic of specific sarcomas, and their use as diagnostic markers has been
suggested. From a diagnostic pathologic point of view, detection of such
cytogenetic or molecular aberrations applicable to routinely processed archival
tissue specimens is considered a powerful tool for tumor diagnosis. To assess the
feasibility and reliability of the molecular detection of the transcript
originating from the chimeric gene in paraffin-embedded tumor specimens, we
performed a nested reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-based
assay to detect the EWS-FLI1 chimeric message in a series of Ewing family tumors.
Of 24 paraffin-embedded tumor specimens from 23 cases analyzed, the chimeric
message was detectable in 20 (83%) specimens from 20 cases (87%) by this nested
RT-PCR assay, whereas none of 7 small round cell tumors not from this family (3
alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, 2 neuroblastomas, 2 malignant lymphomas) showed
detectable chimeric messages. In the sequence analysis of the PCR products, the
amplified chimeric messages contained the junctions between exon 7 of the EWS
gene and any one of exons 5, 6 and 8 of the FLI1 gene. The detection process was 
usually completed within 3 days, except for the subseqent sequence analysis. Our 
results endorse the use of this molecular assay as an ancillary technique in the 
diagnosis of Ewing family tumors using paraffin-embedded material.

PMID: 10379685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Curr Biol. 1999 May 6;9(9):485-8.

Tyrosine kinase Pyk2 mediates G-protein-coupled receptor regulation of the Ewing 
sarcoma RNA-binding protein EWS.

Felsch JS(1), Lane WS, Peralta EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02138, USA. felsch@fas. harvard.edu.

Ewing family tumors result from the effects of chromosomal translocations that
fuse the Ewing sarcoma (EWS) gene to various genes encoding transcription
factors. The resulting chimeric EWS fusion proteins are transcriptional
activators with transforming potential that have received much study. By
contrast, the cellular function of somatic EWS remains obscure. EWS belongs to a 
family of RNA-binding proteins thought to play role in RNA synthesis or
processing. Here, we show that EWS interacts with Pyk2, a protein tyrosine kinase
implicated in a variety of signal transduction processes. G-protein-coupled
receptor signaling and other stimuli of Pyk2 kinase activity significantly block 
the interaction between EWS and Pyk2. Furthermore, as assessed by sucrose
gradient centrifugation, EWS partitions with dense ribosome-containing fractions 
in a manner that is enhanced by signaling from the G-protein-coupled m1
muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR). We conclude that extranuclear EWS is a
previously unrecognized target of G-protein-coupled receptor regulation.

PMID: 10322114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 May;25(1):6-15.

Molecular characterization of the genomic breakpoint junction in a t(11;22)
translocation in Ewing sarcoma.

Obata K(1), Hiraga H, Nojima T, Yoshida MC, Abe S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cytogenetics, Division of Bioscience, Graduate School of
Environmental Earth Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based nucleotide sequence analysis was performed 
in 12 cases of Ewing sarcoma on the cDNA and/or genomic DNA breakpoint regions of
a t(11;22)(q24;q12), which joins the EWS gene located on chromosome 22 with the
FLI1 gene located on chromosome 11, in order to understand the molecular
mechanism of this translocation. Reverse transcriptase-PCR on total tumor cell
RNA from the examined cases showed five types of EWS-FLI1 chimeric product,
resulting from various junctions between EWS exon 7 or 10 with FLI1 exon 5, 6, or
8. Sequencing of the genomic fusion junctions of EWS-FLI1 in seven cases showing 
three types of the chimeric cDNA products revealed that most of the breakpoint
junctions shared common nucleotide(s) from both genes, and that the breakpoints
in EWS introns 7 and 10 clustered within 100 bp and 300 bp, respectively. All the
junctions were found to be flanked by various oligomers, among which a consensus 
sequence, 5'-AGAAAARDRR-3', was found near the breakpoints of both genes in four 
cases, suggesting that these oligomers may have a functional significance in the 
genesis of t(11;22). In addition to these oligomers, sequences highly homologous 
to Alu repeats and/or eukaryotic topoisomerase II cleavage sites were located
near, or flanked, or even encompassed, the breakpoints in most of the cases
examined. Thus, these sequences may also mediate DNA double-strand breakage and
rejoining to generate the t(11;22). Genomic sequence analysis of both EWS-FLI1
and FLI1-EWS chimeric genes in three of the seven cases demonstrated a deletion
and duplication of both EWS and FLI1 sequences in two cases and no gain or loss
in one case. The present findings suggest that multiple mechanisms may be
operative for the break and rejoining of the fragments of chromosomes 11 and 22
in the genesis of t(11;22), and that some of these translocations are asymmetric 
at the molecular level.

PMID: 10221334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Pathol. 1998 Dec;186(4):434-7.

A novel EWS-ERG rearrangement generating two hybrid mRNAs in a peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumour (pPNET) with a t(15;22) translocation.

Minoletti F(1), Sozzi G, Tornielli S, Pilotti S, Azzarelli A, Pierotti MA, Radice
P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Oncology A, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy.

The occurrence of a t(15;22) translocation in a peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumour (pPNET) has been previously reported. Molecular
examination revealed the presence in tumour mRNA of two hybrid transcripts
containing the 5' portion of the EWS gene fused to the 3' portion of the ERG
gene. Sequence analyses indicated that both aberrant mRNAs most likely originated
from the same rearrangement, which produced different hybrid isoforms due to the 
presence of an alternatively spliced exon in the ERG gene. To the authors'
knowledge, this is the first report of the detection of two hybrid EWS-ERG mRNAs 
within the same tumour.

PMID: 10209495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Cancer Res. 1999 Apr 1;59(7):1428-32.

Differential transactivation by alternative EWS-FLI1 fusion proteins correlates
with clinical heterogeneity in Ewing's sarcoma.

Lin PP(1), Brody RI, Hamelin AC, Bradner JE, Healey JH, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is present in up to 95% of cases of Ewing's
sarcoma and results in the formation of an EWS-FLI1 fusion gene which encodes a
chimeric transcription factor. The proximate role of EWS-FLI1 in the pathogenesis
of Ewing's sarcoma is thought to involve the activation of as yet largely unknown
target genes. Many alternative forms of EWS-FLI1 exist because of variations in
the locations of the EWS and FLI1 genomic breakpoints. The most common form,
designated "type 1," consists of the first seven exons of EWS joined to exons 6-9
of FLI1 and accounts for approximately 60% of cases. The "type 2" EWS-FLI1 fusion
also includes FLI1 exon 5 and is present in another 25%. We and others have
observed previously that the type 1 fusion is associated with a significantly
better prognosis than the other fusion types. Because EWS-FLI1 is an aberrant
transcription factor, we investigated whether these differences in clinical
behavior may be correlated to functional differences by comparing transactivation
by the type 1 EWS-FLI1 with other types in both heterologous cells (HeLa, NIH3T3)
and homologous cells (Ewing's sarcoma cell lines). In a panel of seven Ewing's
sarcoma cell lines, we found transactivation of a transiently transfected
FLI1-responsive reporter construct to be significantly lower in cell lines with
the type 1 fusion than in cell lines with the type 2 fusion (P = 0.003).
Cotransfection of the same reporter construct with each of a series of seven
EWS-FLI1 expression constructs (corresponding to the two major fusion types and
five less common types) also showed that type 1 EWS-FLI1 was a significantly
weaker transactivator than the type 2 product in both HeLa and NIH3T3 cells (P = 
0.003, and P = 0.033, respectively). Electromobility shift assays showed
equivalent binding of the type 1 and type 2 EWS-FLI1 to the consensus
FLI1-responsive binding site, indicating that differences in transactivation were
not due simply to differences in DNA binding affinity. The finding that the type 
1 EWS-FLI1 fusion, associated with less aggressive clinical behavior, encodes a
less active chimeric transcription factor may provide the basis for a molecular
explanation of clinical heterogeneity in Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 10197607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Hum Pathol. 1999 Mar;30(3):352-5.

Translocation (11;22)(q24;q12) in a small cell tumor of the thigh in a 2-year-old
boy: immunohistology, cytogenetics, molecular genetics, and review of the
literature.

Mastik MF(1), Molenaar WM, Plaat BE, de Graaf SS, Hogendoorn PC, van der Hout AH,
van den Berg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

A case of a 2-year-old boy with a palpable mass in the left thigh is presented.
Incisional biopsy was performed and subsequent histopathological examination
revealed an infiltrative tumor composed of relatively large cells. The tumor
cells were immunoreactive for vimentin and keratin, but not for desmin or smooth 
muscle actin. Cytogenetic analysis showed a 46,XY,t(11;22)(q24;q12) karyotype.
The translocation (11;22)(q24;q12) is said to be characteristic for the family of
Ewing's sarcoma and related tumors. As a result of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) the EWS 
gene on chromosome 22q12 joins the 3' part of FLI-1 gene on chromosome 11q24,
which encodes a member of the ets family of transcriptional regulators. Using
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) a corresponding
EWS-FLI-1 fusion product was detected. Additional immunohistological staining for
p30/p32MIC2, which is suggestive, but not specific for Ewing's sarcoma, appeared 
to be weakly positive. In the current case a diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma was
considered unlikely, because of the location of the tumor and the
immunohistological profile. Nevertheless it was decided to treat the patient
according to a Ewing's sarcoma protocol based on the genotype of the tumor. The
findings were compared with other extraosseous pediatric small cell tumors
showing the t(11;22)(q24;q12) described in the literature.

PMID: 10088556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Hum Pathol. 1999 Mar;30(3):324-30.

Detection of EWS-FLI-1 fusion in Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor by fluorescence in situ hybridization using formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded tissue.

Kumar S(1), Pack S, Kumar D, Walker R, Quezado M, Zhuang Z, Meltzer P, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, and Cancer Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-1500, USA.

The balanced translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) is specific for the Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/PNETs) and results in the
EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript, which can be detected by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Recent studies also have used fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) to show the translocation; however, most of these have 
been performed on cell lines or touch preparations and short-term cultures of
tumors. Moreover, the existing probes generally have shown only the break in the 
specific chromosomes rather than the translocation itself. We describe our
findings with a new set of probes that localize to 22q12 (EWS) and 11q24 (FLI-1) 
and directly show the translocation as juxtaposed red-green signals on der(22) in
nuclei extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffm-embedded tissues. After
establishing the specificity of the probes (on metaphase spreads and interphase
nuclei in two translocation-positive cell lines and normal peripheral blood
lymphocytes), we evaluated 11 ES/PNETs and 10 other tumors (four alveolar
rhabdomyosarcomas, three neuroblastomas, two lymphomas, one extramedullary
myeloid tumor) using a two-color FISH assay. All 11 ES/PNETs showed fusion
signals in 20% to 80% of evaluable nuclei. In two lymphoma cases, random
overlapping signals were present in 2% and 4% of nuclei, whereas the remaining
eight tumors were negative. The presence of t(11;22) was confirmed by RT-PCR in
10 of 11 ES/PNETs. We conclude that FISH analysis with this newly designed probe 
pair is a specific and sensitive method of detecting t(11;22) on routinely
processed tissue and can be useful in the differential diagnosis of ES/PNETs from
other small round blue cell tumors when only fixed tissue is available.

PMID: 10088552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Am J Ophthalmol. 1999 Feb;127(2):226-8.

Translocation of chromosomes 11 and 22 in choroidal metastatic Ewing sarcoma
detected by fluorescent in situ hybridization.

Chan CC(1), Pack S, Pak E, Tsogos M, Zhuang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1857, USA. ccc@helix.nih.gov

PURPOSE: To describe a patient with metastasis of Ewing sarcoma to the choroid
and the molecular genetics of the tumor.
METHODS: A 26-year-old woman with metastatic Ewing sarcoma developed large
choroidal masses in the left eye and died 2 months later. Autopsy of the eyes was
performed. Dual-color fluorescent in situ hybridization was used to detect
genetic alteration in the ocular tumor with EWS and FLI-1 probes.
RESULTS: Histopathology confirmed choroidal metastatic Ewing sarcoma. Molecular
analysis showed chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) or EWS/FLI-1
rearrangement in the malignant cells of the eye.
CONCLUSIONS: Ewing sarcoma can rarely metastasize to the uvea. Molecular
detection of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation in Ewing sarcoma is valuable in 
the differential diagnosis of small round cell tumors.

PMID: 10030577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Am J Surg Pathol. 1999 Feb;23(2):159-65.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing's sarcoma: genomic confirmation, phenotypic drift.

Bridge JA(1), Fidler ME, Neff JR, Degenhardt J, Wang M, Walker C, Dorfman HD,
Baker KS, Seemayer TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha 68198-5440, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2000 Feb;24(2):322-3.

Ewing's sarcoma, a highly malignant neoplasm, is characterized by an 11;22
translocation [t(11;22) (q24;q12)], resulting in the fusion of genes FLII and
EWS. Adamantinoma of extragnathic bones, a low-grade malignant neoplasm with
epithelial features, is not typically considered in the differential diagnosis of
Ewing's sarcoma. In this study, three osseous Ewing's sarcomas with histological,
immunohistochemical, or ultrastructural epithelial features were subjected to
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and sequencing studies for the
Ewing's sarcoma molecular rearrangement. (Two of the three cases were originally 
described as adamantinomas or nontypical Ewing's sarcoma before the availability 
of genetic characterization.) In addition, traditional cytogenetic analysis and a
unique combined interphase molecular cytogenetic/ immunocytochemical approach
with bicolor 11;22 translocation breakpoint flanking probes (cosmids) and
pancytokeratin antibodies were performed on one neoplasm. At(11;22) (q24;q12) was
found in one neoplasm and a type II EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript was detected in
all three neoplasms. The combined genetic/immunocytochemical approach revealed
the presence of the 11 ;22 translocation in the nuclei of cytokeratin
immunoreactive cells. These genotypic and phenotypic findings delineate a novel
Ewing's sarcoma histologic variant, "adamantinoma-like Ewing's sarcoma."

PMID: 9989842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Jan 1;108(1):19-25.

A combined cytogenetic and molecular approach to diagnosis in a case of
desmoplastic small round cell tumor with a complex translocation (11;22;21).

Roberts P(1), Burchill SA, Beddow RA, Wheeldon J, Cullinane C, Lewis IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Cytogenetics Unit, St. James's University Hospital, Leeds, UK.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) has recently been described as a
discrete tumor entity. It is distinguished from other small round cell tumors by 
its prominent desmoplastic quality, its preponderance in adolescent males, its
almost exclusive intraabdominal location, a multi-immunophenotypic profile, and
its aggressive nature. Diagnosis on histology alone is not always unequivocal. A 
recurrent t(11;22)(p13;q12) translocation has recently been described in this
tumor, and a chimeric RNA fusion product formed from the WT1 and EWS genes is
detectable by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). We
describe the use of a multi-faceted approach using conventional G-banding,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and RT-PCR to assist the diagnosis of a
case of DSRCT with a complex variant t(11;22;21)(p13;q12;q22.1) translocation and
demonstrate the value of a combined approach to genetic investigation of solid
tumors.

PMID: 9973919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Hum Pathol. 1999 Jan;30(1):78-80.

Sensitive detection of rare Ewing's sarcoma cells in peripheral blood by reverse 
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.

Fidelia-Lambert MN(1), Zhuang Z, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Disseminated disease is very important in the clinical assessment of pediatric
sarcomas. Several reports suggest that reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) holds great promise in the early staging of cancer patients in 
general. However, the complexities of these protocols hamper adequate
standardization, and their application as routine diagnostic tools has been
difficult. The aim of this study is to assess the actual minimal number of tumor 
cells that may be detected by RT-PCR in a blood sample. Specific tumor cell
dilutions from a Ewing's sarcoma cell line reconstituted in peripheral blood from
healthy individuals were "ficolled" and submitted to RNA extraction for cDNA
preparation and PCR amplification of the t(11-22) (q24;q12) fusion transcript.
After PCR amplification, we were able to detect the EWS/FI-1 chimeric gene
product at a dilution of 10 tumor cells per 1 or 2 mL of blood. Our simple method
supports a role for routine clinical use of RT-PCR in the detection of
circulating Ewing's sarcoma cells.

PMID: 9923931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Jan 10;246(1):38-46.

Regulatory role of mevalonate and N-linked glycosylation in proliferation and
expression of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein in Ewing's sarcoma cells.

Wang M(1), Xie Y, Girnita L, Nilsson G, Dricu A, Wejde J, Larsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Tumor Pathology, CCK, R8:04, Karolinska Hospital,
Stockholm, S-171 76, Sweden.

The Ewing's sarcoma cell line RD-ES, which carries the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene,
responded to the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase
inhibitor lovastatin with growth arrest. Replenishment of mevalonate (MVA) to the
arrested cells restored cell growth. However, if tunicamycin (TM), which is an
inhibitor of N-linked glycosylation, was present together with MVA the cells
remained arrested, indicating that N-linked glycosylation is of importance for
growth of Ewing's sarcoma cells. Inhibition of the biosynthesis of EWS/FLI-1
fusion protein by treatment with antisense oligonucleotides also led to growth
arrest, suggesting that this protein is of importance for cell growth. We
investigated whether MVA synthesis and N-linked glycosylation could be involved
in regulation of the expression of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein, which in fact
contains four potential sites for N-linked glycosylation. We found that
inhibition of both HMG-CoA reductase and N-linked glycosylation drastically
decreased the expression of the fusion protein, which mainly appears in the cell 
nuclei. There was no significant difference in the inhibitory effect on the
fusion protein between the cytoplasm and the cell nuclei, indicating that the
transport of the fusion protein to the cell nucleus is not affected. The fusion
protein did not exhibit any gel electrophoretic mobility shift after treatment of
the cells with lovastatin or TM, and it did not incorporate [3H]glucosamine.
Therefore we can conclude that the fusion protein is not a glycoprotein. The
decreased expression of the fusion protein following lovastatin or TM treatment
was found to be due to a lowered stability of de novo-synthesized fusion protein.
The down-regulation of the fusion protein was correlated to growth arrest.
Furthermore, the kinetics between the expression of EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein and 
the initiation of DNA synthesis in MVA-stimulated cells were similar. Taken
together, our data suggest that the regulatory role of N-linked glycosylation in 
the expression of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein is important for growth of Ewing's
sarcoma cells. Possible mechanisms underlying TM-induced decrease in EWS/FLI-1
expression may involve the breaking of growth factor receptor pathways.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;82(3-4):278-83.

The genomic breakpoint and chimeric transcripts in the EWSR1-ETV4/E1AF gene
fusion in Ewing sarcoma.

Ishida S(1), Yoshida K, Kaneko Y, Tanaka Y, Sasaki Y, Urano F, Umezawa A, Hata J,
Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, School of
Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo (Japan).

Chromosome translocation creates a fusion between the EWSR1 gene and an ETS
family gene. The fusion between these two genes is a characteristic feature of
Ewing sarcoma. We previously identified a fourth translocation,
t(17;22)(q12;q12), in genomic DNA isolated from cells of patients affected with
Ewing sarcoma. The discovery of this translocation suggested that there might be 
a novel EWSR1-ETV4 fusion gene. In the present study, we determined the genomic
breakpoint and characterized the chimeric transcript of the EWSR1-ETV4 fusion
gene in two t(17;22) Ewing sarcomas. Reverse transcriptase-PCR assay showed an
in-frame fusion between the 5'-terminal region of EWSR1 and the 3' end of ETV4
(alias E1AF, PEA3); the chimeric transcript could thus serve as a template for
expression of a protein composed of the N-terminal portion of EWSR1 fused to the 
DNA-binding domain of ETV4. Long PCR and sequence analysis of genomic DNA
revealed that either exon 8 or intron 7 of EWSR1 is fused to the same intron of
ETV4 in both tumors. Several palindromic oligomer sequences were found close to
the breakpoints in both genes. The 159-bp Alu-like sequence was repeated in the
breakpoint region of the ETV4 gene. These observations suggest a mechanism of
EWSR1-ETV4 gene fusion.

PMID: 9858836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1998 Jun;7(3):152-7.

Ewing family tumors: potential prognostic value of reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction detection of minimal residual disease in peripheral
blood samples.

de Alava E(1), Lozano MD, Patiño A, Sierrasesúmaga L, Pardo-Mindán FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

In more than 95% of patients, the Ewing family of tumors (ET) has chimeric
transcripts caused by fusion of the EWS gene to either FLI1 or ERG. The presence 
of specific EWS-FLI1 or EWS-ERG transcripts in peripheral blood (PB) samples of
patients being treated for ET was prospectively evaluated, and these data were
correlated to their clinical status. The authors studied 113 PB samples from 28
patients with ET. Treatment included chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgical
excision of tumor after induction therapy. PB samples were taken prospectively at
least 2 weeks after resection of tumor. Nested reverse-transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) followed by Southern blot was performed in all samples.
Resected tumors were reviewed for the degree of response to chemotherapy and
volume. Seventy-seven PB samples from 28 patients had EWS-FLI1/ERG transcripts.
In 11 patients, PB samples became negative with treatment, and, in 5 of them, the
samples remained negative throughout the study. Samples taken during progression 
were always positive and, in 4 patients, became positive before progression was
clinically evident. All patients with transcripts other than EWS-FLI1 type 1 (n =
3) died from tumor progression. This is a sensitive assay to monitor circulating 
tumor cells in Ewing tumors. The preliminary data suggest that progression is
preceded by positive samples and may be related to specific transcript types.

PMID: 9836070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Am J Pathol. 1998 Nov;153(5):1401-9.

Subtracted, unique-sequence, in situ hybridization: experimental and diagnostic
applications.

Davison JM(1), Morgan TW, Hsi BL, Xiao S, Fletcher JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Nonrandom chromosomal aberrations, particularly in cancer, identify pathogenic
biological pathways and, in some cases, have clinical relevance as diagnostic or 
prognostic markers. Fluorescence and colorimetric in situ hybridization methods
facilitate identification of numerical and structural chromosome abnormalities.
We report the development of robust, unique-sequence in situ hybridization probes
that have several novel features: 1) they are constructed from multimegabase
contigs of yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clones; 2) they are in the form of
adapter-ligated, short-fragment, DNA libraries that may be amplified by
polymerase chain reaction; and 3) they have had repetitive sequences (eg, Alu and
LINE elements) quantitatively removed by subtractive hybridization. These
subtracted probes are labeled conveniently, and the fluorescence or colorimetric 
detection signals are extremely bright. Moreover, they constitute a stable
resource that may be amplified through at least four rounds of polymerase chain
reaction without diminishing signal intensity. We demonstrate applications of
subtracted probes for the MYC and EWS oncogene regions, including 1)
characterization of a novel EWS-region translocation in Ewing's sarcoma, 2)
identification of chromosomal translocations in paraffin sections, and 3)
identification of chromosomal translocations by conventional bright-field
microscopy.

PMCID: PMC1853394
PMID: 9811331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Am J Surg Pathol. 1998 Nov;22(11):1417-22.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the ovary confirmed by CD99
immunostaining, karyotypic analysis, and RT-PCR for EWS/FLI-1 chimeric mRNA.

Kawauchi S(1), Fukuda T, Miyamoto S, Yoshioka J, Shirahama S, Saito T, Tsukamoto 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan.

We report a case of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET), which
belongs to the PNET/Ewing's sarcoma family, arising in the left ovary of a
29-year-old woman. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of solid nests and
sheets of monotonous, primitive, small round cells with a few rosettes, making it
difficult to distinguish from small cell carcinoma of the ovary.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed intense cell-membranous
immunoreactivity for MIC2 protein (CD99). A short-term cell culture and
karyotypic analysis revealed the tumor to possess a balanced t(11;22)(q24;q12)
chromosomal translocation that is highly specific for tumors of the PNET/Ewing's 
sarcoma family. In addition, EWS/FLI-1 chimeric mRNA that originated from the
characteristic chromosomal translocation was detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. These results confirmed the diagnostic
validity of the present tumor being a pPNET, thus raising the possibility that in
the past, pPNETs which have arisen in the ovary may have been mistakenly
diagnosed as small cell carcinomas of the ovary.

PMID: 9808135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Oncogene. 1998 Oct 22;17(16):2039-45.

EWS/FLI1 up regulates mE2-C, a cyclin-selective ubiquitin conjugating enzyme
involved in cyclin B destruction.

Arvand A(1), Bastians H, Welford SM, Thompson AD, Ruderman JV, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology/Laboratory Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, USA.

The EWS/FLI1 fusion gene found in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal
tumor, is able to transform certain cell lines by acting as an aberrant
transcription factor. The ability of EWS/FLI1 to modulate gene expression in
cells transformed and resistant to transformation by EWS/FLI1, was assessed by
Representational Difference Analysis (RDA). We found that the cyclin selective
ubiquitin conjugase murine E2-C, was up regulated in NIH3T3 cells transformed by 
EWS/FLI1 but not in a nontransformed NIH3T3 clone expressing EWS/FLI1. We also
found that mE2-C is upregulated in NIH3T3 cells transformed by other genes
including activated cdc42, v-ABL and c-myc. We demonstrated that expression of
mE2-C in both the EWS/FLI1 transformed and parent NIH3T3 lines varies with the
cell cycle. Finally, dominant-negative mE2-C, created by changing a catalytic
cysteine to serine, inhibits the in vitro ubiquitination and degradation of
cyclin B in human HeLa cell extracts. These data suggest that part of the
biologic effect of EWS/FLI1 could be to transcriptionally modulate genes involved
in cell cycle regulation.

PMID: 9798675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1998 Oct 15;106(2):156-8.

Novel breakpoints of the EWS gene and the WT1 gene in a desmoplastic small round 
cell tumor.

Shimizu Y(1), Mitsui T, Kawakami T, Ikegami T, Kanazawa C, Katsuura M, Obata K,
Yamagiwa I, Hayasaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Japan.

We report here a 15-year-old boy with an intraabdominal desmoplastic small round 
cell tumor (DSRCT). Cytogenetic analysis of the tumor cells showed the
chromosomal translocation (11;22). Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction and sequencing analysis revealed a chimeric transcriptional message of
the EWS gene exon 10 fused to the WT1 gene exon 8. The typical chimeric
transcript seen in DSRCT is an in-frame fusion of EWS exon 7 to WT1 exon 8. The
tumor in this case had a novel and longer chimeric transcript, which should be a 
potent transcription factor. Genetic analysis is a very powerful and specific aid
in the differential diagnosis of small round cell tumors.

PMID: 9797782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Gene. 1998 Oct 23;221(2):191-8.

Genomic structure of the human RBP56/hTAFII68 and FUS/TLS genes.

Morohoshi F(1), Ootsuka Y, Arai K, Ichikawa H, Mitani S, Munakata N, Ohki M.

Author information: 
(1)Radiobiology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. fmorohos@ncc.go.jp

We previously isolated RBP56 cDNA by PCR using mixed primers designed from the
conserved sequences of the RNA binding domain of FUS/TLS and EWS proteins. RBP56 
protein turned out to be hTAFII68 which was isolated as a TATA-binding protein
associated factor (TAF) from a sub-population of TFIID complexes (Bertolotti A., 
Lutz, Y., Heard, D.J., Chambon, P., Tora, L., 1996. hTAFII68, a novel
RNA/ssDNA-binding protein with homology to the proto-oncoproteins TLS/FUS and EWS
is associated with both TFIID and RNA polymerase II. EMBO J. 15, 5022-5031). The 
RBP56/hTAFII68, FUS/TLS and EWS proteins comprise a sub-family of RNA binding
proteins, which consist of an N-terminal Ser, Gly, Gln and Tyr-rich region, an
RNA binding domain, a Cys2/Cys2 zinc finger motif and a C-terminal RGG-containing
region. Rearrangement of the FUS/TLS gene and the EWS gene has been found in
several types of malignant tumors, and the resultant fusion proteins play an
important role in the pathogenesis of these tumors. In the present study, we
determined the genomic structure of the RBP56/hTAFII68 gene. The RBP56/hTAFII68
gene spans about 37kb and consists of 16 exons from 33bp to 562bp. The longest
exon, exon 15, encodes the C-terminal region containing 19 repeats of a
degenerate DR(S)GG(G)YGG sequence. While the structure of the FUS/TLS gene has
been reported previously, we determined the total DNA sequence of the FUS/TLS
gene, consisting of 12kb. The RBP56/hTAFII68, FUS/TLS and EWS genes consist of
similar numbers of exons. Comparison of the structures of these three genes
showed that the organization of exons in the central part encoding a homologous
RNA binding domain and a cysteine finger motif is highly conserved, and other
exon boundaries are also located at similar sites, indicating that these three
genes most likely originate from the same ancestor gene.

PMID: 9795213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cancer. 1998 Oct 15;83(8):1504-21.

Skeletal and extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma: a comparative
clinicopathologic, ultrastructural, and molecular study.

Antonescu CR(1), Argani P, Erlandson RA, Healey JH, Ladanyi M, Huvos AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

BACKGROUND: Skeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (SMC) is considered to be either a
typical chondrosarcoma with prominent myxoid alterations or an altogether unique 
malignant cartilage tumor. Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is a
relatively rare but well-recognized neoplasm. It was initially thought to be a
low grade sarcoma of cartilage derivation and was recently found, in most cases, 
to contain a reciprocal t(9;22), resulting in a fusion of the EWS and CHN genes. 
Are SMC and EMC the same entity arising in two different locations, or are they
two separate entities? To the authors' knowledge, this study represents the first
systematic attempt to answer this question.
METHODS: Forty consecutive cases of EMC (20 cases) and SMC (20 cases) were
compared by light and electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, and molecular
analysis. The mean clinical follow-up for both groups was 55 months. Histologic
criteria for SMC consisted of 95% myxoid matrix, with only minimal hyaline
cartilage formation.
RESULTS: The gender distribution was identical in both groups (13 males and 7
females). The mean age was 55 years for EMC patients and 45 years for SMC
patients. The EMC tumors were predominantly located in the deep soft tissues of
the lower extremity (60%) and buttock (20%), and the mean tumor size was 13 cm.
SMC was most commonly located in the bones around the hip joint (pelvis 35%;
proximal femur 20%) and shoulder (20%); the mean size was 9 cm. Histologic grade 
in the EMC group correlated with survival (82% of the high grade tumors
metastasized). Electron microscopy performed in 8 EMC cases revealed
intracisternal microtubules in 3 cases and prominent mitochondria in 5, whereas
in 5 SMC cases it revealed only inconspicuous organelles. Molecular analysis for 
the EWS-CHN fusion RNA resulting from the t(9;22) was performed in 15 cases (9
EMC and 6 SMC) and was detected in 7 of 9 EMC cases and 0 of 6 SMC cases. In one 
case, the molecular structure of the EWS-CHN fusion RNA was novel. The
probability of metastasis was significantly higher (P=0.004) for the EMC group
than for the SMC group.
CONCLUSIONS: Although similar light microscopic features are noted in EMC and
SMC, fundamental differences are noted at the ultrastructural and molecular
levels, suggesting that EMC and SMC represent two distinct entities in the
chondrosarcoma family of tumors.

PMID: 9781944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Oncogene. 1998 Sep 3;17(9):1149-57.

Fli-1b is generated by usage of differential splicing and alternative promoter.

Dhulipala PD(1), Lee L, Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

The proto-oncogene Fli-1, a member of Ets family is rearranged or activated
through proviral integration in erythroleukemias, induced by Friends' Murine
Leukemia Virus. The DNA binding domain (ETS domain) of Fli-1 is fused to the RNA 
binding domain of EWS by t(11q24:22q12) chromosomal translocation in Ewing's
sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Screening of human cDNA libraries
has identified two different 5'-termini and alternatively spliced forms of the
human Fli-1 gene (Fli-1b), suggesting the possible existence of two independent
promoters. The genomic sequence adjacent to the alternate exon of human Fli-1b
gene shows functional promoter activity when cloned in promoter-less CAT
expression vector and transfected into QT-6 cells. The transcription initiation
(CAP) site and minimum promoter region necessary for function were localized. The
5'-flanking regions of human Fli-1b and mouse Fli-1 show 80% homology suggesting 
conserved promoter regulatory elements. The Fli-1b 5'-flanking sequence lacks
canonical TATA or CCAAT boxes but contains a partially conserved TATA-like
sequence at position 242. Several transcription factor binding sequences like
ATF/CREB, E2A-PBX1, EBP, PEA-3, ETS-2, Sp-1, c-Myc, TBP, GATA-1 and Oct-3 were
conserved in the promoter sequence. Functional promoter assays revealed that
Fli-1b promoter shows very strong transcriptional activation compared to Fli-1
promoter. We also showed that variant Fli-1b has transcriptional activation
properties similar to those of Fli-1. Fli-1b and Fli-1 show differential
expression in various hematopoietic cell lines. This differential expression and 
promoter activities of Fli-1 and Fli-1b suggests that several mechanisms are
involved in Fli-1 gene regulation which are mediated by many transcription
factors.

PMID: 9764825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1998 Jul;89(7):703-11.

Molecular analysis of Ewing's sarcoma: another fusion gene, EWS-E1AF, available
for diagnosis.

Urano F(1), Umezawa A, Yabe H, Hong W, Yoshida K, Fujinaga K, Hata J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo.

Ewing's sarcoma, one of the most malignant tumors of children and young adults,
expresses specific chimeric genes, e.g. EWS-FLI-1, EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1 and EWS-FEV.
In this paper, we extensively characterized a new fusion gene, EWS-EIAF by means 
of whole cDNA sequencing, RNA blot analysis, DNA blot analysis and chromosomal
analysis, and showed it to be available for the diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma and 
to participate in the oncogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma. Furthermore, we conducted a
genetic analysis of Ewing family tumors in conjunction with immunohistochemical
analysis and ultrastructural analysis. Our results demonstrate some limitations
of both genetic analysis and histopathological analysis, and establish the
relationship between neurogenic phenotypes and chimera genes.

PMID: 9738976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Clin Oncol. 1998 Sep;16(9):3028-36.

Clinical, pathologic, and molecular spectrum of tumors associated with
t(11;22)(p13;q12): desmoplastic small round-cell tumor and its variants.

Gerald WL(1), Ladanyi M, de Alava E, Cuatrecasas M, Kushner BH, LaQuaglia MP,
Rosai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA. geraldw@mskcc.org

PURPOSE: Intense investigation has reshaped concepts about undifferentiated
tumors occurring in young people (small round-cell tumors). Tumors associated
with t(11;22)(p13;q12) and descriptively designated desmoplastic small round-cell
tumor (DSRCT) are a distinctive, rare, poorly understood member of this family.
We reviewed 109 cases of DSRCT to further characterize this entity better.
METHODS: Clinical information and histology were reviewed. Immunohistochemistry
and immunoblotting were performed using standard techniques. Chimeric EWS-WT1 RNA
and DNA were detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and genomic
translocation breakpoints mapped in a subset of cases.
RESULTS: There were 90 males and 19 females from 6 to 49 years of age (mean, 22
years). A total of 103 had tumor in the abdominal cavity, four in the thoracic
region, one in the posterior cranial fossa, and one in the hand. Typical
histologic and immunohistochemical features were usually evident in well-sampled 
tumors, but variations in cellularity, stromal components, cytology,
architecture, and immunoreactivity occurred. Tumor cells were usually reactive
with antibodies to keratin (67 of 78 cases, 86%), epithelial membrane antigen (50
of 54, 93%), vimentin (64 of 66, 97%), desmin (70 of 78, 90%), neuron-specific
enolase (60 of 74, 81%), and the EWS-WT1 chimeric protein (25 of 27, 93%);
typically nonreactive for muscle common actin (one of 58, 2%), myogenin (zero of 
eight, 0%), and chromogranin (one of 46, 2%); and variably reactive for MIC2
(nine of 47, 20%) and p53 (five of 17 with > 20% tumor cells reactive).
Functional EWS-WT1 gene fusion was evident in 25 of 26 cases with genomic
breakpoints in WT1 intron 7, and EWS introns 7, 8, and 9. Prognosis in general is
poor, but tumors are responsive to aggressive therapy.
CONCLUSION: This large review identifies a greater degree of clinical,
pathologic, and molecular variation than originally appreciated for tumors
associated with t(11;22)(p13;q12). Translocation and functional fusion of the EWS
and WT1 genes appears to be a consistent feature of this unique tumor.

PMID: 9738572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 6;17(5):603-10.

Oncogenic EWS-Fli1 interacts with hsRPB7, a subunit of human RNA polymerase II.

Petermann R(1), Mossier BM, Aryee DN, Khazak V, Golemis EA, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria.

As a result of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal translocation characterizing the
Ewing family of tumors (ET), the amino terminal portion of EWS, an RNA binding
protein of unknown function, is fused to the DNA-binding domain of the ets
transcription factor Fli1. The hybrid EWS-Fli1 protein acts as a strong
transcriptional activator and, in contrast to wildtype Fli1, is a potent
transforming agent. Similar rearrangements involving EWS or the highly homologous
TLS with various transcription factors have been found in several types of human 
tumors. Employing yeast two-hybrid cloning we isolated the seventh largest
subunit of human RNA polymerase II (hsRPB7) as a protein that specifically
interacts with the amino terminus of EWS. This association was confirmed by in
vitro immunocoprecipitation. In nuclear extracts, hsRPB7 was found to copurify
with EWS-Fli1 but not with Fli1. Overexpression of recombinant hsRPB7
specifically increased gene activation by EWS-chimeric transcription factors.
Replacement of the EWS portion by hsRPB7 in the oncogenic fusion protein restored
the transactivating potential of the chimera. Our results suggest that the
interaction of the amino terminus of EWS with hsRPB7 contributes to the
transactivation function of EWS-Fli1 and, since hsRPB7 has characteristics of a
regulatory subunit of RNA polymerase II, may influence promoter selectivity.

PMID: 9704926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Curr Opin Oncol. 1998 Jul;10(4):334-42.

Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors after their
genetic union.

Kovar H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna,
Austria.

The Ewing family of tumors has been defined by the presence of an EWS-ets gene
rearrangement. Using molecular techniques for the visualization of this
aberration, several tumors of unusual location and histology were recently
identified and added to this group. Increasing experimental data suggest that
EWS-ets fusions act as transforming transcription factors. Subtractive screening 
of transgenic fibroblasts has led to the identification of potential targets. The
authentic cellular context for these aberrant gene products is still unknown and 
may be diverse, however. Clinical heterogeneity has stimulated a search for
genetic factors that may relate to treatment response. The effect of the EWS-ets 
fusion transcript structure on localized disease has been recently confirmed and 
frequent p16 tumor suppressor alterations have been described. The presence of
metastases at diagnosis as the major predictor of outcome has been assessed on a 
submicroscopic level by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Problems
arising from these studies are discussed, although the biological basis for
variable disease extension remains obscure.

PMID: 9702401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):18086-91.

The transcriptional repressor ZFM1 interacts with and modulates the ability of
EWS to activate transcription.

Zhang D(1), Paley AJ, Childs G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York 10461, USA.

The ZFM1 protein is both a transcriptional repressor and identical to the
splicing factor SF1. ZFM1 was shown to interact with and repress transcription
from the glycine, glutamine, serine, and threonine-rich transcription activation 
domain of the sea urchin transcription factor, stage-specific activator protein
(SSAP). EWS, a human protein involved in cellular transformation in Ewing's
sarcoma tumors, contains an NH2-terminal transcriptional activation domain (NTD) 
which resembles that of SSAP in both amino acid composition and the ability to
drive transcription to levels higher than VP16 in most cell types. Here we report
that ZFM1 also interacts with EWS in both two-hybrid assays and glutathione
S-transferase pull-down experiments. The region on EWS which interacts with ZFM1 
maps to 37 amino acids within its NTD. Overexpression of ZFM1 in HepG2 cells
represses the transactivation of reporter gene expression driven by Gal4-EWS-NTD 
fusion protein and this repression correlates with ZFM1 binding to EWS.
Furthermore, two proteins, TLS and hTAFII68, which have extensive homology to
EWS, also interact with ZFM1. Recently, it was discovered that EWS/TLS/hTAFII68
are each present in distinct TFIID populations and EWS and hTAFII68 were also
found to be associated with the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme. The association of 
ZFM1 with these proteins implies that one normal cellular function for ZFM1 may
be to negatively modulate transcription of target genes coordinated by these
cofactors.

PMID: 9660765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1998 Feb;7(1):29-35.

Molecular diagnosis of Ewing tumors: improved detection of EWS-FLI-1 and EWS-ERG 
chimeric transcripts and rapid determination of exon combinations.

Meier VS(1), Kühne T, Jundt G, Gudat F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University of Basel, Switzerland.

Most Ewing tumors (ET), including Ewing sarcomas, peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumors (PNET), and Askin's tumors, can be defined according to
the specific chromosomal translocations t(11;22)(q24;q12) (EWS-FLI-1) or
t(21;22)(q21;q12) (EWS-ERG). Detection of the chimeric RNA transcripts by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) has greatly facilitated the
diagnosis of ET. Because of variable chromosomal breakpoint locations, however,
the EWS gene fusions with FLI-1 and ERG genes are highly heterogenous, resulting 
in different sizes of the amplification products. To improve the diagnostic
usefulness of the RT-PCR assay, we have developed an assay to detect chimeric
mRNA transcripts by nested RT-PCR, followed by digestion of the PCR fragments
with three different restriction endonucleases. This allows confirmation of the
specificity of the PCR product and provides a rapid method to determine the
combination of exons present in a transcript. In the 12 Ewing tumors tested, five
different exon combinations were detected. In nine repeat biopsies of four
patients, the case-specific translocation remained unchanged. One additional
central PNET had no ET-specific translocation. In conclusion, the suggested
combination of RT-PCR and restriction analysis of the PCR products allows a rapid
and specific determination of ET-specific translocations.

PMID: 9646032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Oncogene. 1998 Apr 16;16(15):1973-9.

The desmoplastic small round cell tumor t(11;22) translocation produces EWS/WT1
isoforms with differing oncogenic properties.

Kim J(1), Lee K, Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Structural alterations of the Wilms' tumor locus (WT1) at 11p13 have been
implicated in the etiology of two human cancers--Wilms' tumor (WT), a pediatric
renal malignancy, and Desmoplastic Small Round Cell Tumor (DSRCT), an aggressive 
cancer of the abdominal serosal lining with predilection for male adolescents.
Germline mutations within the WT1 tumor suppressor gene predispose to WT and are 
associated with congenital malformations of the urogenital system, and somatic
mutations are associated with initiation of transformation in WTs. In DSRCT, a
recurrent translocation, t(11;22)(p13;q12), fuses the amino terminal domain of
the EWS1 gene product to three of the four WT1 zinc fingers. Two EWS/WT1 isoforms
are generated as a result of an alternative splicing event between zinc fingers
III and IV, inserting or removing three amino acids (+/- KTS). We demonstrate
that introduction of EWS/WT1(-KTS) into NIH3T3 cells causes their tumorigenic
transformation as determined by: formation of transformed foci on a monolayer of 
cells; anchorage-independent growth; and tumor formation in nude mice.
EWS/WT1(+KTS) showed no transforming potential in these assays. These results
indicate the oncogenic effect of the t(11;22) translocation is mediated by the
EWS/WT1(-KTS) isoform and that fusion of the EWS amino terminal domain to the WT1
DNA binding domain produces a chimeric product showing a gain of function.

PMID: 9591781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Am J Surg Pathol. 1998 Apr;22(4):391-8.

Olfactory neuroblastoma is not related to the Ewing family of tumors: absence of 
EWS/FLI1 gene fusion and MIC2 expression.

Argani P(1), Perez-Ordoñez B, Xiao H, Caruana SM, Huvos AG, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The relationship of olfactory neuroblastoma to the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors
remains controversial due to its variable histopathology and to conflicting or
inconsistent cytogenetic, immunophenotypic, and molecular data. To address this
issue, we performed a morphologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular study of 20
olfactory neuroblastomas. Morphologically, the tumors consisted of nests of
primitive small, round, blue cells, usually set in a background of
neurofibrillary stroma. Immunohistochemical stains revealed strong reactivity for
neuroendocrine markers (synaptophysin, chromogranin, neuron-specific enolase) and
only focal staining for cytokeratins in two cases. Immunostaining with antibody
O13 to the Ewing sarcoma-associated MIC2 antigen was uniformly negative (0 of
17). Amplifiable RNA was extracted from paraffin-embedded tissue blocks of 11
cases, and no evidence of the chimeric EWS/FLI transcript, characteristic of
Ewing sarcoma, was found in any case. The EWS gene was not rearranged using
Southern blot analysis in one additional case in which high molecular weight DNA 
was available. These results disagree with the proposed classification of
olfactory neuroblastoma in the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors and suggest that
therapy developed for the latter tumor group may not be biologically rational for
olfactory neuroblastoma.

PMID: 9580174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Oncogene. 1998 Feb 26;16(8):1021-30.

The DNA binding domains of the WT1 tumor suppressor gene product and chimeric
EWS/WT1 oncoprotein are functionally distinct.

Kim J(1), Lee K, Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The t(11;22)(p13;q12) translocation associated with desmosplastic small round
cell tumor results in a chimeric molecule fusing the amino terminal domain (NTD) 
of the EWS1 gene to three of the four carboxy-terminal zinc fingers of the WT1
tumor suppressor gene. Since the DNA binding domains of WT1 and EWS/WT1 are
structurally different, we have assessed the functional consequences of the
EWS/WT1 fusion. We find that the EWS/WT1 protein has a higher binding affinity
for a given recognition target than the WT1 product. This is unlike other fusion 
products involving translocation of the NTD of EWS to DNA binding domains in
which DNA binding specificity and affinity is not changed. We demonstrate that
EWS/WT1 is a nuclear protein and that the NTD of EWS contains (a) nuclear
localization signal(s). We also find that the integrity of a domain within the
WT1 zinc fingers, responsible for mediating interaction between WT1 and the
transcriptional repressor par-4, is disrupted in the EWS/WT1 fusion product.
Deletion analysis of the NTD of EWS indicated that integrity of the entire domain
was necessary to achieve full transactivation potential.

PMID: 9519876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Virchows Arch. 1998 Feb;432(2):131-4.

Specific and sensitive detection of the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein in Ewing's
sarcoma by Western blotting.

Wang M(1), Nilsson G, Carlberg M, Dricu A, Wejde J, Kreicbergs A, Larsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumour Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

We applied Western blotting, using an antibody against the carboxy terminal of
the FLI1 protein, for detection of the 68-kDa EWS/FLI1 fusion protein in cultured
Ewing's sarcoma cells and in four surgical biopsies of Ewing's sarcoma. Of six
different human cell lines, the 68-kDa fusion protein was identified only in
Ewing's sarcoma cells carrying the t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation. The four
samples from Ewing's sarcoma patients were also found to contain the 68-kDa
fusion protein. The lowest detection level for total protein loaded on the gel
was 0.3 microg. When whole Ewing's sarcoma cells were used for Western blotting
without prior protein extraction, the lowest detection level was 1,300 cells. It 
will be possible to use Western blotting for detection of the EWS/FLI1 fusion
protein in the diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma in surgical biopsy specimens, and
possibly also in fine-needle aspirates. As the method is not dependent on the
quality of mRNA in the sample and involves no risk of contamination, it will be a
powerful complement to the reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR).

PMID: 9504857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Hum Pathol. 1998 Mar;29(3):289-94.

Absence of detectable EWS/FLI1 expression after therapy-induced neural
differentiation in Ewing sarcoma.

Knezevich SR(1), Hendson G, Mathers JA, Carpenter B, Lopez-Terrada D, Brown KL,
Sorensen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, BC's Children's Hospital, Vancouver, Canada.

Ewing sarcoma and other peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs)
display limited neural differentiation and are thought to have a neural crest
origin Greater than 95% of these tumors share common t(11;22)(q24;q12)
ort(21;22)(q22;q12) chromosomal translocations leading to ES/FLI1 or EWS/ERG gene
fusions, respectively. The resulting chimeric oncoproteins seem to function as
aberrant transcription factors. However, whether these molecules contribute to
the limited neural differentiation observed in pPNETs or actually inhibit
differentiation remains unclear. We report a Ewing sarcoma case from the forearm 
of a 10-year-old girl which expressed EWS/FLI1 fusion transcripts. The tumor was 
treated with surgery, chemotherapy, and local radiation, but residual tumor was
detected within a year as a well-differentiated peripheral neural tumor lacking
detectable EWS/FLI1 expression. Further studies suggested that the primary and
residual tumors were clonally related. This association between apparent
therapy-induced differentiation in Ewing sarcoma and absence of detectable fusion
transcripts in the residual tumor provides presumptive evidence that EWS/FLI1
expression may inhibit differentiation in tumour cells.

PMID: 9496833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Int J Cancer. 1998 Feb 20;79(1):56-60.

Predictive potential of testing for bone marrow involvement in Ewing tumor
patients by RT-PCR: a preliminary evaluation.

Zoubek A(1), Ladenstein R, Windhager R, Amann G, Fischmeister G, Kager L, Jugovic
D, Ambros PF, Gadner H, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Children's Hospital, Vienna,
Austria.

EWS/ets-oncogene fusion transcripts can be detected in at least 98% of Ewing
tumors [(ET) Ewing sarcoma and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor] by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), thus confirming the
histopathologic diagnosis. To detect minimal amounts of tumor cells in the bone
marrow (BM), we used an RT-PCR assay with a high sensitivity, revealing one tumor
cell in a background of 10(6) normal cells. We examined BM samples from 35 newly 
diagnosed ET patients (23 with localized and 12 with metastatic disease). At
diagnosis, tumor cells in the BM were detected in 7/23 patients with localized
disease (30%). Fifty percent of patients with isolated lung metastasis were
RT-PCR positive (3/6), whereas 6/6 patients with bone metastases showed positive 
signals (100%). All patients with initial PCR positivity in the BM became
negative during treatment. After a median follow-up of 30 months, relapses were
observed in both groups of patients with localized disease (3/7 RT-PCR positive
and 2/16 RT-PCR negative). The only recurrence in the group with isolated lung
metastases occurred as progressive lung disease in 1 of the 2 RT-PCR-negative
patients, whereas among the 6 patients with bone metastases 2 remain in complete 
remission. So far, RT-PCR screening for BM involvement did not allow prediction
of early relapse in ET. To assess better the significance of this test in the
evaluation of long-term prognosis and in monitoring the effectiveness of systemic
therapy, long observation periods are warranted before it becomes a tool for
treatment stratification.

PMID: 9495359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;18(3):1489-97.

EWS, but not EWS-FLI-1, is associated with both TFIID and RNA polymerase II:
interactions between two members of the TET family, EWS and hTAFII68, and
subunits of TFIID and RNA polymerase II complexes.

Bertolotti A(1), Melot T, Acker J, Vigneron M, Delattre O, Tora L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

The t(11;22) chromosomal translocation specifically linked to Ewing sarcoma and
primitive neuroectodermal tumor results in a chimeric molecule fusing the
amino-terminus-encoding region of the EWS gene to the carboxyl-terminal
DNA-binding domain encoded by the FLI-1 gene. As the function of the protein
encoded by the EWS gene remains unknown, we investigated the putative role of EWS
in RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription by comparing its activity with that
of its structural homolog, hTAFII68. We demonstrate that a portion of EWS is able
to associate with the basal transcription factor TFIID, which is composed of the 
TATA-binding protein (TBP) and TBP-associated factors (TAFIIs). In vitro binding 
studies revealed that both EWS and hTAFII68 interact with the same TFIID
subunits, suggesting that the presence of EWS and that of hTAFII68 in the same
TFIID complex may be mutually exclusive. Moreover, EWS is not exclusively
associated with TFIID but, similarly to hTAFII68, is also associated with the Pol
II complex. The subunits of Pol II that interact with EWS and hTAFII68 have been 
identified, confirming the association with the polymerase. In contrast to EWS,
the tumorigenic EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is not associated with either TFIID or
Pol II in Ewing cell nuclear extracts. These observations suggest that EWS and
EWS-FLI-1 may play different roles in Pol II transcription.

PMCID: PMC108863
PMID: 9488465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Tumori. 1997 Sep-Oct;83(5):847-55.

HLA binding characteristics and generation of cytotoxic lymphocytes against
peptides derived from oncogenic proteins.

Bertazzoli C(1), Marchesi E, Dermime S, Ravagnani F, Parmiani G,
Gambacorti-Passerini C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Oncology D, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

AIMS AND BACKGROUND: Structurally altered proteins (derived from chromosomal
translocations or gene mutations) can be considered tumor specific antigens and
represent an attractive target for a T-cell mediated response. T lymphocytes
recognize antigens in the form of peptides bound to HLA-molecules.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Peptides derived from oncogenic proteins were screened for
the presence of HLA binding motifs; actual binding were evaluated by HLA
stabilization experiments using transfectants and specific anti-HLA antibodies.
Specific lymphocytes were induced by in vitro peptide sensitization and screened 
by thymidine uptake or cellular cytotoxic assays.
RESULTS: We identified peptides derived from EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein and from
mutated K-RAS protein (encompassing respectively the fusion point and the
mutation at position 12) that showed binding motif for HLA-Cw*0702 and HLA-A3
respectively. The actual binding of these peptides was analysed in a
stabilization assay. We detected binding for the EWS/FLI-1 peptide and for 5 RAS 
peptides (1 wild type and 4 mutated). The effect of temperature, beta
2-microglobulin (beta 2-m) and fetal calf serum (FCS) on the binding and the
stability of the HLA/peptide complex was studied. A low temperature (26 degrees
C) increased the binding both in HLA-A3 and HLA-Cw*0702, while FCS reduced it.
beta 2-m increased the binding to the HLA-A3 molecule but did not influence the
binding to the HLA-Cw*0702. The stability of already formed complexed was
somewhat different in the HLA-A3 and HLA-Cw*0702 system: both were more stable at
26 degrees C than at 37 degrees C but while the beta 2-m and FCS did not
influence the stability of the HLA-A3/peptide complex, they seemed to cause
opposite effects in the HLA-Cw*0702 system (beta 2-m stabilized and FCS
destabilized the complex). Finally, we were able to generate a specific CD8+ CTL 
line against a K-RAS mutated peptide.
CONCLUSIONS: Although binding motifs and actual HLA binding can be detected in
several cases, the generation of a cellular response is infrequent, confirming
that HLA binding is necessary but not sufficient to obtain an in vitro response. 
Further optimization of culture conditions, type of Antigen Presenting Cells
(APC), peptides, use of stabilizers like beta 2-m are still needed.

PMID: 9428921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 5;272(49):30822-7.

The insulin-like growth factor-I receptor is required for EWS/FLI-1
transformation of fibroblasts.

Toretsky JA(1), Kalebic T, Blakesley V, LeRoith D, Helman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Branch, NCI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA. jt@helix.nih.gov

Ewing's family of tumors is characterized by a well described reciprocal
translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), which produces a fusion protein (EWS/FLI-1)
that transforms mouse fibroblasts. The EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein has been shown to
act as a potent chimeric transcription factor. Overexpression of insulin-like
growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) has been implicated in many tumor models as
playing a role in cell growth and tumorigenesis. In addition, blockade of the
IGF-IR inhibits the growth of Ewing's family of tumors cells. Therefore, we first
studied whether the presence of the IGF-IR is required for transformation by the 
EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein. To perform this study, we used two previously described
fibroblast cell lines, R- and W, derived from an IGF-IR knockout mouse and a
wild-type littermate, respectively. Neither W nor R- cells without the fusion
protein formed soft agar colonies. However, W clones expressing the fusion
message (WF cells) formed soft agar colonies, whereas R- clones expressing the
fusion message (R-F cells) did not form soft agar colonies. Because the IGF-IR is
required for EWS/FLI-1 transformation, we chose to investigate whether altered
signaling occurs from the IGF-IR when the EWS/FLI-1 fusion is present. WF cells
demonstrated a greater degree of ligand-stimulated insulin receptor substrate-1
phosphorylation when compared with W cells, suggesting that expression of the
EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein alters the IGF-IR signaling pathway.

PMID: 9388225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nat Genet. 1997 Dec;17(4):495-7.

EWS/FLI1-induced manic fringe renders NIH 3T3 cells tumorigenic.

May WA(1), Arvand A, Thompson AD, Braun BS, Wright M, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, USA.

EWS/FLI1, a fusion gene found in Ewing's sarcoma, encodes a transcriptional
regulator and promotes cellular transformation by modulating the transcription of
specific target genes. We have found that EWS/FLI1 and structurally related
fusion proteins upregulate manic fringe (MFNG), a recently described member of
the Fringe gene family instrumental in somatic development. MFNG is also
expressed in human tumour-derived cell lines expressing EWS/FLI1. Overexpression 
of MFNG in NIH 3T3 cells renders them tumorigenic in mice with severe combined
immunodeficiency disease (SCID). These data demonstrate that part of the
oncogenic effect of EWS/FLI1 is to transcriptionally deregulate a member of a
family of morphogenic genes.

PMID: 9398859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hybridoma. 1997 Oct;16(5):457-64.

Production and characterization of mouse monoclonal antibodies to wild-type and
oncogenic FLI-1 proteins.

Melot T(1), Gruel N, Doubeikovski A, Sevenet N, Teillaud JL, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique des Tumeurs, INSERM U 434, Paris.

Mouse monoclonal antibodies were raised against the C-terminal domain of human
FLI-1, a member of the ETS family of transcription factors which is involved in
various murine and human malignancies. This FLI-1 specific domain is included in 
the fusion product EWS-FLI-1, an oncogenic variant of FLI-1 expressed in Ewing
tumors. Antibodies were screened first by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay onto 
recombinant FLI-1-coated plates. Positive clones were then tested for their
ability to immunoprecipitate over-expressed EWS-FLI-1 protein. Three monoclonal
antibodies were selected and further characterized. One of them, termed 7.3 MoAb,
was shown to react with FLI-1 and EWS-FLI-1 in immunoblotting,
immunoprecipitation, and immunofluorescence experiments. With all three methods, 
this antibody not only enabled the detection of overexpressed proteins but also
more interestingly, that of endogenously expressed proteins. Furthermore, the 7.3
MoAb can specifically inhibit the interaction of FLI-1 with its DNA-binding site 
as shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The 7.3 MoAb appears to be
specific for FLI-1 because it does not react with ERG, the ETS family member most
closely related to FLI-1. This antibody should be a useful tool in the diagnostic
evaluation of Ewing tumors and should permit biochemical analyses to study the
function of the wild-type FLI-1 protein and of the EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein.

PMID: 9388029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nat Genet. 1997 Nov;17(3):309-13.

The EWS-WT1 translocation product induces PDGFA in desmoplastic small round-cell 
tumour.

Lee SB(1), Kolquist KA, Nichols K, Englert C, Maheswaran S, Ladanyi M, Gerald WL,
Haber DA.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown.

Chromosomal translocations resulting in chimaeric transcription factors underlie 
specific malignancies, but few authentic target genes regulated by these fusion
proteins have been identified. Desmoplastic small round-cell tumour (DSRT) is a
multiphenotypic primitive tumour characterized by massive reactive fibrosis
surrounding nests of tumour cells. The t(11;22)(p13;q12) chromosomal
translocation that defines DSRT produces a chimaeric protein containing the
potential transactivation domain of the Ewing-sarcoma protein (EWS) fused to zinc
fingers 2-4 of the Wilms tumour suppressor and transcriptional repressor WT1
(refs 2,3). By analogy with other EWS fusion products, the EWS-WT1 chimaera may
encode a transcriptional activator whose target genes overlap with those
repressed by WT1 (ref. 4). To characterize its functional properties, we
generated osteosarcoma cell lines with tightly regulated inducible expression of 
EWS-WT1. Expression of EWS-WT1 induced the expression of endogenous
platelet-derived growth factor-A (PDGFA), a potent secreted mitogen and
chemoattractant whose promoter contains the many potential WT1-binding sites.
Native PDGFA was not regulated by wild-type WT1, indicating a difference in
target gene specificity between this tumour suppressor and its oncogenic
derivative. PDGFA was expressed within tumour cells in primary DSRT specimens,
but it was absent in Wilms tumours expressing WT1 and Ewing sarcomas with an
EWS-Fli translocation. We conclude that the oncogenic fusion of EWS to WT1 in
DSRT results in the induction of PDGFA, a potent fibroblast growth factor that
contributes to the characteristic reactive fibrosis associated with this unique
tumour.

PMID: 9354795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 24;272(43):27369-77.

The prooncoprotein EWS binds calmodulin and is phosphorylated by protein kinase C
through an IQ domain.

Deloulme JC(1), Prichard L, Delattre O, Storm DR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Department of Pharmacology, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA.

A growing family of proteins is regulated by protein kinase C and calmodulin
through IQ domains, a regulatory motif originally identified in neuromodulin
(Alexander, K. A., Wakim, B. T., Doyle, G. S., Walsh, K. A., and Storm, D. R.
(1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 7544-7549). Here we report that EWS, a nuclear
RNA-binding prooncoprotein, contains an IQ domain, is phosphorylated by protein
kinase C, and interacts with calmodulin. Interestingly, PKC phosphorylation of
EWS inhibits its binding to RNA homopolymers, and conversely, RNA binding to EWS 
interferes with PKC phosphorylation. Several other RNA-binding proteins,
including TLS/FUS and PSF, co-purify with EWS. PKC phosphorylation of these
proteins also inhibits their binding to RNA in vitro. These data suggest that PKC
may regulate interactions of EWS and other RNA-binding proteins with their RNA
targets and that IQ domains may provide a regulatory link between Ca2+ signal
transduction pathways and RNA processing.

PMID: 9341188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Oncogene. 1997 Sep;15(11):1357-62.

Characteristic sequence motifs at the breakpoints of the hybrid genes FUS/CHOP,
EWS/CHOP and FUS/ERG in myxoid liposarcoma and acute myeloid leukemia.

Panagopoulos I(1), Lassen C, Isaksson M, Mitelman F, Mandahl N, Aman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Sweden.

We have sequenced the breakpoint regions in one acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with
t(16;21)(p11;q22) resulting in the formation of a FUS/ERG hybrid gene and in four
myxoid liposarcomas (MLS), three of which had the translocation t(12;16)
(q13;p11) and a FUS/CHOP fusion gene and one with t(12;22;20)(q13;q12;q11) and an
EWS/CHOP hybrid gene. The breakpoints were localized to intron 7 of FUS, intron 1
of CHOP, an intronic sequence of ERG and intron 7 of EWS. In two MLS cases with
t(12;16) and in the AML, the breaks in intron 7 of FUS had occurred close to each
other, a few nucleotides downstream from a TG dinucleotide repeat region. The
break in the two MLS had occurred in the same ATGGTG hexamer and in the AML 40
nucleotides upstream from the hexamer. The third case of t(12;16) MLS had a break
upstream and near a TC-dinucleotide repeat region and a sequence similar to the
chi bacterial recombination element was found to flank the breakpoint. In the MLS
with the EWS/ CHOP hybrid gene, the break in intron 7 of EWS had occurred close
to an Alu sequence. Similarly, in all 4 MLS, the breaks in intron 1 of CHOP were 
near an Alu sequence. No Alu or other repetitive sequences were found 250 bp
upstream or downstream from the break in the ERG intron involved in the AML case.
In the AML, the MLS with ESW/CHOP and in one MLS with FUS/CHOP there were one,
two and six, respectively, nucleotide identity between the contributing germline 
sequences in the breakpoint. In the other two MLS cases, two and three extra
nucleotides of unknown origin were inserted between the FUS and CHOP sequences.
At the junction and/or in its close vicinity, identical oligomers, frequently
containing a trinucleotide TGG, were found in both partner genes. Our data thus
show that all four genes-FUS, EWS, CHOP and ERG-contain characteristic motifs in 
the breakpoint regions which may serve as specific recognition sites for
DNA-binding proteins and have functional importance in the recombination events
taking place between the chromosomes. Different sequence motifs may, however,
play a role in each individual case.

PMID: 9315104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Pathol. 1997 Aug;182(4):437-41.

Additional evidence of a variant translocation t(12;22) with EWS/CHOP fusion in
myxoid liposarcoma: clinicopathological features.

Dal Cin P(1), Sciot R, Panagopoulos I, Aman P, Samson I, Mandahl N, Mitelman F,
Van den Berghe H, Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics and Flanders Institute of Biotechnology, Leuven,
Belgium.

It is well established that the majority of myxoid/round cell liposarcomas (LPS) 
are characterized by a reciprocal translocation t(12;16)(q13;p11) which at the
molecular level results infusion of the CHOP and FUS/TLS genes. It is assumed
that functional characterization of these genes may provide insight into the
molecular pathogenesis of this tumour type. This study describes two new cases of
myxoid/round cell LPS having a t(12;22). By reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) it has been shown that this leads to fusion between the
CHOP and EWS genes, thus indicating involvement of the EWS gene, at least
occasionally, in yet another sarcoma type. Combining these two cases with two
others which were recently similarly characterized at the molecular level, their 
clinicopathological features have been compared with cases having the more usual 
t(12;16). It was not possible to identify any clinical or pathological
differences between these molecular genetic subsets. The relevance or
significance of these gene fusion products in myxoid/round cell LPS remains to be
determined.

PMID: 9306965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1997 Aug;97(1):12-9.

Multiple chromosomal mechanisms generate an EWS/FLI1 or an EWS/ERG fusion gene in
Ewing tumors.

Desmaze C(1), Brizard F, Turc-Carel C, Melot T, Delattre O, Thomas G, Aurias A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Genetics, Curie Institute, Paris, France.

The t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is found in about 85% of Ewing tumors and
leads in all cases to an EWS/FLI1 fusion gene. In a few instances, complex
translocations, involving chromosomes 11, 22 and a third chromosome or other
variant translocations not involving chromosome 11 also have been reported. These
rearrangements generate an active fusion gene between the EWS gene and either the
human FLI1 gene or other members of the ETS gene family: the ERG gene localized
in band 21q22.2, the ETV1 gene localized in band 7p22, or the E1AF gene localized
in band 17q12. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) on interphase
nuclei or metaphases, we report here the characterization of particular
karyotypes in Ewing tumors, namely a complex t(2;11;22) translocation, a variant 
t(12;22) translocation, and one Ewing tumor without specific rearrangements but
with an EWS/ERG fusion gene demonstrated by molecular analysis. These molecular
cytogenetic methods allowed us (1) to precisely localize the genomic breakpoints 
within-EWSR1 and EWSR2 and to identify the chromosome carrying the fusion gene;
(2) to determine the nature of events generating the fusion genes; (3) to
demonstrate that some variant translocations represent masked complex
translocations; and (4) to show that the generation of an EWS/ERG fusion gene
cannot be obtained through a simple balanced translocation.

PMID: 9242212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Virchows Arch. 1997 Jul;431(1):45-51.

Establishment of a new continuous clear cell sarcoma cell line. Morphological and
cytogenetic characterization and detection of chimaeric EWS/ATF-1 transcripts.

Hiraga H(1), Nojima T, Abe S, Yamashiro K, Yamawaki S, Kaneda K, Nagashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS), a rare tumour of deep soft tissues, often has a t(12;
22) (q13; q12) translocation that induces the formation of a hybrid EWS/ATF-1
gene. To investigate these alterations further, we established a new continuous
cell line directly from a CCS taken from a 9-year-old girl. The cultures were
characterized with respect to morphological, ultrastructural, immunohistochemical
and karyotypical features and were tested by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR)
for chimaeric EWS/ATF-1 transcripts. The continuous cell line, designated KAO, is
tumorigenic in nude mice, and the resultant tumours resemble the primary CCS. The
tumour cells and the cultured cells have melanosomes in their cytoplasm and are
immunoreactive with the melanoma-specific antibody HMB45, but do not express
S-100 protein. The cultured CCS cells have the t(12; 22)(q13; q12) translocation 
and express the hybrid EWS/ATF-1 gene. No transcripts of the hybrid gene were
detected in a malignant cutaneous melanoma tested simultaneously. Although CCS
and malignant melanoma are morphologically related, the present results suggest
that their geneses differ at the chromosome and molecular levels. They also
indicate that chromosome analysis and detection of fusion EWS/ATF-1 transcripts
may be useful adjuvant tools for the diagnosis of CCS.

PMID: 9247632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hum Pathol. 1997 Jul;28(7):767-71.

EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts in three peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
of the kidney.

Quezado M(1), Benjamin DR, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Although primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is a well-recognized entity, its 
renal localization as a primary site has not been appreciated. Only nine cases of
renal PNET exist in the literature. The paucity of renal PNET could be explained 
by the lack of objective diagnostic techniques that would facilitate its
distinction from other primitive round cell tumors of the kidney, such as the
more widely recognized monophasic Wilms' tumor and clear-cell sarcoma of the
kidney (CCSK), as well as renal carcinoid, or neuroblastoma invading the kidney
from the adjacent adrenal gland. The recently identified specific fusion
transcripts detectable by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) have provided us with a valuable tool for the detection of renal PNET.
This article reports three renal PNET that expressed EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts
by RT-PCR, in addition to positive staining for MIC2 protein and neuron-specific 
enolase (NSE). One also exhibited dense core granules in cell processes by
electron microscopy. Employment of such methodology will lead to a more accurate 
classification of renal tumors.

PMID: 9224742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Scand J Immunol. 1997 Jun;45(6):587-95.

The SH3 domain of Bruton's tyrosine kinase interacts with Vav, Sam68 and EWS.

Guinamard R(1), Fougereau M, Seckinger P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie INSERM-CNRS de Marseille-Luminy (CIML), Marseille,
France.

Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) is a cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinase which
controls crucial steps of differentiation of B lymphocytes. Mutations affecting
either the PH, SH3, SH2 or kinase domain of BTK all give rise to X linked
agammaglobulinaemia (XLA) in humans. In this study, the authors report that the
BTK-SH3 domain binds to a set of proteins expressed in pro-B, pre-B and B cell
lines. Three of them were characterized as Vav, Sam68 and EWS. The authors show
that a Pro-->Leu substitution in a region of the SH3 domain, which is deleted in 
an XLA patient, is sufficient to abolish BTK-SH3 binding potential. The authors
also report that several of the BTK-SH3 binding proteins, including Sam68, EWS
and Vav, are tyrosine phosphorylated in conditions that also promote BTK kinase
activity. For EWS and Sam68 this tyrosine phosphorylation was cell cycle
dependent.

PMID: 9201297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mod Pathol. 1997 May;10(5):496-9.

Malignant melanoma of the soft parts (clear-cell sarcoma): confirmation of EWS
and ATF-1 gene fusion caused by a t(12;22) translocation.

Speleman F(1), Delattre O, Peter M, Hauben E, Van Roy N, Van Marck E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
franki.speleman@rug.ac.be

We report on the cytogenetic and molecular analysis of a malignant melanoma of
the soft parts (MMSP). A t(12;22)(q13;q12) was found as the only structural
chromosomal change, and this provides additional support for the important role
of this translocation in MMSP development. Molecular analysis revealed in frame
fusion between exon 10 of the Ewing's sarcoma oncogene (EWS) and codon 110 of
ATF-1. In previously analyzed MMSPs, junctions were observed between EWS exon 8
and ATF-1 codon 65. The present data thus indicate that, as in Ewing's sarcoma,
different fusion proteins can occur in MMSP. The presence of the EWS/ATF-1 fusion
gene in the tumor cells was demonstrated by dual color fluorescence in situ
hybridization on interphase nuclei. Our data provide additional support for the
specific association of the t(12;22) and the resulting EWS/ATF-1 gene fusion in
MMSP. This particular genetic aberration, therefore, serves as a strong
diagnostic marker for MMSP. We conclude that detection of the t(12;22) by
cytogenetic or molecular analysis is useful in establishing or confirming the
diagnosis of MMSP.

PMID: 9160316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Exp Cell Res. 1997 Mar 15;231(2):386-90.

Identification of a new coiled body component.

Alliegro MC(1), Alliegro MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Louisiana State University Medical Center, New Orleans 
70112, USA.

Erratum in
    Exp Cell Res 1996 Dec 15;229(2):452-3.

Corrected and republished from
    Exp Cell Res. 1996 Sep 15;227(2):386-90.

Coiled bodies are small, round nuclear inclusions that have been identified in
many somatic cell types. Equivalent structures are found in the germinal vesicles
of amphibian and insect oocytes, known respectively as sphere organelles and
Binnenkörper. Their functions are not known, but their molecular composition is
being brought to light. In addition to the nucleolar protein, fibrillarin, coiled
bodies contain DNA topoisomerase I and an array of RNA processing molecules
characteristic of spliceosomes. One coiled body protein absent from nucleoli and 
spliceosomes, known as p80-coilin, has also been described. We have now
identified pigpen, a new member of the EWS family of proteins, as a second
protein enriched in coiled bodies. In an earlier report we found that pigpen's
structure and expression pattern were suggestive of a role in endothelial cell
proliferation and differentiation. In this brief report we characterize pigpen's 
nuclear compartment and describe its reorganization during mitosis.

PMID: 9087179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Oncogene. 1997 Mar 13;14(10):1159-64.

A new member of the ETS family fused to EWS in Ewing tumors.

Peter M(1), Couturier J, Pacquement H, Michon J, Thomas G, Magdelenat H, Delattre
O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Transfert, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

As a result of chromosome translocations, the EWS gene is fused to a variety of
transcription factors in human solid neoplasia. In Ewing tumors EWS can be fused 
to four different members of the ETS family, namely FLI-1, ERG, ETV1 and E1AF. We
have identified a new member of the ETS family, called FEV, which is fused to EWS
in a subset of Ewing tumors. FEV encodes a 238 amino acid protein which contains 
an ETS DNA binding domain closely related to that of FLI-1 and ERG. However, the 
N-terminal portion of FEV is only 42 amino acids long which suggests that FEV is 
lacking important transcription regulatory domains contained in FLI-1 and ERG
N-terminal parts. The C-terminal end of FEV is rich in alanine residues which may
indicate that FEV is a transcription repressor. The FEV gene is encoded by three 
exons and is located on chromosome 2. FEV expression was only detected in adult
prostate and small intestine but not in other adult nor in fetal tissues, thus
indicating that FEV has a restricted expression pattern. Following a scheme
similar to previously described translocations in Ewing tumors, a t(2;22)
chromosome translocation fuses the N-terminal domain of EWS to the ETS DNA
binding domain of FEV.

PMID: 9121764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Mar;18(3):232-9.

LINE-I element insertion at the t(11;22) translocation breakpoint of a
desmoplastic small round cell tumor.

Liu J(1), Nau MM, Zucman-Rossi J, Powell JI, Allegra CJ, Wright JJ.

Author information: 
(1)NCI-Navy Medical Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

A t(11;22)(p13;p12) chromosomal translocation, juxtaposing the Wilms' tumor (WT1)
and Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) genes, is the cytogenetic hallmark of desmoplastic
small round cell tumor (DSRCT), a primitive multiphenotypic sarcoma arising in
serosal tissues. Chimeric transcripts generated by this rearrangement encode an
aberrant transcription factor that fuses the 5' region of EWS with a 3' WT1
segment. We describe the insertion of a LINE-I DNA mobile genetic element at the 
genomic breakpoint of a DSRCT chromosomal translocation. A 480 bp heterologous
DNA segment with homology to the LINE-I DNA consensus sequence was located
between EWS intron 8 and WT1 exon 8 in the productively rearranged allele.
Sequence homology corresponded to the LINE-I ORF-2, which encodes a protein with 
reverse-transcriptase activity. The heterologous inserted fragment was not
evident in the germline of normal tissue from the patient, suggesting that
transposition occurred in somatic cells, possibly during the process of
chromosomal rearrangement. This case represents the first example of LINE-I DNA
transposition at the fusion site of a tumor-associated chromosomal rearrangement.

PMID: 9071577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Mar;18(3):228-31.

EWS-ERG fusion transcript produced by chromosomal insertion in a Ewing sarcoma.

Kaneko Y(1), Kobayashi H, Handa M, Satake N, Maseki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Chemotherapy, Saitama Cancer Center Hospital, Japan.

The EWS gene is fused in Ewing sarcoma-like tumors by a chromosomal translocation
to one of the four ETS-family genes: FLI1, ERG, ETV1, and E1AF. The orientation
of EWS and FLI1 on chromosomes 22 and 11, respectively, is 5' centromeric and 3' 
telomeric, whereas that of ERG on chromosome 21 is the reverse. Although 10% of
Ewing-family tumors express the EWS-ERG fusion transcript, there have been no
reports on tumors with t(21;22)(q22;q12) identified by banding cytogenetics. We
found the karyotype 50, XY, +8, +8, +12, +mar in all metaphase cells from a
tumor. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis
performed on the tumor and direct sequencing of the products identified the
EWS-ERG fusion transcript. Subsequent two-color fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis with EWS and ERG clones showed the fused signals on
the der(21) chromosome, but no ERG signals on the chromosome 22 homologs. Thus,
our RT-PCR and FISH analyses indicated that the chromosome 22 fragment containing
the 5' portion of EWS had been inverted and inserted into chromosome 21 and had
fused to the 3' portion of ERG. This subtle chromosome aberration could not be
identified by routine cytogenetics. A chromosomal inversion/insertion has also
been described in acute leukemia with the MLL-AF10 fusion gene, and this may be a
common pathway for producing fusion of reverse-oriented genes in leukemias and
solid tumors.

PMID: 9071576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Hum Genet. 1997 Mar;99(3):357-63.

Interethnic polymorphism of EWS intron 6: genome plasticity mediated by Alu
retroposition and recombination.

Zucman-Rossi J(1), Batzer MA, Stoneking M, Delattre O, Thomas G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 434 Genetique des Tumeurs, Institut Curie, Section de Recherche,
Paris, France. Jessica.Zucman-rossi@curie.fr

The EWS gene has been identified as being systematically translocated in Ewing's 
sarcoma. In order to ascertain the basis of a marked interethnic difference in
the incidence of Ewing's sarcoma, intron 6 of EWS, which is located near the
translocation breakpoint region (EWSR1), was characterized. Sequence analysis of 
the entire intron 6 region revealed a very high density of Alu elements. Most of 
these Alu sequences could be classified in previously described subfamilies,
facilitating delineation of an evolutionary model that involves successive
retroposition events. According to this model, the EWS intron 6 region
progressively expanded until about 5 million years ago. More recently (10(5)
years ago), in part of the human population, the size of this region decreased by
over 50% as the result of a homeologous recombination between two Alu sequences, 
which removed 2480 bp. This rare allele has only been observed in individuals of 
African origin, a population that is characterized by the lowest incidence of
Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 9050923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur J Cancer. 1997 Feb;33(2):239-43.

EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts identified in patients with typical neuroblastoma.

Burchill SA(1), Wheeldon J, Cullinane C, Lewis IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Candlelighter's Children's Cancer Research Laboratory, St James University
Hospital, Leeds, U.K.

Erratum in
    Eur J Cancer 1997 Oct;33(11):1907.
    Eur J Cancer 1997 Jul;33(8):1337.

The t(11.22)(q24.q12) results in expression of a chimeric RNA product, EWS-FLI1. 
This RNA product is expressed in over 85% of tumours belonging to the Ewing's
family, and is increasingly used as a definitive characteristic of these tumours.
In this study, we evaluated reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain (RT-PCR) for
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts in 18 neurally derived small round cell tumours.
These included six Ewing's family tumours and 12 neuroblastomas. EWS-FLI1 fusion 
transcripts were identified in all six Ewing's tumours, but also in two of the 12
neuroblastomas. One neuroblastoma contained the classic type 1 fusion transcript,
and the second a type 1 transcript containing a 66 bp (base pair) insert that was
not derived from the EWS or FLI1 gene. The presence of EWS-FLI1 fusion products
in RNA extracted from primary neuroblastoma suggests the identification of
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts is not pathognomonic for tumours of the Ewing's
family. The clinical significance of these fusion transcripts in neuroblastoma is
not known.

PMID: 9135495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Oncogene. 1997 Jan 30;14(4):451-61.

A topogenic role for the oncogenic N-terminus of TLS: nucleolar localization when
transcription is inhibited.

Zinszner H(1), Immanuel D, Yin Y, Liang FX, Ron D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, NYU
Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.

TLS (FUS) and the related gene EWS encode the N-terminal portion of many fusion
oncoproteins involved in human sarcomas and leukemia. TLS is an RNA-binding
nuclear protein that is identical to hnRNP P2 and may be implicated in mRNA
metabolism. When RNA polymerase II is inhibited, TLS immunostaining in the
nucleus is dramatically altered, from its normal diffuse nucleoplasmic pattern to
accumulation in dense nuclease-resistant aggregates. Co-immunostaining with
antibodies to fibrillarin or p80 coilin and immunoelectron microscopy revealed
that the TLS aggregates are associated with the nucleolus and are distinct from
other known structures such as the coiled body or the interchromatin granule.
Injection of cells with an oligodeoxynucleotide that disrupts splicing does not
result in redistribution of TLS, indicating that the event is specific to
inhibition of transcription. Oncoproteins that contain the N-terminal domain from
either TLS, EWS or their Drosophila homologue, SARFH (CAZ), are also targeted to 
the same structure. These findings suggest a correlation between the topogenic
and transforming activities of TLS and EWS N-termini and imply the existence of
cellular targets that are shared by the germ-line encoded proteins and their
oncogenic derivatives.

PMID: 9053842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Oncogene. 1997 Jan 16;14(2):213-21.

FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 function as ternary complex factors and ELK1 and SAP1a function
as ternary and quaternary complex factors on the Egr1 promoter serum response
elements.

Watson DK(1), Robinson L, Hodge DR, Kola I, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

The ETS gene products are a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins that
contain a highly conserved and structurally unique DNA binding domain, termed the
ETS domain. Several ETS proteins bind to DNA as monomers, however it has been
shown that the DNA binding activity is enhanced or modulated in the presence of
other factors. By differential display and whole genome PCR techniques, we have
recently shown that the Erg1 gene is a target for ETS proteins. The Egr1 promoter
contains multiple ETS binding sites, three of which exist as parts of two serum
response elements (SREI and SREII). The SRE is a cis-element that regulates the
expression of many growth factor responsive genes. ELK1 and SAP1a have been shown
to form ternary complexes with SRF on the SRE located in the c-fos promoter.
Similarly, we examined whether the ELK1, SAP1a, FLI1, EWS-FLI1, ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 
and PU.1 proteins can form ternary complexes with SRF on the Egr1 SREI and II.
Our results demonstrate that indeed ELK1, SAPla, FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 are able to
form ternary complexes with SRF on Egr1 SREs. In addition, ELK1 and SAP1a can
also form quarternary complexes on the Egr1 SREI. However, the proteins ETS1,
ETS2, PEA3 and PU.1 were unable to form ternary complexes with SRF on either the 
Egr1 or c-fos SREs. Our data demonstrate that FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 constitute new
members of a subgroup of ETS proteins that can function as ternary complex
factors and further implicate a novel function for these ETS transcription
factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene. By amino acid sequence comparison we 
found that, in fact, 50% of the amino acids present in the B-box of SAP1a and
ELK1, which are required for interaction with SRF, are identical to those present
in both FLI1 (amino acids 231- 248) and EWS-FLI1 proteins. This B-box is not
present in ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 or PU.1 and these proteins were unable to form
ternary complexes with SRF and Egrl-SREs or c-fos SRE. Furthermore, deletion of
194 amino terminal amino acids of FLI1 did not interfere with its ability to
interact with SRF, in fact, this truncation increased the stability of the
ternary complex. The FLI1 protein has a unique R-domain located next to the DNA
binding region. This R-domain may modulate the interaction with SRF, providing a 
mechanism that would be unique to FLI1 and EWS-FLI1, thus implicating a novel
function for these ETS transcription factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene.

PMID: 9010223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Clin Invest. 1997 Jan 15;99(2):239-47.

EWS-Fli1 antisense oligodeoxynucleotide inhibits proliferation of human Ewing's
sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor cells.

Tanaka K(1), Iwakuma T, Harimaya K, Sato H, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. ktanaka@yoda.nidr.nih.gov

The translocation t(11;22) is a common chromosomal abnormality detected both in
Ewing's sarcoma and in primitive neuroectodermal tumor cells. The translocation
results in an EWS-Fli1 fusion gene, made up of the 5' half of the EWS gene on
chromosome 22 fused to the 3' half of the Fli1 gene on chromosome 11. Recent
studies have evaluated possible roles of the fusion gene products. However, the
biological significance of EWS-Fli1 is still unknown. Using a competitive
polymerase chain reaction technique, we show here that there might be a
correlation between the expression levels of the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene and the
proliferative activities of Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor
cells. When the EWS-Fli1 expression is inhibited by antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides against the fusion RNA, the growth of the tumor cells is
significantly reduced both in vitro and in vivo. The data further indicate the
growth inhibition of the cells by the antisense sequence might be mediated by
G0/G1 block in the cell cycle progression. These results suggest that EWS-Fli1
may play an important role in the proliferation of the tumor cells, and the
EWS-Fli1 fusion RNA could be used as a target to inhibit the growth of Ewing's
sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor with the specific antisense
oligonucleotide.

PMCID: PMC507791
PMID: 9005992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1997;220:143-50.

Biology of EWS/FLI and related fusion genes in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor.

May WA(1), Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories, School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 90024, USA.

PMID: 9103680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Mol Biol. 1996 Dec 20;264(5):843-51.

Molecular cloning and subcellular localisation of the snRNP-associated protein
69KD, a structural homologue of the proto-oncoproteins TLS and EWS with RNA and
DNA-binding properties.

Hackl W(1), Lührmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

We recently isolated and characterised a 69 kDa protein (69KD) found associated
with spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs). Here, we report the 
molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding this protein, its nucleic acid binding
properties and its subcellular localisation. Sequence analysis of the 69KD cDNA
revealed: (1) that 69KD shares structural similarity with the human RNA binding
proteins TLS and EWS (95% and 65% identity, respectively), the products of two
genes frequently targeted by tumour-specific chromosomal translocations; (2) that
69KD contains a consensus RNA binding domain (CS-RBD) and three Arg/Gly-rich RNA 
binding motifs, structural features typical of many RNA binding proteins, in
particular of hnRNP proteins; and (3) that 69KD contains a single putative
Cys2/Cys2 zinc finger domain, a characteristic of many DNA-binding proteins.
Consistent with its possession of these motifs, 69KD display a general nucleic
acid binding activity, with a strong preference for guanyl and uridyl-rich RNA
sequences, as well as for single-stranded and double-stranded DNA. The functional
significance of this affinity for nucleic acids remains unclear. However, based
on the established association of 69KD with the Sm core domain of snRNPs in vivo,
these motifs might help mediate 69KD binding to snRNPs or be involved in some, as
yet, unknown aspect of RNA metabolism. Consistent with both possibilities, 69KD
is detected within typical snRNP containing subnuclear structures referred to as 
speckles, and is also more widely distributed throughout the nucleoplasm, as
observed for many hnRNP proteins.

PMID: 9000615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 19;13(12):2649-58.

EAT-2 is a novel SH2 domain containing protein that is up regulated by Ewing's
sarcoma EWS/FLI1 fusion gene.

Thompson AD(1), Braun BS, Arvand A, Stewart SD, May WA, Chen E, Korenberg J,
Denny C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90095, USA.

The EWS/FLI1 fusion protein is created by the translocation between chromosomes
11 and 22 that appears in most Ewing's sarcomas. This chimeric protein has been
demonstrated to be an aberrant transcription factor. Genes up regulated by
EWS/FLI1 but not by full-length FLI1 were identified by representational
difference analysis (RDA). We have characterized a novel gene, EWS/FLI1 activated
transcript 2 (EAT-2) that was cloned from a murine cDNA library using a
differentially expressed RDA fragment. EAT-2 expression is seen within 4-8 h of
EWS/FLI1 induction. Its expression correlates with transformation of NIH3T3 cells
by chimeric proteins related to EWS/FLI1 but not by unrelated genes. EAT-2 is
expressed in normal murine tissues and contains a unique but biochemically
functional SH2 domain. An homologous sequence in the human genome has been
identified and mapped to chromosome 1q22. Human EAT-2 transcripts were identified
by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in Ewing's sarcoma
cell tumour cell lines. EAT-2's unique structure and correlation with
transformation make it a candidate for playing a role in the transformation of
NIH3T3 cells and the oncogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 9000139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genomics. 1996 Nov 15;38(1):51-7.

Cloning and mapping of a human RBP56 gene encoding a putative RNA binding protein
similar to FUS/TLS and EWS proteins.

Morohoshi F(1), Arai K, Takahashi EI, Tanigami A, Ohki M.

Author information: 
(1)Radiobiology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan. fmorohos@ncc.go.jp

The EWS gene was found at the chromosome breakpoints in Ewing sarcoma, and the
FUS/TLS gene was found at the breakpoints of myxoid liposarcoma and acute myeloid
leukemia. These genes encode proteins that carry a highly homologous RNA binding 
domain. Fusion proteins made of the N-terminal half of EWS or FUS/TLS and
transcriptional regulatory proteins, also derived from genes located at
breakpoints, have been suggested to be involved in the pathogenesis of tumors. By
PCR amplification of human Namalwa cell cDNA using degenerate primers made from
the conserved amino acid sequences in the RNA binding domain of EWS and FUS/TLS, 
we obtained a cDNA fragment (RBP56 cDNA), the predicted amino acid sequences of
which were similar but not identical to those of EWS and FUS/TLS. Using this
fragment as a probe, we obtained two isoforms of cDNAs consisting of 2144 and
2153 bp, respectively, which encode proteins consisting of 589 and 592 amino acid
residues, respectively. The predicted amino acid sequences of RBP56 protein have 
a serine-, tyrosine-, glutamine-, and glycine-rich region in the N-terminal
region, an RNA binding domain and a C2C2 finger motif in the central region, and 
degenerate repeats of DR(S)GG(G)-YGG sequences in the C-terminal region. The
expression of RBP56 mRNA was observed in all of the human fetal and adult tissues
examined, as was the expression of EWS and FUS/TLS mRNAs. The RBP56 gene was
mapped to chromosome 17q11.2 to q12.

PMID: 8954779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Science. 1996 Oct 25;274(5287):605-10.

Tat-SF1: cofactor for stimulation of transcriptional elongation by HIV-1 Tat.

Zhou Q(1), Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Tat may stimulate transcriptional elongation by recruitment of a complex
containing Tat-SF1 and a kinase to the human immunodeficiency virus-type 1
(HIV-1) promoter through a Tat-TAR interaction. A complementary DNA for the
cellular activity, Tat-SF1, has been isolated. This factor is required for Tat
trans-activation and is a substrate of an associated cellular kinase.
Cotransfection with the complementary DNA for Tat-SF1 specifically modulates Tat 
activation. Tat-SF1 contains two RNA recognition motifs and a highly acidic
carboxyl-terminal half. It is distantly related to EWS and FUS/TLS, members of a 
family of putative transcription factors with RNA recognition motifs that are
associated with sarcomas.

PMID: 8849451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genomics. 1996 Oct 1;37(1):1-8.

Expression patterns of the human sarcoma-associated genes FUS and EWS and the
genomic structure of FUS.

Aman P(1), Panagopoulos I, Lassen C, Fioretos T, Mencinger M, Toresson H, Höglund
M, Forster A, Rabbitts TH, Ron D, Mandahl N, Mitelman F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Lund, Sweden.

FUS (TLS) was first identified as the 5'-part of a fusion gene with CHOP
(GADD153, DDIT3) in myxoid liposarcomas with t(12; 16)(q13; p11). Homologies were
found with the EWS oncogene, which is rearranged in Ewing sarcomas and other
neoplasias. The genomic structure of FUS shows extensive similarities with that
of EWS, but the exon/intron structures differ in the 5' parts, and overall FUS is
smaller than EWS. Exon 3 of FUS corresponds to exons 3 and 4 in EWS. FUS exons
4-6 correspond to EWS exons 5-8. Exons 7 to 15 of FUS are very similar to those
in EWS, although the EWS exons are larger than the corresponding FUS exons. FUS
and EWS were expressed in all tissues investigated. The transcripts were stable
within the 160-min half-life experiments. No or little variation in FUS or EWS
expression was seen when resting lymphocytes were activated. These observations
indicate that FUS and EWS belong to the housekeeping type of genes. This view is 
supported by the presence of the housekeeping gene type of promoter region in
both genes.

PMID: 8921363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1996 Oct;17(2):102-7.

Genomic PCR detects tumor cells in peripheral blood from patients with myxoid
liposarcoma.

Panagopoulos I(1), Aman P, Mertens F, Mandahl N, Rydholm A, Bauer HF, Mitelman F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

Myxoid liposarcoma (MLS) is the most common subtype of liposarcoma. The
cytogenetic hallmark of MLS is the pathognomonic t(12;16)(q13;p11), present in
more than 85% of cases. The translocation leads to the fusion of the CHOP and FUS
genes at 12q13 and 16p11, respectively, and the generation of a FUS/CHOP hybrid
protein. The presence of a tumor-specific chimeric gene makes it possible to
identify MLS cells by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). We have analyzed
peripheral blood samples obtained during a 10-year period at diagnosis of primary
and/or recurrent disease in 19 MLS patients with t(12;16) and in one MLS patient 
with t(12;22;20), resulting in the fusion of the CHOP and EWS genes. Nested PCR
on genomic DNA from blood samples amplified FUS/CHOP hybrid fragments in three
patients and EWS/CHOP in the patient with t(12;22;20). There was no obvious
association between PCR findings and clinical outcome, but larger series are
needed to draw any firm conclusions.

PMID: 8913727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. EMBO J. 1996 Sep 16;15(18):5022-31.

hTAF(II)68, a novel RNA/ssDNA-binding protein with homology to the
pro-oncoproteins TLS/FUS and EWS is associated with both TFIID and RNA polymerase
II.

Bertolotti A(1), Lutz Y, Heard DJ, Chambon P, Tora L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France.

TFIID is the main sequence-specific DNA-binding component of the RNA polymerase
II (Pol II) transcriptional machinery. It is a multiprotein complex composed of
the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and TBP-associated factors (TAF(II)s). Here we
report the cloning and characterization of a novel human TBP-associated factor,
hTAF(II)68. It contains a consensus RNA-binding domain (RNP-CS) and binds not
only RNA, but also single stranded (ss) DNA. hTAF(II)68 shares extensive sequence
similarity with TLS/FUS and EWS, two human nuclear RNA-binding pro-oncoproteins
which are products of genes commonly translocated in human sarcomas. Like
hTAF(II)68, TLS/FUS is also associated with a sub-population of TFIID complexes
chromatographically separable from those containing hTAF(II)68. Therefore, these 
RNA and/or ssDNA-binding proteins may play specific roles during transcription
initiation at distinct promoters. Moreover, we demonstrate that hTAF(II)68
co-purifies also with the human RNA polymerase II and can enter the preinitiation
complex together with Pol II.

PMCID: PMC452240
PMID: 8890175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Exp Cell Res. 1996 Sep 15;227(2):386-90.

Identification of a new coiled body component.

Alliegro MC(1), Alliegro MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Louisiana State University Medical Center, New Orleans 
70112, USA. mallie@lsumc.edu

Erratum in
    Exp Cell Res 1997 Mar 15;231(2):373.
    Exp Cell Res 1996 Dec 15;229(2):452-3.

Corrected and republished in
    Exp Cell Res. 1997 Mar 15;231(2):386-90.

Coiled bodies are small, round nuclear inclusions that have been identified in
many somatic cell types. Equivalent structures are found in the germinal vesicles
of amphibian and insect oocytes, known respectively as sphere organelles and
Binnenkörper. Their functions are not known, but their molecular composition is
being brought to light. In addition to the nucleolar protein, fibrillarin, coiled
bodies contain DNA topoisomerase I and an array of RNA processing molecules
characteristic of spliceosomes. One coiled body protein absent from nucleoli and 
spliceosomes, known as p80-coilin, has also been described. We have now
identified pigpen, a new member of the EWS family of proteins, as a second
protein enriched in coiled bodies. In an earlier report we found that pigpen's
structure and expression pattern were suggestive of a role in endothelial cell
proliferation and differentiation. In this brief report we characterize pigpen's 
nuclear compartment and describe its reorganization during mitosis.

PMID: 8831578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Cancer. 1996 Jul 29;67(3):339-42.

An EWS/ERG fusion with a truncated N-terminal domain of EWS in a Ewing's tumor.

Peter M(1), Mugneret F, Aurias A, Thomas G, Magdelenat H, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Transfert, INSERM U 434, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

As a result of chromosome translocations, the EWS gene is fused to a variety of
transcription factors in human solid tumors. Up to now, gene fusions of EWS with 
6 different partners have been described. In all fusions presently reported the
entire N-terminal domain of EWS (NTD-EWS) composed of 265 amino acids encoded by 
the first 7 exons of EWS was always included in the chimeric proteins, suggesting
that the integrity of this domain was mandatory for the oncogenic property of the
fusion proteins. We report the molecular characterization of a Ewing tumor
demonstrating a reciprocal t(21;22)(q22;q12) translocation. No EWS/ERG fusion
transcript could be detected with previously reported RT-PCR primers. However,
Southern-blot experiments demonstrated that the EWS gene was disrupted within a
2-kb PstI genomic fragment including exon 7. PCR amplification and sequence of
the translocation junction fragments indicated that the breakpoint was localized 
within exon 7 of EWS. The resulting fusion gene encoded a chimeric protein in
which a truncated NTD-EWS was linked, in frame, to the ETS DNA-binding domain of 
ERG. This observation indicates that, to avoid false negative results,
RT-PCR-based diagnosis of tumors with EWS fusion transcripts should now include
the search for such rare variants. It also suggests that the amino-terminal
portion of the NTD-EWS, but not its carboxy terminal part, might be fundamental
for the oncogenicity of the chimeric proteins.

PMID: 8707406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Dev Biol. 1996 Mar 15;174(2):288-97.

A nuclear protein regulated during the transition from active to quiescent
phenotype in cultured endothelial cells.

Alliegro MC(1), Alliegro MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Louisiana State University Medical Center, New Orleans 
70112, USA.

Pigpen is a 67-kDa Sepharose-binding molecule isolated from mammalian endothelial
and retinal pigmented epithelial cells. The protein is distributed
nonhomogeneously in the nucleus, exhibiting diffuse staining throughout
(excluding nucleoli), together with a small number of intensely stained focal
points, or granules, and punctate staining along the nuclear envelope. Pigpen was
absent or greatly attenuated in the nonepithelial cell types we examined,
including fibroblasts, myeloma, and astroglia. cDNA sequence analysis revealed a 
positively charged molecule with an RNP-CS RNA-binding domain, 19 RGG repeats,
and a consensus tyrosine phosphorylation site in the C-terminus. The amino
terminal portion of the molecule is characterized by 7 glutamine-rich hexapeptide
repeats similar to those found in the transactivation domain of known
transcription activators. Pigpen has a high level of identity with the FUS gene
product, TLS (Translocated in Liposarcoma; Crozat et al, 1993; Rabbits et al.,
1993), a new member of the EWS family of proteins. Expression of pigpen is
regulated during the transition between active and quiescent endothelial cell
phenotypes. Both mRNA and overall protein levels are maintained at a steady level
in actively growing cells. The number of nuclear granules increases as cultures
approach confluency. When cells reach confluency, overall expression is sharply
reduced and the number of nuclear focal points declines gradually. We observed
that reactivation of endothelial cells locally by wounding of confluent cultures 
resulted in a spatially restricted reactivation of pigpen expression. This
pattern of expression, taken together with structural data, suggests that pigpen 
may function in the growth and differentiation of endothelial cells during
angiogenesis.

PMID: 8631501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Mar 15;24(6):1052-8.

SRE elements are binding sites for the fusion protein EWS-FLI-1.

Magnaghi-Jaulin L(1), Masutani H, Robin P, Lipinski M, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie des Tumeurs Humaines, CNRS URA 1156, Villejuif,
France.

EWS-FLI-1 is a chimeric protein produced in most Ewing's sarcomas. It results
from the fusion of the N-terminal-encoding region of the EWS gene to the
C-terminal DNA-binding domain (the ETS domain) encoded by the FLI-1 ets family
gene. Both EWS-FLI-1 and FLI-1 proteins function as transcription factors that
bind specifically to ets sequences (the ets boxes) present in promoter elements. 
EWS- FLI-1 is a powerful transforming protein, whereas FLI-1 is not. In a search 
for potential DNA binding sites for these two proteins, we have tested their
ability to recognize the serum responsive element (SRE) in the c-fos promoter.
This cis element contains an ets box which can be occupied by members of the ETS 
protein family which do not bind DNA autonomously but form a ternary complex with
a second protein, p67SRF (serum responsive factor). We demonstrate here that
EWS-FLI-1, but not FLI-1, is able to form a ternary complex on the c-fos SRE.
Using a GST pull-down assay, we show that both FLI-1 and EWS-FLI-1 interact in
vitro with SRF in the absence of DNA. In electromobility shift assays, EWS-FLI-1 
binding to the SRE is detectable in the absence of SRF whereas the binding of
FLI-1 is not, suggesting that the interaction with DNA is the step which limits
ternary complex formation by FLI-1. Deletion of the N-terminal portion of FLI-1
resulted in a protein which behaved as EWS-FLI-1, suggesting the existence of an 
N- terminal inhibitory domain in the normal protein. Taken together, our data
indicate that there are intrinsic differences in the binding of EWS-FLI-1 and
FLI-1 proteins to distinct ets sequences.

PMCID: PMC145748
PMID: 8604338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Feb 15;219(2):608-12.

A novel chimera gene between EWS and E1A-F, encoding the adenovirus E1A
enhancer-binding protein, in extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma.

Urano F(1), Umezawa A, Hong W, Kikuchi H, Hata J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma/PNET, a tumor of the bone and soft tissue, is one of the most
common causes of tumor death among youths. This tumor does not have specific
phenotypes, but does have characteristic chromosomal translocations. Furthermore,
the expression of EWS/FLI-1 or EWS/ERG chimeric genes was found to be generated
through a t(11;22)(q24;q12) or a t(21;22)(q22;q12) translocation. In this study, 
we identified a new chimera gene between the transactivation domain of EWS and
E1A-F, encoding the adenovirus E1A enhancer-binding protein. Since E1A-F is known
to activate matrix metalloproteinase genes, the chimera gene may possibly be
involved in tumor progression and could be a novel tumor marker for Ewing's
sarcoma/PNET.

PMID: 8605035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Feb 6;93(3):1038-43.

Olfactory neuroblastoma is a peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor related
to Ewing sarcoma.

Sorensen PH(1), Wu JK, Berean KW, Lim JF, Donn W, Frierson HF, Reynolds CP,
López-Terrada D, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, British Columbia's Children's Hospital, Vancouver,
Canada.

Olfactory neuroblastoma (ONB) is a malignant tumor of the nasal mucosa whose
histogenesis is unclear. A relationship to neuroblastoma (NB), a pediatric tumor 
of the sympathetic nervous system, is based on morphologic similarities and the
expression of similar neural antigens. However, the clinical presentation of ONB 
differs from that of NB, and MYCN amplification characteristic of NB is not
observed. We have therefore examined the relationship of this malignancy to other
classes of neural tumors. In previous studies, two ONB cell lines demonstrated
cytogenetic features and patterns of protooncogene expression suggestive of a
relationship to the Ewing sarcoma family of childhood peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs). The pPNETs show t(11;22)(q24;q12) or
t(21;22)(q22;q12) chromosomal translocations fusing the EWS gene from 22q12 with 
either the FL11 gene on 11q24 or the ERG gene on 21q22. We therefore analyzed
ONBs for the presence of pPNET-associated gene fusions. Both cell lines showed
rearrangement of the EWS gene, and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of
each case demonstrated fusion of EWS and FL11 genomic sequences. Moreover, both
lines expressed EWS/FL11 fusion transcripts with in-frame junctions between exon 
7 of EWS and exon 6 of FL11 as described for pPNETs. We identified similar gene
fusions in four of six primary ONB cases. None of the cases expressed tyrosine
hydroxylase, a catecholamine biosynthetic enzyme widely expressed in NB. Our
studies indicate that ONB is not a NB but is a member of the pPNET family.

PMCID: PMC40026
PMID: 8577710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1996 Feb;15(2):115-21.

Fusion of an ETS-family gene, EIAF, to EWS by t(17;22)(q12;q12) chromosome
translocation in an undifferentiated sarcoma of infancy.

Kaneko Y(1), Yoshida K, Handa M, Toyoda Y, Nishihira H, Tanaka Y, Sasaki Y,
Ishida S, Higashino F, Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Chemotherapy, Saitama Cancer Center Hospital, Japan.

EIAF is a newly isolated ETS-family gene that is located on 17q21 and codes for
the adenovirus EIA enhancer-binding protein. In our chromosome analysis of 18 of 
the Ewing family of tumors and undifferentiated sarcomas, we found
t(17;22)(q12;q12) in an MIC2 antigen-positive undifferentiated sarcoma of
infancy. On Southern blot analysis, EWS and EIAF cDNA probes hybridized to the
same rearranged band, indicating that an EWS-EIAF fusion gene was formed in the
tumor. Further Southern blot analysis using four EIAF cDNA probes of different
sizes showed that the breakpoint lies in the region upstream to the ETS domain of
the EIAF gene. EIAF may be the fourth ETS-family gene to be identified forming a 
fusion gene with EWS. We assume that the RNA binding domain of EWS may have been 
replaced by the DNA binding domain of EIAF in the EWS-EIAF fusion protein as in
other fusion proteins previously characterized in Ewing sarcoma and other types
of sarcomas.

PMID: 8834175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncogene. 1996 Feb 1;12(3):489-94.

Fusion of the EWS and CHOP genes in myxoid liposarcoma.

Panagopoulos I(1), Höglund M, Mertens F, Mandahl N, Mitelman F, Aman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Sweden.

The translocation t(12;16)(q13;p11), which cytogenetically characterizes myxoid
liposarcomas (MLS), results in a fusion of the CHOP gene in 12q13 and the FUS
gene in 16p11, creating a chimeric FUS/CHOP gene. We have identified two cases of
MLS with translocations giving rise to recombination between 12q13 and 22q12. The
result was a fusion of the N-terminal part of the EWS gene in 22q12, involved in 
a number of mesenchymal tumor types, with the CHOP gene and the creation of an
EWS/CHOP chimeric gene. The presence of the EWS/CHOP chimeric gene in MLS shows
that (i) the N-terminal part of FUS may be replaced by the N-terminal part of EWS
in a CHOP fusion oncoprotein (ii) the two N-terminal parts, when fused to certain
transcription factors, have a common or very similar oncogenic potential and
(iii) the tumorigenic process in MLS and the morphogenetically distinctly
different EWS-associated tumor types may be related.

PMID: 8637704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Oncogene. 1996 Jan 18;12(2):229-35.

Fusion of the EWS gene to CHN, a member of the steroid/thyroid receptor gene
superfamily, in a human myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Clark J(1), Benjamin H, Gill S, Sidhar S, Goodwin G, Crew J, Gusterson BA,
Shipley J, Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology and Experimental Pathology, Haddow Laboratories,
Belmont, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

The specific chromosomal translocation t(9;22)(q22-31;q11-12) has been observed
in the myxoid variant of human chondrosarcoma. In agreement with this observation
we report that the EWS gene located at chromosome band 22q12 becomes fused to
CHN, a member of the steroid/thyroid receptor gene superfamily located at
9q22-31, in a skeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. CHN appears to be the human
homologue of the rat gene NOR1, which was recently identified as a sequence
overexpressed in rat brain cells undergoing apoptosis. Our results also indicate 
that the chimaeric EWS-CHN gene encodes a EWS-CHN fusion protein in which the
C-terminal RNA-binding domain of EWS is replaced by the entire CHN protein,
comprising a long N-terminal domain, a central DNA binding domain and a
C-terminal ligand-binding/dimerisation domain.

PMID: 8570200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncogene. 1996 Jan 4;12(1):159-67.

The EWS-ATF-1 gene involved in malignant melanoma of soft parts with t(12;22)
chromosome translocation, encodes a constitutive transcriptional activator.

Fujimura Y(1), Ohno T, Siddique H, Lee L, Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute,
Philadelphia, PA 19107-5541, USA.

Molecular characterization of malignant melanoma of soft parts or soft tissue
clear cell sarcoma which shares t(12;22) chromosome translocation revealed fusion
of EWS with a transcriptional factor gene ATF-1. The EWS gene, which encodes an
RNA binding protein, was also shown to be involved in Ewing sarcoma, related
primitive neuroectodermal tumors and desmoplastic small round cell tumors. In
order to understand the functional role of EWS-ATF-1 chimeric protein in human
solid tumors, we have cloned the aberrant human ATF-1 (EWS-ATF-1) cDNA and
studied its DNA binding, transcriptional activation properties and compared with 
normal ATF-1 protein. Our results demonstrate that EWS-ATF-1 binds weakly to DNA 
in vitro but functions as an efficient constitutive transcriptional activator
unlike the normal ATF-1 which needs to be induced with cAMP. Deletion analysis
revealed that EWS-fusion domain functions as a regulatory domain for the
transcriptional activation properties of EWS-ATF-1 chimeric protein. Deletion of 
leucine zipper domain results in a loss of transcriptional activation of
EWS-ATF-1 chimeric protein suggesting that protein-protein interaction play a
role in the transcriptional activation properties of EWS-ATF-1. We demonstrate
that EWS-fusion domain negatively regulates the DNA binding activity of EWS-ATF-1
chimeric protein. Therefore replacement of part of the amino-terminal kinase
regulatory domain of ATF-1 protein with EWS regulatory domain results in an
altered DNA binding, protein-protein interactions and transcriptional activation 
properties of EWS-ATF-1 causing deregulated gene expression which may be
responsible for the genesis of t(12;22) chromosome translocation-bearing human
solid tumors. Targeting the transcriptional cofactors (CBP, etc) by EWS-fusion
proteins could be one of the mechanisms of activation of EWS-fusion proteins in
human neoplasia.

PMID: 8552387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Dec;4(12):2219-26.

Oncogenic conversion of a novel orphan nuclear receptor by chromosome
translocation.

Labelle Y(1), Zucman J, Stenman G, Kindblom LG, Knight J, Turc-Carel C,
Dockhorn-Dworniczak B, Mandahl N, Desmaze C, Peter M, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique des Tumeurs, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

A recurrent t(9;22) (q22;q12) chromosome translocation has been described in
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC). Fluorescent in situ hybridization
experiments performed on one EMC tumour indicated that the chromosome 22
breakpoint occurred in the EWS gene. Northern blot analysis revealed an aberrant 
EWS transcript which is cloned by a modified RT-PCR procedure. This transcript
consists of an in-frame fusion of the 5' end of EWS to a previously unidentified 
gene, which was named TEC. This fusion transcript was detected in six of eight
EMC studied, and three different junction types between the two genes were found.
In all junction types, the putative translation product contained the
amino-terminal transactivation domain of EWS linked to the entire TEC protein.
Homology analysis showed that the predicted TEC protein contains a DNA-binding
domain characteristic of nuclear receptors. The highest identity scores were
observed with the NURR1 family of orphan nuclear receptors. These receptors are
involved in the control of cell proliferation and differentiation by modulating
the response to growth factors and retinoic acid. This work provides, after the
PML/RAR alpha gene fusion, the second example of the oncogenic conversion of a
nuclear receptor and the first example involving the orphan subfamily. Analysis
of the disturbance induced by the EWS/TEc protein in the nuclear receptor network
and their target genes may lead to new approaches for EMC treatment.

PMID: 8634690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Hum Pathol. 1995 Dec;26(12):1370-4.

EWS and WT-1 gene fusion in desmoplastic small round cell tumor of the abdomen.

Brodie SG(1), Stocker SJ, Wardlaw JC, Duncan MH, McConnell TS, Feddersen RM,
Williams TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico, School of Medicine,
Albuquerque 87131, USA.

Chromosome translocations found in neoplasms often result in the creation of
hybrid genes encoding chimeric proteins. This case study describes a patient with
desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) of the abdomen, an aggressive
neoplasm characterized by translocation of chromosomes 11 and 22. Southern
hybridization showed that the Ewing sarcoma gene (EWS) gene was rearranged in the
DSRCT. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of tumor cell RNA
revealed that exons 1 to 7 of the EWS gene were joined to exons 8 to 10 of the
Wilms' Tumor-1 (WT-1) gene resulting in the production of a chimeric message. The
WT-1 and EWS genes encode DNA and RNA binding proteins involved in Wilms' tumor
and Ewing sarcoma pathogenesis, respectively. The fusion of these two genes in
DSRCT results in the production of a putatively oncogenic protein composed of the
zinc finger DNA binding domains of WT-1 linked to potential transcriptional
regulatory domains of EWS. DNA sequencing revealed the genomic breakpoints of
translocation on chromosomes 11 and 22. The genomic breakpoint on chromosome 22
occurred in EWS intron 7 just 2 nucleotides 3' of exon 7. Polymerase chain
reaction-based assays were developed that could detect the fused genes in the
DSRCT tumor using either RNA or genomic DNA. The potential diagnostic use of
these assays is discussed.

PMID: 8522311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Pathol. 1995 Dec;147(6):1584-91.

Detection of chimeric transcripts in desmoplastic small round cell tumor and
related developmental tumors by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. 
A specific diagnostic assay.

de Alava E(1), Ladanyi M, Rosai J, Gerald WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor is a recently described entity associated
with fusion of the EWS and WT1 genes and with expression of a chimeric
transcript. To investigate the structure and potential diagnostic utility of the 
detection of EWS-WT1 chimeric RNA in desmoplastic small round cell tumor, 12
examples of this entity and 49 other tumors that enter in its differential
diagnosis were studied by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for the
presence of EWS-WT1, EWS-FLI-1, PAX3-FKHR, and PAX7-FKHR chimeric transcripts.
EWS-WT1 was detected in 11 of 12 desmoplastic small round cell tumors but not in 
any other tumor type studied, including 17 Wilms' tumors, 10 Ewing's
sarcomas/primitive neuroectodermal tumors, 13 alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, and 9
embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas. One desmoplastic small round cell tumor was found to
have a variant EWS-WT1 chimeric product that included exon 8 of EWS EWS-FLI-1
chimeric RNA was present in all Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor
and not identified in any other tumor types, including desmoplastic small round
cell tumor. PAX3/PAX7-FKHR chimeras were present in 9 of 13 alveolar
rhabdomyosarcomas but not in any other tumors. Detection of chimeric transcripts 
by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction is a very specific aid in
differential diagnosis of developmental tumors and further establishes
desmoplastic small round cell tumor as a distinct entity.

PMCID: PMC1869955
PMID: 7495283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Oncogene. 1995 Sep 21;11(6):1049-54.

Loss of tumorigenicity of Ewing's sarcoma cells expressing antisense RNA to
EWS-fusion transcripts.

Ouchida M(1), Ohno T, Fujimura Y, Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107-5541, USA.

Cytogenetic analysis of Ewing's sarcoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumors and
Askin tumors revealed characteristic translocations t(11;22) or t(21;22).
Molecular analysis of these translocations revealed 5'-region of EWS gene (from
band 22q12) is fused to the 3'-region of either Fli-1 gene (from band 11q24) or
erg gene (from band 21q22). Functional characterization of the EWS-Fli-1 and
EWS-erg chimeric proteins suggested that they function as transcriptional
activators. In order to develop therapeutic agents, it is essential to know
whether expression of the EWS-fusion gene products is coupled to tumorigenicity
of Ewing's sarcoma cells and if targeting the EWS-fusion products results in loss
of tumorigenicity of Ewing's sarcoma cells. For this reason, we have made stable 
Ewing's sarcomas expressing antisense EWS-Fli-1 or EWS-erg expression plasmids.
Expression of antisense EWS fusion transcripts resulted in a significant loss of 
endogenous EWS-Fli-1 and EWS-erg proteins in Ewing's sarcoma cells. These cells
expressing antisense EWS fusion transcripts showed loss of anchorage independent 
growth and tumorigenicity in nude mice unlike the parental Ewing's sarcoma cells.
These results demonstrate the necessity of a certain threshold level of
expression of EWS-fusion products in the clonogenicity and tumorigenicity of
Ewing's sarcoma cells and therefore emphasizes the importance of targeting the
EWS-fusion products as a therapy for Ewing family of tumors.

PMID: 7566963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4623-30.

Identification of target genes for the Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI fusion protein by 
representational difference analysis.

Braun BS(1), Frieden R, Lessnick SL, May WA, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90024, USA.

The EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene results from the 11;22 chromosomal translocation in
Ewing's sarcoma. The product of the gene is one of a growing number of
structurally altered transcription factors implicated in oncogenesis. We have
employed a subtractive cloning strategy of representational difference analysis
in conjunction with a model transformation system to identify genes transcribed
in response to EWS/FLI. We have characterized eight transcripts that are
dependent on EWS/FLI for expression and two transcripts that are repressed in
response to EWS/FLI. Three of the former were identified by sequence analysis as 
stromelysin 1, a murine homolog of cytochrome P-450 F1 and cytokeratin 15.
Stromelysin 1 is induced rapidly after expression of EWS/FLI, suggesting that the
stromelysin 1 gene may be a direct target gene of EWS/FLI. These results
demonstrate that expression of EWS/FLI leads to significant changes in the
transcription of specific genes and that these effects are at least partially
distinct from those caused by expression of germ line FLI-1. The representational
difference analysis technique can potentially be applied to investigate
transformation pathways activated by a broad array of genes in different tumor
systems.

PMCID: PMC230703
PMID: 7623854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4562-71.

Association of SARFH (sarcoma-associated RNA-binding fly homolog) with regions of
chromatin transcribed by RNA polymerase II.

Immanuel D(1), Zinszner H, Ron D.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, New York 
University Medical Center, New York 10016, USA.

Many oncogenes associated with human sarcomas are composed of a fusion between
transcription factors and the N-terminal portions of two similar RNA-binding
proteins, TLS and EWS. Though the oncogenic fusion proteins lack the RNA-binding 
domain and do not bind RNA, the contribution from the N-terminal portion of the
RNA-binding protein is essential for their transforming activity. TLS and EWS
associate in vivo with RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcripts. To learn more
about the target gene specificity of this interaction, the localization of a
Drosophila melanogaster protein that has extensive sequence identity to the
C-terminal RNA-binding portions of TLS and EWS was studied in preparations of
Drosophila polytene nuclei. cDNA clones encoding the full-length Drosophila
TLS-EWS homolog, SARFH (stands for sarcoma-associated RNA-binding fly homolog),
were isolated. Functional similarity to TLS and EWS was revealed by the
association of SARFH with Pol II transcripts in mammalian cells and by the
ability of SARFH to elicit homologous down-regulation of the levels of the
mammalian proteins. The SARFH gene is expressed in the developing Drosophila
embryo from the earliest stages of cellularization and is subsequently found in
many cell types. In preparations of polytene chromosomes from salivary gland
nuclei, SARFH antibodies recognize their target associated with the majority of
active transcription units, revealed by colocalization with the phosphorylated
form of RNA Pol II. We conclude that SARFH and, by homology, EWS and TLS
participate in a function common to the expression of most genes transcribed by
RNA Pol II.

PMCID: PMC230696
PMID: 7623847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Oncogene. 1995 May 4;10(9):1749-56.

Promoters containing ATF-binding sites are de-regulated in cells that express the
EWS/ATF1 oncogene.

Brown AD(1), Lopez-Terrada D, Denny C, Lee KA.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Clare Hall Laboratories, South Mimms,
Hertfordshire, UK.

Chromosomal translocations that fuse the N-terminal region of the Ewings sarcoma 
oncogene (EWS) to the C-terminal region (including the DNA-binding domain) of the
cellular transcription factor ATF1 are associated with a tumour type termed
malignant melanoma of soft parts (MMSP). It is envisioned that transformation by 
the EWS/ATF1 fusion protein results from aberrant transcriptional regulation of
genes that are normally regulated by ATF1. To examine this hypothesis we have
expressed exogenous EWS-ATF1 in JEG3 cells and tested its ability to activate
several promoters that contain binding sites for ATF1. We show that EWS-ATF1 is a
strong constitutive activator of some promoters tested but represses others.
Significantly, the ability of particular promoters to be activated by EWS/ATF1 in
JEG3 cells correlates with promoter activity in two MMSP-derived cell lines
(SU-CCS-1 and DTC1). Our results therefore provide evidence that endogenous
EWS/ATF1 can de-regulate transcription and that this capacity may contribute to
transformation in MMSP.

PMID: 7753552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1995 Apr;12(4):307-10.

Fusion of the EWS gene to a DNA segment from 9q22-31 in a human myxoid
chondrosarcoma.

Gill S(1), McManus AP, Crew AJ, Benjamin H, Sheer D, Gusterson BA, Pinkerton CR, 
Patel K, Cooper CS, Shipley JM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Haddow Laboratories, Sutton, Surrey,
United Kingdom.

Southern blot analyses revealed a rearrangement of the EWS gene in a skeletal
human myxoid chondrosarcoma. Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
studies, using cosmid clones F7 and G9 that flank the EWS locus on 22q12,
confirmed the presence of this EWS gene abnormality. Cloning the rearranged EWS
DNA fragment and mapping by FISH demonstrated that the EWS gene is joined to DNA 
sequences localised in 9q22-31. These findings are consistent with previous
cytogenetic reports of a recurrent t(9;22)(q22-31;q11-12) in the myxoid variant
of chondrosarcoma and reveal involvement of the EWS gene in a fourth type of
human sarcoma.

PMID: 7539287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Oncogene. 1995 Mar 16;10(6):1229-34.

A variant Ewing's sarcoma translocation (7;22) fuses the EWS gene to the ETS gene
ETV1.

Jeon IS(1), Davis JN, Braun BS, Sublett JE, Roussel MF, Denny CT, Shapiro DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38101.

Most Ewing's sarcomas or related primitive neuroectodermal tumors have the
(11;22)(q24;q12) or less frequently the (21;22)(q22;q12) translocation. These
rearrangements fuse the EWS gene on chromosome 22q12 to either the FLI1 or ERG
genes, both members of the ETS family of transcription factors. Simple variant
chromosomal translocations have been occasionally described in these tumors. We
have identified a third Ewing's sarcoma translocation, the t(7;22)(p22;q12), that
fuses EWS to the human homologue of the murine ETS gene ER81. This gene,
designated ETV1 (for ETS Translocation Variant), is located on chromosome band
7p22. Identical EWS nucleotide sequences found in the majority of EWS-FLI1 and
EWS-ERG chimeric transcripts are fused to a portion of ETV1 encoding an ETS
domain with sequence specific DNA-binding activity. These findings confirm that
the fusion of EWS to different ETS family members can result in a similar tumor
phenotype.

PMID: 7700648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Res. 1995 Mar 15;55(6):1385-92.

Biphenotypic sarcomas with myogenic and neural differentiation express the
Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI1 fusion gene.

Sorensen PH(1), Shimada H, Liu XF, Lim JF, Thomas G, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, British Columbia's Children's
Hospital/University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Accurate diagnosis of primitive childhood sarcomas continues to be a formidable
problem because these malignancies generally demonstrate very little
morphological evidence of their tissue of origin. One of these tumor classes, the
Ewing's sarcoma family of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs),
are thought to have a neural histogenesis based on evidence of neuroectodermal
differentiation. Greater than 95% of pPNETs carry t(11;22) or t(21;22)
chromosomal translocations which fuse the EWS gene from chromosome 22q12 in-frame
with either FLI1 from chromosome 11q24 or ERG from chromosome 21q22. The pPNETs
are considered to be histogenetically distinct from rhabdomyosarcomas, myogenic
tumors lacking these EWS gene fusions and hypothesized to derive from immature
skeletal muscle precursors. In the present study, we describe a unique set of
childhood soft tissue sarcomas that show both neural and myogenic
differentiation. These biphenotypic tumors express myogenic regulatory factors
and muscle-specific antigens and also show neuroectodermal differentiation with
ultrastructural evidence of neurosecretory granules and expression of
neural-associated genes. Northern analysis and reverse transcriptase PCR reveal
expression of EWS/FLI1 gene fusions in all biphenotypic sarcomas analyzed.
Chimeric EWS/FLI1 transcripts and fusion proteins in these tumors are identical
to those described for pPNETs. Our results provide evidence for a class of
biphenotypic childhood sarcomas with myogenic and neural differentiation and
suggest that these tumors may be related to the Ewing's sarcoma family of pPNETs.

PMID: 7882340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Mar 11;23(5):835-43.

Cabeza, a Drosophila gene encoding a novel RNA binding protein, shares homology
with EWS and TLS, two genes involved in human sarcoma formation.

Stolow DT(1), Haynes SR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We have previously described a partial Drosophila cDNA, clone P19, which bears
homology to members of the RNA recognition motif (RRM) family of proteins [Haynes
et al. (1987) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 84, 1819-1823]. RNA binding as well as 
involvement in RNA processing has been demonstrated for some RRM proteins. We
report here the further characterization of P19, which we renamed cabeza (caz).
caz is located on the X chromosome at position 14B. Using Northern analysis, at
least four transcripts from the caz gene were observed at varying levels during
development. caz mRNA and protein are enriched in the brain and central nervous
system during embryogenesis. In addition, the protein is enriched in the adult
head. UV crosslinking was used to demonstrate in vitro RNA binding activity for
full-length recombinant caz protein and for the caz RRM domain. Sequence analysis
revealed caz is related to two human genes, EWS and TLS, which are involved in
chromosomal translocations. The fusion of EWS and TLS to other cellular genes
results in sarcoma formation. In addition to their overall structural
organization and sequence similarity, these three genes share an RRM which is
divergent from typical RRMs. Therefore, it appears that these genes constitute a 
new sub-family of RNA binding proteins.

PMCID: PMC306767
PMID: 7708500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Feb 14;92(4):1028-32.

Characterization of the genomic breakpoint and chimeric transcripts in the
EWS-WT1 gene fusion of desmoplastic small round cell tumor.

Gerald WL(1), Rosai J, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor is a recently recognized distinctive tumor
shown to be associated with a recurrent translocation, t(11;22)(p13;q12), and
rearrangement of the genes for Ewing sarcoma (EWS) and Wilms tumor (WT1). A
genomic DNA fragment containing the EWS-WT1 gene fusion has been isolated from a 
desmoplastic small round cell tumor, and the breakpoint has been characterized.
The breakpoints involve the intron between EWS exons 7 and 8 and the intron
between WT1 exons 7 and 8. Chimeric transcripts corresponding to the fusion gene 
were detected in four of six cases studied. Analysis of these transcripts show an
in-frame fusion of RNA encoding the amino-terminal domain of EWS to both
alternatively spliced forms of the last three zinc fingers of the DNA-binding
domain of WT1. Desmoplastic small round cell tumor represents the third tumor
type associated with translocation of EWS and the first tumor associated with
consistent translocation of WT1. The chimeric products are predicted to modulate 
transcription at WT1 target sites and contribute to development of this unique
tumor.

PMCID: PMC42630
PMID: 7862627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Oncogene. 1995 Feb 2;10(3):423-31.

Multiple domains mediate transformation by the Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI-1 fusion
gene.

Lessnick SL(1), Braun BS, Denny CT, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories,
University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The (11;22) chromosomal translocation found in Ewing's sarcoma and related tumors
fuses the amino terminus of the EWS protein to the DNA-binding domain of the
FLI-1 transcription factor. In contrast to normal FLI-1, the EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transforms NIH3T3 cells and this activity requires both EWS and FLI-1 sequences. 
Reporter gene assays showed that the portion of EWS fused to FLI-1 encodes a
strong transcriptional activation domain. To determine whether this function is
necessary for transformation by EWS/FLI-1, deletion analysis of EWS was
performed. We found that the EWS domain could be functionally subdivided into two
regions: (i) an amino terminal domain (domain A) which transforms efficiently
when fused to FLI-1 but has little transactivation activity in a model system and
(ii) a distal region (domain B) which transactivates efficiently but transforms
less efficiently when fused to FLI-1. Replacement of the EWS domain with known
heterologous transcriptional activation domains yielded chimeric FLI-1 fusions
that in some instances could transform NIH3T3 cells. Finally we demonstrate that 
EWS/FLI-1 and related FLI-1 chimeras are able to cooperate with another
transcription factor to activate a model reporter gene. These results further
demonstrate that EWS/FLI-1 is an aberrant transcription factor and suggest that
the EWS domain mediates important protein-protein interactions with other factors
resulting in the transcriptional modulation of target genes.

PMID: 7845667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Oncogene. 1994 Dec;9(12):3717-29.

TLS/FUS fusion domain of TLS/FUS-erg chimeric protein resulting from the t(16;21)
chromosomal translocation in human myeloid leukemia functions as a
transcriptional activation domain.

Prasad DD(1), Ouchida M, Lee L, Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute,
Philadelphia, PA 19107-5541.

EWS and TLS/FUS genes, which code for RNA binding proteins are involved in a wide
variety of human solid tumors. The TLS/FUS gene is involved both in human myxoid 
liposarcomas which carry a characteristic chromosomal translocation,
t(12;16)(q13;p11) and in human myeloid leukemias with recurrent chromosomal
translocation, t(16;21)(p11:q22). The TLS/FUS gene is fused to a transcriptional 
repressor, CHOP (in human myxoid liposarcomas) or transcriptional activator, erg 
(in human myeloid leukemias). To understand better the functional role of
TLS/FUS-erg in human myeloid leukemias, we have cloned the TLS/FUS and
TLS/FUS-erg cDNAs and studied the functional properties of their gene products.
TLS/FUS protein binds to RNA in vitro and shows preferential binding to poly G.
Both the amino- and the carboxy- terminal regions of TLS/FUS containing the
conserved RNA binding motifs are needed for poly G specific RNA binding activity.
The TLS/FUS fusion domain (TFD) appears to regulate the DNA binding activity of
TLS/FUS-erg chimeric protein which shows weaker transcriptional activation
properties compared to normal erg proteins. Mutational analysis of the
TLS/FUS-erg chimeric protein reveals TFD to function as a transcriptional
activation domain thus replacing the amino terminal transcriptional activation
domain of the erg protein. Therefore alterations in both DNA binding and
transcriptional activation properties of aberrant erg proteins may be responsible
for the genesis of t(16;21) chromosomal translocation-bearing human myeloid
leukemias.

PMID: 7970732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1994 Dec;11(4):256-62.

Fusion of the FUS gene with ERG in acute myeloid leukemia with t(16;21)(p11;q22).

Panagopoulos I(1), Aman P, Fioretos T, Höglund M, Johansson B, Mandahl N, Heim S,
Behrendtz M, Mitelman F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

It has been shown that the gene ERG in 21q22 is rearranged in the
t(16;21)(p11;q22) associated with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). ERG is a member
of the ETS gene family and is fused with EWS in a subset of Ewing's sarcomas. EWS
in 22q12 has a very high homology with FUS (also called TLS) in 16p11; the latter
gene is rearranged in the t(12;16)(q13;p11) that characterizes myxoid
liposarcoma. To investigate whether FUS is involved in the t(16;21) of AML, we
used the Southern blot technique and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to examine
the bone marrow of a 3-year-old boy with a t(16;21)(p11;q22)-positive AML.
Hybridization of Southern blot filters containing digested DNA with probes for
FUS and ERG showed both germline and aberrant fragments. Using specific primers
for the 5' part of FUS and the 3' part of ERG, we amplified a 4.4 kb genomic
FUS/ERG DNA fragment from the leukemic sample. In a second PCR experiment, in
which we used primers upstream of the 5' part of ERG and downstream of the 3'
part of FUS, a 5.6 kb fragment was amplified. Blotting and hybridization with
specific probes for FUS and ERG revealed that the amplified fragments consisted
of FUS/ERG and ERG/FUS hybrid DNA. Both PCR fragments, when used as probes,
detected germline ERG and FUS as well as aberrant fragments on Southern blot
filters. The results suggest that the t(16;21) in AML leads to rearrangement and 
fusion of the FUS and ERG genes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7533529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Genes Dev. 1994 Nov 1;8(21):2513-26.

A novel effector domain from the RNA-binding protein TLS or EWS is required for
oncogenic transformation by CHOP.

Zinszner H(1), Albalat R, Ron D.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, New York 
University Medical Center, New York, New York 10016.

In human myxoid liposarcoma, a chromosomal rearrangement leads to fusion of the
growth-arresting and DNA-damage-inducible transcription factor CHOP (GADD153) to 
a peptide fragment encoded by the TLS gene. We have found that wild-type TLS and 
a closely related sarcoma-associated protein, EWS, are both abundant nuclear
proteins that associate in vivo with products of RNA polymerase II transcription.
This association leads to the formation of a ternary complex with other
heterogeneous RNA-binding proteins (hnRNPs), such as A1 and C1/C2. An
NIH-3T3-based transformation assay was used to study the oncogenic role of the
sarcoma-associated domain of these RNA-binding proteins. Transduction of the
TLS-CHOP oncogene into cells by means of a retroviral expression vector leads to 
loss of contact inhibition, acquisition of the ability to grow as colonies in
soft agar, and tumor formation in nude mice. Mutations that interfere with the
function of the leucine zipper dimerization domain or the adjacent basic region
of CHOP abolish transformation. The essential role of the TLS component was
revealed by the inability of truncated forms to fully transform cells. Domain
swap between TLS- and EWS-associated oncogenes demonstrated that the component
contributed by the RNA-binding proteins are functionally interchangeable, whereas
the transcription factor component specifies tumor phenotype. The
sarcoma-associated component of TLS and EWS contribute a strong transcriptional
activation domain to the fusion proteins; however, transforming activity cannot
be fully substituted by fusion of CHOP to other strong trans-activators. The
juxtaposition of a novel effector domain from sarcoma-associated RNA-binding
proteins to the targeting domain of transcription factors such as CHOP leads to
the creation of a potent oncogene.

PMID: 7958914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncogene. 1994 Oct;9(10):3087-97.

The EWS gene, involved in Ewing family of tumors, malignant melanoma of soft
parts and desmoplastic small round cell tumors, codes for an RNA binding protein 
with novel regulatory domains.

Ohno T(1), Ouchida M, Lee L, Gatalica Z, Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute,
Philadelphia, PA 19107-5541.

The EWS gene, which maps to band q12 of human chromosome 22, is involved in a
wide variety of human solid tumors including Ewing sarcoma, related primitive
neuroectodermal tumors, malignant melanoma of soft parts and desmoplastic small
round cell tumors. In these tumors, the EWS is fused to genes encoding
transcriptional activators/repressors, like Fli-1 or erg or ATF 1 or wt1. To
better understand the function of the EWS protein, we cloned the EWS cDNA.
Sequence analysis of this cDNA revealed differential splicing involving two exons
encoding 72 amino acids. Both alternatively spliced transcripts, EWS and EWS-b,
are expressed in a variety of cells. Because EWS proteins contain putative
conserved RNA binding motifs, we studied the RNA binding properties of the EWS
protein. The EWS-b protein binds to RNA in vitro and, specifically, to poly G and
poly U. The RNA binding activity was localized to the carboxy terminal 86 amino
acids, which constitute RGG box. Thus the amino terminal domain of EWS (NTD-EWS),
which is involved in chromosome translocation may regulate the specificity of RNA
binding activity of EWS. An EWS-erg chimeric protein, which is found in Ewing's
sarcoma cells, functions as a transcriptional activator. Mutational analysis of
EWS-erg chimeric protein revealed that NTD-EWS functions as a regulatory domain
for the transcriptional activation properties of EWS-erg chimeric protein.

PMID: 8084618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Genomics. 1994 Sep 1;23(1):278-81.

Cloning and chromosome localization of the mouse Ews gene.

Plougastel B(1), Mattei MG, Thomas G, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique des Tumeurs, INSERM CIF 9201, Paris, France.

The human EWS gene encodes a putative RNA binding protein. As a result of
acquired chromosome rearrangement, the N-terminal portion of the EWS protein is
fused to the DNA binding domain of either FLI-1 or ERG in the Ewing family of
tumors and to the DNA binding domain of ATF1 in malignant melanoma of soft parts.
We have determined the cDNA sequence of the mouse Ews gene. Its nucleotide
sequence and its translation product demonstrate 93 and 98% homology with the
human EWS cDNA and protein, respectively. The murine Ews locus lies within a
conserved synteny segment between human chromosome 22q12 and mouse chromosome
11A1-A3.

PMID: 7829090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Clin Invest. 1994 Aug;94(2):489-96.

EWS-erg and EWS-Fli1 fusion transcripts in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumors with variant translocations.

Giovannini M(1), Biegel JA, Serra M, Wang JY, Wei YH, Nycum L, Emanuel BS, Evans 
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037.

We have determined the frequency of EWS fusion transcripts in a series of primary
Ewing's sarcomas and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors and cells lines.
Type 1 and 2 EWS-Fli1 fusions were demonstrated in 8 cell lines and 14 patient
samples. Five patients with cytogenetically characterized rearrangements of
chromosome 22 that did not involve chromosome 11 were included in these studies. 
A novel EWS-Fli1 in-frame isoform fusing EWS to exon 8 of Fli1 was isolated from 
a tumor with a variant t(12;22;22)(q14;p1;q12) translocation. Three in-frame
isoforms of a novel hybrid transcript derived from the fusion of EWS with the ETS
domain of the human erg gene were identified in patient samples and a cell line
with cytogenetically unidentified or cryptic translocations involving chromosomes
21 and 22. Interphase analysis by fluorescent in situ suppression hybridization
using two overlapping erg yeast artificial chromosome clones demonstrated
disruption of the erg gene on chromosome 21 in a patient sample with monosomy 22.
Our results provide new information about the involvement of EWS in small round
cell tumors involving exchange of its putative RNA-binding domain with
DNA-binding domains derived from different members of the ETS family of
transcription factors. These studies emphasize the utility of reverse
transcriptase PCR analysis and fluorescent in situ hybridization as additional
diagnostic tools for differential diagnosis among small round cell tumors.

PMCID: PMC295111
PMID: 8040301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cancer Res. 1994 Jun 1;54(11):2865-8.

An RNA-binding protein gene, TLS/FUS, is fused to ERG in human myeloid leukemia
with t(16;21) chromosomal translocation.

Ichikawa H(1), Shimizu K, Hayashi Y, Ohki M.

Author information: 
(1)Radiobiology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

The t(16;21)(p11;q22) translocation is a recurrent chromosomal abnormality found 
in several types of myeloid leukemia. We have previously demonstrated that the
breakpoints of this translocation are clustered in a specific intron of the ERG
gene on chromosome 21, which has recently been reported to be involved in Ewing's
sarcoma. We show here that the TLS/FUS gene on chromosome 16 is fused with the
ERG gene to produce the TLS/FUS-ERG chimeric transcript by this translocation.
The TLS/FUS gene has been identified as a translocated gene in myxoid liposarcoma
by the t(12;16)(q13;p11) translocation and encodes an RNA-binding protein that is
highly homologous to the product of the EWS gene involved in Ewing's sarcoma.
Thus, the TLS/FUS-ERG gene fusion in t(16;21) leukemia is predicted to produce a 
protein that is very similar to the EWS-ERG chimeric protein responsible for
Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 8187069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1994 May;74(1):13-8.

Interphase molecular cytogenetics of Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral
neuroepithelioma t(11;22) with flanking and overlapping cosmid probes.

Desmaze C(1), Zucman J, Delattre O, Melot T, Thomas G, Aurias A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique des Tumeurs, INSERM CJF 9201, Institut Curie, Paris, 
France.

The translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), recurrently observed in Ewing's sarcoma and
in peripheral neuroepithelioma has been recently cloned. The analysis of a series
of ES/PNE has revealed that the chromosome 22 breakpoints are clustered in a
small region of 7 kb, called EWSR1, and that those on chromosome 11 are spread
over a larger region of 40-50 kb, called EWSR2. Cosmids from loci flanking or
overlapping these two regions have been obtained. We demonstrate here that
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with these cosmids allows the
localization of the two breakpoints with a 10-kb resolution and leads to a rapid 
and reliable ES/PNE diagnosis.

PMID: 8194041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 1994;78:214-9.

[Detection of EWS-/FLI-1 gene fusion transcripts by RT-PCR as a tool in the
diagnosis of tumors of the Ewing sarcoma group].

[Article in German]

Dockhorn-Dworniczak B(1), Schäfer KL, Dantcheva R, Blasius S, van Valen F,
Burdach S, Winkelmann W, Jürgens J, Böcker W.

Author information: 
(1)Gerhard-Domagk-Institut für Pathologie, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität,
Münster.

Recent cloning of the chromosome breakpoint regions of the reciprocal chromosomal
t(11;22) (q24;q12) has revealed that the breakpoints were localized within the
EWS gene (Ewings sarcoma gene) on chromosome 22 and the FLI-1 gene on chromosome 
11. Thus, molecular genetic techniques were applicable for the detection of this 
genetic aberration, which occurs as a consistent feature of the Ewings tumor
family. By reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction technique (RT-PCR)
in 78% of Ewings sarcoma derived cell lines, and in 91% of primary Ewings tumor
tissue t(11;22) specific EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts were detected. Furthermore,
in bone marrow samples from an Ewings sarcoma patient contaminating tumor cells
could be shown by RT-PCR. Our results indicate that molecular genetic detection
of the t(11;22) translocation opens a new modality for the differential diagnosis
and the staging of Ewings tumor patients.

PMID: 7533989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Eur J Cancer. 1994;30A(6):827-31.

EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement in small round cell sarcomas of bone and soft tissue
detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction amplification.

Pellin A(1), Boix J, Blesa JR, Noguera R, Carda C, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Valencia, Spain.

Recent cloning of the t(11;22) region has led to the detection of a number of
sequences involved in the breakpoints by substituting a sequence which encodes a 
putative RNA binding domain for that of the DNA binding domain of the human
homologue of murine FLI-1. Several tumours display consistent translocation at
t(11;22) (q24;q12), a finding that suggests these fusion transcripts could be
expressed and detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
amplification. To date, only a small number of Ewing's sarcomas (Es) and
peripheral neuroectodermal tumours (pPNET) of bone have been tested with this
novel molecular biology approach. In this study, we confirmed the presence of the
three putative chimaeric transcripts on 7 cases of Es and pPNET sarcomas of bone 
and soft tissue, providing 100% positivity for the tested tumours. For
comparative purposes, a number of other neuroectodermal tumours were analysed
with negative results: esthesioneuroblastoma, retinoblastoma, Schwannoma. A
primitive soft tissue sarcoma (ectomesenchymoma) with a 22 chromosome
rearrangement did not express any transcript, nor did a number of
non-neuroectodermal small round cell sarcomas of soft tissue (rhabdomyosarcomas) 
and bone (microcellular osteosarcoma), conventional bone sarcomas,
leiomyosarcomas, malignant fibrous histiocytomas and synovial sarcomas. These
results reinforce the value of molecular biology techniques for the correct
assessment of histology difficult evaluable neoplasms, such as the group of small
round cell tumours within the Es family.

PMID: 7522496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cancer Res. 1993 Dec 15;53(24):5859-63.

EWS/Fli-1 chimeric protein is a transcriptional activator.

Ohno T(1), Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107-5541.

Fli-1, an ets related gene, was found to be rearranged in 75% of erythroleukemias
induced by Friend murine leukemia virus. We have shown previously that the Fli-1 
gene codes for a sequence specific transcriptional activator which contains two
autonomous transcriptional activation domains, one at the amino terminal region
and the other at the carboxy terminal region. Recently human Fli-1 gene was shown
to be involved in Ewing's sarcoma and related subtypes of primitive
neuroectodermal tumors which share t(11;22) (q24;q12) chromosome translocation.
In these tumors the carboxyl terminal region of Fli-1 was found to be fused with 
the amino terminal region of a putative RNA binding protein, EWS. Because part of
the amino terminal transcriptional activation domain of Fli-1 was replaced with
the amino terminal domain of the EWS (NTD-EWS) which shares homology with RNA
polymerase II, it was speculated that NTD-EWS may interfere with RNA pol II
function. Alternatively, NTD-EWS could also contribute to the transcriptional
activation function of EWS/Fli-1 chimeric protein by providing either a
modulatory/regulatory domain or a novel transcriptional activation domain. Here
we show that EWS/Fli-1 chimeric protein functions as a transcriptional activator.
Deletion analysis reveals that the EWS domain functions as a
modulatory/regulatory domain for the transcriptional activation properties of the
carboxy terminal transcriptional activation domain of EWS/Fli-1. We therefore
propose that replacement of the amino terminal transcriptional activation domain 
of the Fli-1 protein with the regulatory domain of NTD-EWS results in the
activation of the carboxy terminal transcriptional activation domain of Fli-1
which may be the molecular mechanism involved in these human tumors.

PMID: 7503813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genomics. 1993 Dec;18(3):609-15.

Genomic structure of the EWS gene and its relationship to EWSR1, a site of
tumor-associated chromosome translocation.

Plougastel B(1), Zucman J, Peter M, Thomas G, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique des Tumeurs, Inserm CJF 9201, Institut Curie, Paris, 
France.

The EWS gene has been identified based on its location at the chromosome 22
breakpoint of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation that characterizes Ewing
sarcoma and related neuroectodermal tumors. The EWS gene spans about 40 kb of DNA
and is encoded by 17 exons. The nucleotide sequence of the exons is identical to 
that of the previously described cDNA. The first 7 exons encode the N-terminal
domain of EWS, which consists of a repeated degenerated polypeptide of 7 to 12
residues rich in tyrosine, serine, threonine, glycine, and glutamine. Exons 11,
12, and 13 encode the putative RNA binding domain. The three glycine- and
arginine-rich motifs of the gene are mainly encoded by exons 8-9, 14, and 16. The
DNA sequence in the 5' region of the gene has features of a CpG-rich island and
lacks canonical promoter elements, such as TATA and CCAAT consensus sequences.
Positions of the chromosome 22 breakpoints were determined for 19 Ewing tumors.
They were localized in introns 7 or 8 in 18 cases and in intron 10 in 1 case.

PMID: 8307570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. EMBO J. 1993 Dec;12(12):4481-7.

Combinatorial generation of variable fusion proteins in the Ewing family of
tumours.

Zucman J(1), Melot T, Desmaze C, Ghysdael J, Plougastel B, Peter M, Zucker JM,
Triche TJ, Sheer D, Turc-Carel C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique des Tumerurs, INSERM CJF 9201, Paris, France.

Balanced translocations involving band q12 of human chromosome 22 are the most
frequent recurrent translocations observed in human solid tumours. It has been
shown recently that this region encodes EWS, a protein with an RNA binding
homologous domain. In Ewing's sarcoma and malignant melanoma of soft parts,
translocations of band 22q12 to chromosome 11 and 12 result in the fusion of EWS 
with the transcription factors FLI-1 and ATF1, respectively. The present analysis
of 89 Ewing's sarcomas and related tumours show that in addition to the expected 
EWS-FLI-1 fusion, the EWS gene can be fused to ERG, a transcription factor
closely related to FLI-1 but located on chromosome 21. The position of the
chromosome translocation breakpoints are shown to be restricted to introns 7-10
of the EWS gene and widely dispersed within introns 3-9 of the Ets-related genes.
This heterogeneity generates a variety of chimeric proteins that can be detected 
by immuno-precipitation. On rare occasions, they may be associated with a
truncated EWS protein arising from alternate splicing. All 13 different fusion
proteins that were evidenced contained the N-terminal domain of EWS and the Ets
domain of FLI-1 or ERG suggesting that oncogenic conversion is achieved by the
linking of the two domains with no marked constraint on the connecting peptide.

PMCID: PMC413872
PMID: 8223458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nat Genet. 1993 Aug;4(4):341-5.

EWS and ATF-1 gene fusion induced by t(12;22) translocation in malignant melanoma
of soft parts.

Zucman J(1), Delattre O, Desmaze C, Epstein AL, Stenman G, Speleman F, Fletchers 
CD, Aurias A, Thomas G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory de Tumour Genetics, INSERM CJF 9201, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

The genes involved in the t(12;22)(q13;q12) translocation found recurrently in
malignant melanoma of soft parts have been characterized and shown to form, in
four cases studied, hybrid transcripts. The deduced chimaeric protein encoded by 
the der(22) chromosome consists of the N-terminal domain of EWS linked to the
bZIP domain of ATF-1, a transcription factor which may normally be regulated by
cAMP. ATF-1 has not previously been implicated in oncogenesis. EWS was first
identified as forming a hybrid transcript in Ewing's sarcoma, which links its
N-terminal domain to the DNA binding domain of the FLI-1 gene. Thus the oncogenic
conversion of EWS follows a common scheme of activation, exchanging its putative 
RNA binding domain with different DNA binding domains that appear to be
tumour-specific.

PMID: 8401579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 1993 Aug;8(8):2167-73.

Analysis of the DNA-binding and transcriptional activation functions of human
Fli-1 protein.

Rao VN(1), Ohno T, Prasad DD, Bhattacharya G, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Cancer Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

Three of the ets oncogene superfamily members v-ets, Spi-1/PU.1 and Fli-1, have
been shown to be directly involved in retroviral-mediated acute erythroleukemias.
The Fli-1 gene was found to be rearranged in 75% of the erythroleukemias induced 
by Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV), suggesting that it could play a key
role in cellular transformation. We have previously isolated and characterized
the human Fli-1 gene and have found it to be highly homologous (80%) to the human
erg-2 gene. Human Fli-1 was also shown to be rearranged in Ewing's sarcoma cases,
in which the amino-terminal region of the Fli-1 gene was replaced with a novel
coding region of a putative RNA-binding protein, EWS. In this report, we show
that the recombinant Fli-1 protein expressed in bacteria binds to DNA in a
sequence-specific manner. It appears that Fli-1 and erg proteins fall into the
category of ets proteins that recognize limited ets target sequences, unlike
c-ets-1, ets-2 and Elk-1. The Fli-1 gene was found to activate the transcription 
of the reporter gene that was linked to Fli-1 target sequences, suggesting that
Fli-1 is a sequence-specific transcriptional activator. Deletion analysis
revealed the presence of two autonomous transcriptional activation domains, one
at the amino-terminal region (amino-terminal transcriptional activation domain,
ATA) and the other at the carboxy-terminal region (carboxy-terminal
transcriptional activation domain, CTA). Secondary structural analysis of ATA and
CTA domains revealed the presence of helix-loop-helix (H-L-H) and/or
turn-loop-turn (T-L-T) regions. From these results it appears that a portion of
the Fli-1 ATA domain (H-L-H region) was replaced by the amino-terminal domain of 
EWS gene in Ewing's sarcoma cases. Therefore alteration in the transcriptional
activation function of Fli-1 may be responsible for human malignancies such as
sarcomas, leukemias and lymphomas in which this gene is rearranged.

PMID: 8336942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nature. 1993 Jun 17;363(6430):640-4.

Fusion of CHOP to a novel RNA-binding protein in human myxoid liposarcoma.

Crozat A(1), Aman P, Mandahl N, Ron D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, NYU Medical Center, New York 10016.

Human myxoid liposarcomas contain a characteristic chromosomal translocation,
t(12;16)(q13;p11), that is associated with a structural rearrangement of the gene
encoding CHOP, a growth arrest and DNA-damage inducible member of the C/EBP
family of transcription factors residing on 12q13.1. Using a CHOP-specific
complementary probe and antiserum we report here the presence of an abnormal CHOP
transcript and protein in these tumours. Cloning of the translocation-associated 
CHOP gene product revealed a fusion between CHOP and a gene provisionally named
TLS (translocated in liposarcoma). TLS is a novel nuclear RNA-binding protein
with extensive sequence similarity to EWS, the product of a gene commonly
translocated in Ewing's sarcoma. In TLS-CHOP the RNA-binding domain of TLS is
replaced by the DNA-binding and leucine zipper dimerization domain of CHOP.
Targeting of a conserved effector domain of RNA-binding proteins to DNA may play 
a role in tumour formation.

PMID: 8510758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Nature. 1992 Sep 10;359(6391):162-5.

Gene fusion with an ETS DNA-binding domain caused by chromosome translocation in 
human tumours.

Delattre O(1), Zucman J, Plougastel B, Desmaze C, Melot T, Peter M, Kovar H,
Joubert I, de Jong P, Rouleau G, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoires de Génétique des Tumeurs and URA 620 CNRS, Institut Curie, Paris,
France.

Ewing's sarcoma and related subtypes of primitive neuroectodermal tumours share a
recurrent and specific t(11;22) (q24;q12) chromosome translocation, the
breakpoints of which have recently been cloned. Phylogenetically conserved
restriction fragments in the vicinity of EWSR1 and EWSR2, the genomic regions
where the breakpoints of chromosome 22 and chromosome 11 are, respectively, have 
allowed identification of transcribed sequences from these regions and has
indicated that a hybrid transcript might be generated by the translocation. Here 
we use these fragments to screen human complementary DNA libraries to show that
the translocation alters the open reading frame of an expressed gene on
chromosome 22 gene by substituting a sequence encoding a putative RNA-binding
domain for that of the DNA-binding domain of the human homologue of murine Fli-1.

PMID: 1522903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


